
 
 
 Jump to content 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle sidebar 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Create account Log in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Personal tools 
 
 
 
 
   Create account   Log in 
 
 
 
 
		Pages for logged out editors  learn more 
 
 
 Contributions Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Navigation 
 
 
 Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate 
 
 
 
 
 Contribute 
 
 
 Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file 
 
 
 
 
 Tools 
 
 
 What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item 
 
 
 
 
 Print/export 
 
 
 Download as PDF Printable version 
 
 
 
 
 In other projects 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons 
 
 
 
 
 Languages 
 
 On this Wikipedia the language links are at the top of the page across from the article title.  Go to top . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CentralNotice  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Contents 
 move to sidebar 
 hide 
 
 
 
 
 (Top) 
 
 
 
 
 
 1 Background 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 Staple foods 
 
 
				Toggle Staple foods subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 2.1 Rice 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.2 Afghan bread 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 Major dishes 
 
 
				Toggle Major dishes subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 3.1 Steamed dumplings 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.2 Qormah 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.3 Kabob 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.4 Chicken 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.5 Quroot 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.6 Miscellaneous 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4 Desserts and snacks 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5 Soups 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6 Drinks 
 
 
				Toggle Drinks subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 6.1 Chai 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6.2 Doogh 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 7 Eating habits 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8 Sub-cuisines 
 
 
				Toggle Sub-cuisines subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 8.1 Pashtun cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8.2 Hazara cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 9 Dining etiquette 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 10 Special occasions 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 11 See also 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 12 References 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 13 Further reading 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
						Toggle the table of contents
					 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle the table of contents 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Afghan cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 22 languages 
 
 
 
 বাংলা Čeština Deutsch Español فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Jawa ქართული Kurdî Bahasa Melayu Norsk nynorsk پنجابی Português Русский سرائیکی Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 
 Edit links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Article Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 English 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 More 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
 
 
 Culinary traditions of Afghanistan 
 This article may  require  cleanup  to meet Wikipedia's  quality standards . The specific problem is:  Too many bullet points like a list, instead of sentences and paragraphs. Also needs better organization between 'Staple foods', 'Drinks' etc. Needs more encyclopedic content instead of current catalog-like format.  Please help  improve this article  if you can.   ( November 2021 )  ( Learn how and when to remove this template message ) 
 Part of  a series  on the Culture of Afghanistan 
 History 
 People 
 Languages 
 Traditions 
 Buzkashi 
 Clothing 
 Loya jirga 
 Pashtunwali 
 Wedding 
 
 Mythology 
 Cuisine 
 Festivals 
 Religion 
 Art 
 Architecture 
 Sculpture 
 Painting 
 
 Literature 
 Afghan poetry 
 Afghan proverbs 
 
 Music  and  Performing arts 
 Theater 
 
 Media 
 Television 
 Cinema 
 
 Sport 
 Monuments 
 World Heritage Sites 
 
 Symbols 
 Flag 
 Coat of arms 
 National anthem 
 
   Afghanistan portal v t e 
 Afghan cuisine  ( Pashto :  افغان پخلی ,  romanized:  Afghan Pakhlai ,  Dari :  آشپزی افغانی ,  romanized:  Āshpazi-e Afghāni ) is influenced to a certain extent by  Persian ,  Central Asian  and  Indian  cuisines due to  Afghanistan 's close proximity and cultural ties. [1] [2]  The cuisine is  halal  and mainly based on  mutton ,  beef ,  poultry  and  fish  with  rice  and  Afghan bread . Accompanying these are common vegetables and  dairy products , such as  milk ,  yogurt ,  whey , etc., [3]  and fresh and  dried fruits  such as apples, apricots, grapes, bananas, oranges, plums,  pomegranates , sweet  melons ,  raisin , etc. [4]  The diet of most Afghans revolve around rice-based dishes, while various forms of  naan  is consumed with most meals. [5]   Tea  is generally consumed daily in large quantities, and is a major part of hospitality. [6]  The culinary specialties reflect the nation's  ethnic  and  geographic  diversity. The  national dish  of Afghanistan is  Kabuli palaw , a rice dish cooked with raisins, carrots, nuts and lamb or beef. [7] 
 
 
 Background [ edit ] 
   Location of Afghanistan in Asia 
 The cuisine of Afghanistan is  halal  and has elements from various places, for example  garam masala  from India, coriander and mint from Iran, dumplings and noodles from Uzbekistan and  Xinjiang  in China, and  Baklava  from Turkey.  [8] [9]  The similarities can be seen in the use of spices like  cumin  and  cinnamon  (as in Indian cuisine), green  cardamom  flavors (as in Chinese tea), and kebabs and yoghurts (as in  Turkish  and  Arabic cuisines ). [10] 
 
 Staple foods [ edit ] 
 Rice [ edit ] 
   Afghan  Qabeli palaw 
   Rice with  kofta  (meatballs) and corn 
 Rice is a core staple food in Afghan cuisine and the most important part of any meal. [9]   Biryani  is one of the lesser popular rice dishes in Afghanistan. It is consumed mostly in cities closer to neighboring Pakistan, such as  Kandahar ,  Jalalabad  and  Khost . Challow, or white rice cooked with mild spices, [11]  is served mainly with  qormas  ( korma : stews or casseroles).  Palaw  is cooked similarly to challow, but a combination of meat, stock,  qorma , and herbs are also mixed in before baking, resulting in the elaborate colors, flavors, and aromas from which the rice got its name. Sometimes caramelized sugar is used to give the rice a rich brown color. Examples of palaw include:
 
 Kabuli palaw  (the  national dish [7] ) – meat and stock are added, plus a topping of fried raisins, slivered carrots, and pistachios 
 Yakhni palaw – meat and stock are added to give the rice a brown color 
 Zamarod palaw – spinach  qorma  is mixed in before the baking process, hence  zamarod , meaning "emerald" 
 Bore palaw – lawand is added giving the rice a yellow color 
 Landi palaw – a traditional meal of rice (with stock made from chicken or mutton that has been salted and dried in the sun) 
 Bonjan-e-roomi palaw – bonjan-e-roomi (tomato  qorma ) is added during baking giving the rice a red color 
 Serkah palaw – similar to  yakhni pulao , but with vinegar and other spices 
 Shibet palaw – fresh dill and raisins are added during baking 
 Narenj palaw – a sweet elaborate rice dish made with saffron, orange peel, pistachios, almonds, and chicken 
 Maash palaw – a strictly vegetarian sweet-and-sour pilaf baked with mung beans, apricots, and bulgur wheat 
 Alou balou palaw – a sweet rice dish with plums and chicken 
 Afghan bread [ edit ] 
 This section  is in  list  format but may read better as  prose .  You can help by  converting this section , if appropriate.  Editing help  is available.   ( February 2022 ) 
   Naan (bread) from a local baker, the most widely consumed bread in Afghanistan 
 Afghan  bread  is flat and cooked in a tanoor or  tandoor  (a vertical ground clay oven). The bread is slapped onto a stone wall to cook. Tabakhai is a  flatbread  cooked on a flat upside down pan.
 
 Major dishes [ edit ] 
 Steamed dumplings [ edit ] 
   Mantu  in a steamer before cooking 
   Afghan aushak 
 There is a wide variety of dumplings. Known under the name  khameerbob  and often eaten as dumplings, these native dishes are popular. Due to the long time required to make the dough for the dumplings, they are rarely served at large gatherings, such as weddings. They are instead served on special occasions at home. [ citation needed ] 
 
 Aushak  – dumplings filled with a mixture consisting mainly of leeks, topped with either garlic-mint  qoroot  or a garlic yogurt sauce, sautéed tomatoes, red kidney beans, and a well-seasoned ground-meat mixture (It is a dish associated with Kabul, the capital of Afghanistan.) 
 Mantu  – steamed dumplings filled with onion and ground beef or lamb, usually topped with a tomato- and yogurt- or  qoroot -based sauce and then garnished with dried mint and coriander (The yogurt-based topping is usually a mixture of yogurt, garlic, and split chickpeas. The  qoroot -based sauce is made of goat's cheese and also mixed with garlic; a  qoroot  and yogurt mixture will sometimes be used.) 
 Qormah [ edit ] 
 This section  is in  list  format but may read better as  prose .  You can help by  converting this section , if appropriate.  Editing help  is available.   ( February 2022 ) 
 Qormah  (also spelled "korma" or "qorma") is an onion- and tomato-based stew or casserole usually served with challow rice. [3]  First, onion is caramelized, for a richly colored stew. Then tomato is added, along with a variety of fruits, spices, and vegetables, depending on the recipe. The main ingredient, which can be meat or other vegetables, is added last. There are hundreds of different types of  qormahs  including:
 
 Qormah e gosht (meat  qormah ) – usually the main  qormah  served with palaw at gatherings 
 Qormah e alou-bokhara wa dalnakhod – onion-based using veal or chicken, sour plums, lentils, and cardamom 
 Qormah e nadroo – onion-based, using lamb meat or veal, yogurt, lotus roots, cilantro, and coriander 
 Qormah e lawand – onion-based, using chicken, lamb, or beef, plus yogurt, turmeric, and cilantro 
 Qormah e sabzi – lamb, sautéed spinach, and other greens 
 Qormah e shalgham – onion-based using lamb, turnips, and sugar (sweet and sour taste) 
 Kabob [ edit ] 
   Kofta   Kabob  with  naan 
 Afghan  kabob  is most often found in restaurants and at outdoor street vendor stalls. Most of the time, it contains lamb meat. Kabob is made with naan instead of rice. Customers have the option to sprinkle  sumac  or  ghora ( dried ground sour grapes) on their kabob. Pieces of fat from the sheep's tail ( jijeq ) are usually added to the  skewers  to add extra flavor.
 
   Chopan kabob being prepared 
 Other popular kabobs include the  lamb chop ,  ribs ,  kofta  (ground beef), and chicken.
 Chapli kebab , a specialty of eastern Afghanistan, is a patty of minced beef. It is a popular barbecue meal in both Pakistan and Afghanistan. It is prepared flat and round and served with naan. The original recipe of chapli kabob dictates a half meat, half flour mixture which renders it lighter in taste and less expensive.
 
 Chicken [ edit ] 
 Afghan chicken or murgh-e Afghan is a classic example of one of the most famous dishes of Afghanistan. Chicken dishes are usually found in restaurants and at outdoor street vendor stalls. Unlike in the Indian cooking style, chicken in Afghan cuisine is often used with the intention that it be  halal . Cream, butter, and curd are customary ingredients in all chicken recipes, whether served as an appetizer or a main course.
 
 Quroot [ edit ] 
 Quroot  (or  qoroot ) is a reconstituted dairy product, traditionally a by-product of butter made from sheep's or goat's milk. The residual buttermilk remaining after churning butter is soured further (by keeping it at room temperature for a few days), treated with salt, and then eventually boiled. The precipitated casein is filtered through cheesecloth, pressed in order to remove liquid, and then shaped into balls; the product is thus a hard and very sour cottage cheese. Though it can be eaten raw as a savory snack, it is typically served with cooked Afghan dishes such as aushak, mantu, and kichri qoroot.
 
 Miscellaneous [ edit ] 
 This section  is in  list  format but may read better as  prose .  You can help by  converting this section , if appropriate.  Editing help  is available.   ( February 2022 ) 
   A table setting of Afghan food in Kabul 
   Badenjan ( eggplant ) is usually served for lunch as a light meal or as a  side dish . It tastes best with freshly baked bread along with sour minted yogurt. Shomleh/shlombeh (a cold drink made of yogurt that is sprinkled with fresh or dried  mint ). 
   Afghan men eating at a lunchtime feast in  Kunar Weleyat 
 
 Afghan burger 
 Afghan Chatni [12]  made with fresh  coriander  leaves 
 Afghan Kofta  ( meatballs ) [13] 
 Afghan salad 
 Aush  (hand-made  noodles ) 
 Baamiyah or  Bhindi  (cooked  okra ) 
 Badenjan (cooked  eggplant  with  potatoes  and  tomatoes ) 
 Badenjan-Burani (fried slices of  eggplant , topped with a  garlic   sour cream  sauce and sprinkled with dried  mint ) 
 Badenjan Salad  (eggplant salad with garlic) 
 Bichak  (small  turnovers  with various fillings, including  potato  and  herbs , or ground  meat ) 
 Bolani  also called “Buregian” in southern Afghanistan (somewhat similar to a  Quesadilla ) 
 Chakida or chakka (type of  sour cream ) 
 Chopan (Pashto/Persian: چوپان, meaning "shepherd") kabob (Pashto/Persian: کباب) (lamb chops skewered and grilled on  charcoal ) 
 Dampukht (steamed  rice ) 
 Delda or Oagra (mainly a Southern dish, whose main ingredient is a mixture of split  wheat  and a variety of  beans ) 
 Dolma  (stuffed  grape leaves ) 
 Gosh e feel  (thin, fried  pastries  covered in  powdered sugar  and ground  pistachios ) 
 Halwaua-e-Aurd-e-Sujee 
 Kaddo Borwani  ( sweet pumpkins ) [1] 
 Kalah Chuquki or Kalah Gunjeshk (battered deep-fried bird heads) 
 Kalah Pacha ( lamb  or  beef  head/feet cooked in a broth, served in bowls as a soup dish or in a  stew  or  curry ) 
 Kebab  (similar to Middle Eastern and Central Asian style) 
 Khoujoor [14]  (Afghan  pastry , deep-fried, oval-shaped, similar to  doughnuts  in taste) 
 Kichri (sticky medium-grain  rice  cooked with  mung beans  and  onions ) 
 Londi, or  gusht-e-qaaq  (spiced  jerky ) 
 Maast or labanyat (type of plain  yogurt ) 
 Maushawa (mixed beans and tiny meatballs, served in a bowl) 
 Moraba ( fruit preserves ,  sugar syrup  and fruits,  apple ,  sour cherry , or various berries, or made with dried fruits. "Afghan favorite is the Alu-Bakhara".) 
 Nargis kabob ( egg -based  angel hair pasta  soaked in  sugar syrup , wrapped around a piece of  meat ) 
 Narenge Palau (dried sweet  orange peel  and green raisins with a variety of  nuts , mixed with yellow rice glazed with light  sugar syrup ) 
 Osh Pyozee  (stuffed  onion ) 
 Owmach (made from  flour ; a soup-like dish, very thick and pasty) 
 Salata ( tomato  and  onion -based  salad , often incorporating  cucumber ) 
 Rosh (cooked  lamb and mutton  with no spices) [15] 
 Shami kabob (cooked  beef  blended with  spices ,  flour , and  eggs , and rolled into  hot dog  shapes or flat round shapes and fried) 
 Shola Ghorbandi 
 Shor-Nakhood ( chickpeas  with special toppings) 
 Torshi  ( eggplant  and  carrot  mixed with other herbs and spices, pickled in  vinegar  and aged) 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bolani 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cooked  okra  is also served for lunch or as a side dish
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Afghan  lamb   kebab  with yellow  saffron rice 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Roasted chicken
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Samples of some native Afghan fruits
 
 
 
 
 Desserts and snacks [ edit ] 
   Samples of Afghan fresh and  dried fruits 
 As a desert after a meal, most Afghans generally eat fresh fruits such as apples, apricots, bananas, grapes, mangoes, melons, oranges, pears, pomegranates, etc. For snacks, they drink tea with something sweet like cakes, cookies or pastries. On some occasions they also eat  dried fruits  which are always widely available in every Afghan market. Others may eat any of the following: 
 
 Afghan Cake (similar to  pound cake , sometimes with real  fruit  or  jelly  inside) 
 Afghan Ice Cream 
 Baklava  ( pastry ) 
 Cream roll  ( pastry ) 
 Falooda  or  Faloodeh 
 Firini [16] 
 Fernea, sometimes spelled  feereny , ( milk  and  cornstarch  help make this very sweet, similar to rice pudding without the rice) 
 Kolcha  (variety of  cookies , baked in clay ovens with charcoal) 
 Sheer Yakh, a traditional wet ice cream 
 Sheer khurma , a traditional dessert 
 Sheer Berinj  ( rice pudding ) 
 Soups [ edit ] 
 This section  is in  list  format but may read better as  prose .  You can help by  converting this section , if appropriate.  Editing help  is available.   ( February 2022 ) 
 Shorba  (Afghan  soup  similar to  borscht ) 
 Shorwa-E-Tarkari [17]  (meat and vegetable soup) 
 Peyawa or Eshkana (a  soup  based on  flour , very similar to a  gravy , but mixed with chopped  onion , potatoes, and eggs) 
 Aushe Sarka (vinegar-based flat  noodle  soup, tastes very similar to Chinese hot and sour soup) 
 Drinks [ edit ] 
 Chai [ edit ] 
   Village elders and US special forces drinking Afghan green tea in 2007 
 Chai is  tea  in Afghanistan, which can either be green or black. It is consumed at all times, especially a short time after finishing a meal or with guests during any social gathering. Most people drink green tea with no sugar. Some add  cardamom ,  saffron , or sugar.
 Sheer chai  (which translates from "milk tea") is also consumed but mostly in the morning and on special occasions. It is a type of  Kashmiri chai . Many people of Afghanistan also drink  masala chai , particularly in cities such as  Asadabad ,  Jalalabad ,  Khost  and  Kandahar .
 
 Doogh [ edit ] 
 Doogh  (also known by some Afghans as  shomleh  or  shlombeh ) is a cold drink made by mixing water with yogurt and then adding fresh or dried mint. Some variations of doogh include the addition of crushed or diced cucumber chunks. It is the second most widely consumed drink in Afghanistan (the first being tea), especially during lunchtime in summer. Doogh can be found at almost every Afghan grocery store and is served in restaurants.
 
 Eating habits [ edit ] 
 This section is empty.   You can help by  adding to it .   ( November 2021 ) 
 Sub-cuisines [ edit ] 
 While  Afghans  have a common cuisine, certain ethnicities form sub-variations of it.
 
 Pashtun cuisine [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Pashtun cuisine 
 Pashtuns  are the largest ethnic group of Afghanistan, constituting about 42% of the country's total population. [18]  A major dish in Pashtun culture are Rosh (cooked  lamb and mutton  with no spices) [15]  and  Sohbat , found at traditional gatherings and events. [19] [20]  Other major Pashtun dishes include lamb-skewered  sajji  and  chapli kebab . The name  dampukht  stands for steamed meat, and  Khaddi kebab  is the Afghan  shashlik , which is grilled on an open fire, on a spit. [21] 
 Although it differs from region to region, Pashtun cuisine is meat-heavy and often includes caramelized rice. For example, the dish known as  bolani  in the north and east is often called  borogyen  in the south and west of Afghanistan.
 Common summer beverages include  shlombeh , also known in Persian as  doogh , a drink consisting of liquid yogurt, mint, and  bedreng  (Afghan cucumber).  Sherbet  is an ice-sugared cold drink.  Sheer yakh  is a sweet ice-like product, literally translating to "cold milk". [21] 
 
 Hazara cuisine [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Hazaragi cuisine 
 The  Hazara people  in central Afghanistan (in the region of Hazarajat) and western Pakistan (Balochistan province) have their own fare. The Hazaragi cuisine shares some similarities with neighboring regional cuisines, so it is mainly influenced by Central Asian, Persian, and South Asian cooking. However, cooking methods vary in some of the dishes of these neighboring cuisines.
 
 Dining etiquette [ edit ] 
 Traditionally, dinners are held on a tablecloth on the floor, which is called the  dastarkhan . Meals are normally eaten with the right hand. After a meal, tea with dessert is served. [9] 
 
 Special occasions [ edit ] 
 Serving tea and white sugared almonds (called  nuql ) is customary during Afghan festivals. [3] [22] 
 
 See also [ edit ] 
 
 Food portal 
 Culture of Afghanistan 
 Economy of Afghanistan 
 Portals :   Society   Food   Afghanistan 
 References [ edit ] 
 
 
 ^  a   b   "Exile on Charles Street: Restaurateur Qayum Karzai's life is split between Baltimore and his native Afghanistan" .  Baynard Woods . The Baltimore Sun. 3 March 2015 . Retrieved  2021-12-27 . 
 
 ^   "About Afghan food" .  SBS . 31 March 2021 . Retrieved  13 November  2021 . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   Brittin, Helen (2011).  The Food and Culture Around the World Handbook . Boston: Prentice Hall. pp.  20 –21.  ISBN   9780135074817 . 
 
 ^   "Rare Heirloom Seeds – Baker Creek Heirloom Seeds" .  Baker Creek Heirloom Seeds . Archived from  the original  on 2016-03-04 . Retrieved  2013-10-28 . 
 
 ^   "What to eat and drink in Afghanistan" . 
 
 ^   "Sheer Chai Afghan (Cardamom Tea with milk)" . July 2020. 
 
 ^  a   b   Ali, Tanveer (31 July 2012).  "Everything You Need To Know About Afghan Food" . foodrepublic . Retrieved  2014-02-19 . 
 
 ^   "What do Afghan families like to eat for three meals a day? Why is it the healthiest country in the world?" .  iNews . 15 December 2022 . Retrieved  15 December  2022 . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   Linda McElroy.  "Customs and Cuisine of Afghanistan" . 
 
 ^   Venkatraman, Vijaysree (6 December 2006).  "Discovering Afghan Cuisine, a World Away" .  NPR . 
 
 ^   "Afghan Cuisine: Challow" .  Afghanistan Online . 2018-04-09 . Retrieved  2021-10-18 . 
 
 ^   "Afghan Chatni made with fresh cilantro leaves, « WATAN CHAT" . March 12, 2017. 
 
 ^   Dea, Cynthia (March 9, 2015).  "Where to Find the Best Meatballs in Los Angeles" .  KCET . Retrieved  2022-12-30 . {{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: url-status ( link ) 
 
 ^   Chef », This.  "Khajoor | Afghan Kitchen Recipes" . 
 
 ^  a   b   آغا جان ماما مشهوره روش، کندهار Popular Rosh, Kandahar  on  YouTube 
 
 ^   Firni Recipe Easy Dessert Recipe, Afghani Cuisine Firni , Phirni,Easy Sweet Dish Recipe ,فرنی افغانی  on  YouTube 
 
 ^   Chef », This.  "Shorwa-E-Tarkari (Meat & Veg Soup) | Afghan Kitchen Recipes" . 
 
 ^   "The Ethnic Groups Of Afghanistan" .  WorldAtlas . 10 September 2019. 
 
 ^   "Sohbat: The Pashtun Dish That Brings People Together" .  www.gounesco.com . 5 August 2016. 
 
 ^   ayesha.ibrahim (2016-08-05).  "Sohbat: The Pashtun Dish That Brings People Together" .  Make Heritage Fun! . Retrieved  2021-08-18 . 
 
 ^  a   b   Safia Haleem (1 May 2013).  Pakistan – Culture Smart!: The Essential Guide to Customs & Culture . Kuperard. pp. 98–.  ISBN   978-1-85733-678-8 . 
 
 ^   "Afghan Cookbook" .  afghancookbook.tumblr.com . 
 
 
 Further reading [ edit ] 
 Helen J. Saberi (1997).  "Travel and Food in Afghanistan" .  In Harlan Walker (ed.).  Food on the Move: Proceedings of the Oxford Symposium on Food and Cookery, 1996 . Prospect Books.  ISBN   978-0-907325-79-6 . 
 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons has media related to  Cuisine of Afghanistan . 
 
 v t e Asian cuisine Sovereign states 
 Afghanistan 
 Armenia 
 Azerbaijan 
 Bahrain 
 Bangladesh 
 Bhutan 
 Brunei 
 Burma (Myanmar) 
 Cambodia 
 China 
 Cyprus 
 East Timor (Timor-Leste) 
 Egypt 
 Georgia 
 India 
 Indonesia 
 Iran 
 Iraq 
 Israel 
 Japan 
 Jordan 
 Kazakhstan 
 North Korea 
 South Korea 
 Kuwait 
 Kyrgyzstan 
 Laos 
 Lebanon 
 Malaysia 
 Maldives 
 Mongolia 
 Nepal 
 Oman 
 Pakistan 
 Philippines 
 Qatar 
 Russia 
 Saudi Arabia 
 Singapore 
 Sri Lanka 
 Syria 
 Tajikistan 
 Thailand 
 Turkey 
 Turkmenistan 
 United Arab Emirates 
 Uzbekistan 
 Vietnam 
 Yemen 
 States with limited recognition 
 Abkhazia 
 Artsakh 
 Northern Cyprus 
 Palestine 
 South Ossetia 
 Taiwan 
 Dependencies and other territories 
 British Indian Ocean Territory 
 Christmas Island 
 Cocos (Keeling) Islands 
 Hong Kong 
 Macau 
 
 v t e Cuisines Continental 
 African 
 North 
 West 
 list 
 Americas 
 Caribbean 
 North 
 South 
 list 
 Asian 
 Caucasian 
 Central 
 Indian subcontinent 
 Levantine 
 list 
 European 
 Balkan 
 Central 
 Eastern 
 list 
 Oceanic 
 Intercontinental
 Global 
 Latin American 
 Mediterranean 
 Middle Eastern 
 National  and regional 
 Afghan 
 Albanian 
 Algerian 
 American 
 Californian 
 Floribbean 
 Hawaiian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Lowcountry (South Carolina) 
 New England 
 New Mexico 
 Pacific Northwest 
 Pennsylvania Dutch 
 Puerto Rican 
 Southern US 
 Southwest US 
 Texas 
 Angolan 
 Argentine 
 Armenian 
 Australian 
 Austrian 
 Azerbaijani 
 Bahraini 
 Bangladeshi 
 Barbadian 
 Belarusian 
 Belgian 
 Belizean 
 Beninese 
 Bhutanese 
 Bolivian 
 Bosnian-Herzegovinian 
 Botswana 
 Brazilian 
 British 
 Channel Islands 
 English 
 Gibraltarian 
 Northern Irish 
 Saint Helena 
 Scottish 
 Welsh 
 Bruneian 
 Bulgarian 
 Burkinabé 
 Burmese 
 Burundian 
 Cambodian 
 Cameroonian 
 Canadian 
 Acadian 
 Québécois 
 Central African Republic 
 Chadian 
 Chilean 
 Chinese 
 Cantonese 
 Hong Kong 
 Macanese 
 Tibetan 
 Xinjiang 
 Colombian 
 Congolese 
 Corsican 
 Croatian 
 Cuban 
 Cypriot 
 Czech 
 Danish 
 Faroese 
 Greenlandic 
 Djiboutian 
 Dominican 
 Dominican Republic 
 Dutch 
 East Timorese 
 Ecuadorian 
 Egyptian 
 Emirati 
 Equatorial Guinean 
 Eritrean 
 Estonian 
 Ethiopian 
 Fijian 
 Filipino 
 Finnish 
 French 
 Occitan 
 French Guianan 
 Gabonese 
 Gambian 
 Georgian 
 German 
 Ghanaian 
 Greek 
 Cretan 
 Epirotic 
 Greek Macedonian 
 Heptanesean 
 Guatemalan 
 Guinea-Bissauan 
 Guinean 
 Haitian 
 Honduran 
 Hungarian 
 Icelandic 
 Indian 
 Arunachalese 
 Assamese 
 Bengali 
 Bihari 
 Goan 
 Gujarati 
 Himachal Pradesh 
 Kashmiri 
 Jharkhandi 
 Karnataka 
 Kerala 
 Maharashtrian 
 Manipuri 
 Meghalayan 
 Mizo 
 Naga 
 Odia 
 Punjabi 
 Rajasthani 
 Sikkimese 
 Sindhi 
 Tamil 
 Telangana 
 Telugu 
 Indonesian 
 Acehnese 
 Balinese 
 Banjar 
 Batak 
 Betawi 
 Indo 
 Javanese 
 Madurese 
 Makassar 
 Minahasan 
 Minangkabau 
 Palembangese 
 Sundanese 
 Iranian 
 Iraqi 
 Irish 
 Israeli 
 Italian 
 Abruzzese 
 Ligurian 
 Lombard 
 Lucanian 
 Neapolitan 
 Roman 
 Sardinian 
 Sicilian 
 Venetian 
 Ivorian 
 Jamaican 
 Japanese 
 Okinawan 
 Jordanian 
 Kazakh 
 Kenyan 
 Korean 
 North Korean 
 South Korean 
 Kosovan 
 Kuwaiti 
 Kyrgyz 
 Lao 
 Latvian 
 Lebanese 
 Lesotho 
 Liberian 
 Libyan 
 Liechtensteiner 
 Lithuanian 
 Luxembourg 
 Macedonian 
 Malagasy 
 Malawian 
 Malaysian 
 Sabahan 
 Sarawakian 
 Maldivian 
 Malian 
 Maltese 
 Mauritanian 
 Mauritian 
 Mexican 
 Moldovan 
 Monégasque 
 Mongolian 
 Montenegrin 
 Moroccan 
 Mozambican 
 Namibian 
 Nauruan 
 Nepalese 
 New Zealand 
 Nicaraguan 
 Niger 
 Nigerian 
 Niuean 
 Norwegian 
 Omani 
 Pakistani 
 Palestinian 
 Panamanian 
 Peruvian 
 Polish 
 Portuguese 
 Qatari 
 Romanian  (incl.  Transylvanian Saxon ) 
 Russian 
 Bashkir 
 Chechen 
 Circassian 
 Komi 
 Mordovian 
 Sakha 
 Tatar 
 Udmurt 
 Yamal 
 Rwandan 
 Saint Lucian 
 Salvadoran 
 Sammarinese 
 São Tomé and Príncipe 
 Saudi Arabian 
 Senegalese 
 Serbian 
 Seychellois 
 Sierra Leonean 
 Singaporean 
 Slovak 
 Slovenian 
 Somali 
 South African 
 Spanish 
 Andalusian 
 Asturian 
 Balearic 
 Basque 
 Canarian 
 Cantabrian 
 Catalan 
 Extremaduran 
 Galician 
 Manchegan 
 Valencian 
 Sri Lankan 
 Sudanese 
 Swazi 
 Swedish 
 Swiss 
 Syrian 
 Taiwanese 
 Tajik 
 Tanzanian 
 Zanzibari 
 Thai 
 Togolese 
 Tunisian 
 Turkish 
 Turkmen 
 Trinidadian and Tobagonian 
 Ugandan 
 Ukrainian 
 Uruguayan 
 Uzbek 
 Venezuelan 
 Vietnamese 
 Western Saharan 
 Yemeni 
 Zambian 
 Zimbabwean 
 Ethnic 
 Ainu 
 Arab 
 Indonesian 
 Aromanian 
 Assyrian 
 Balochi 
 Berber 
 Cajun 
 Chinese 
 American 
 Canadian 
 Chifa 
 Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Crimean Tatar 
 Greek American 
 Hazaragi 
 Indian 
 Anglo-Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Indigenous American 
 Inuit 
 Italian American 
 Kurdish 
 Livonian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Malay 
 Ossetian 
 Parsi 
 Pashtun 
 Peranakan 
 Romani 
 Sámi 
 Soul food 
 Sylheti 
 Transylvanian Saxon 
 Yup'ik 
 Religious 
 Buddhist 
 Christian 
 Goan Catholic 
 Mangalorean Catholic 
 Mennonite 
 Hindu 
 Islamic 
 Chinese 
 Ital 
 Jain 
 Jewish 
 American 
 Ashkenazi 
 Bukharan 
 Ethiopian 
 Mizrahi 
 Sephardic 
 Syrian 
 Ritual slaughter 
 Sikh 
 Historical 
 Ancient Egyptian 
 Ancient Greek 
 Ancient Israelite 
 Ancient Roman 
 Antebellum America 
 Aztec 
 Byzantine 
 Early modern European 
 Historical Chinese 
 Historical Indian subcontinent 
 Historical North Indian and Pakistani 
 History of agriculture 
 History of alcoholic drinks 
 History of bread 
 History of seafood 
 History of vegetarianism 
 Historical Argentine 
 Historical Japanese 
 Inca 
 Mayan 
 Muisca 
 Mughal 
 Medieval 
 Ottoman 
 Peasant 
 Soviet 
 Thirteen Colonies 
 Styles 
 Classique 
 Fast food 
 Fusion 
 New American 
 Eurasian 
 Haute 
 Molecular gastronomy 
 Note by Note 
 Nouvelle 
 Lists 
 List of cuisines 
 List of historical cuisines 
 Lists of prepared foods 
 Related 
 Cookbook 
 Cooking 
 Culinary arts 
 Drink 
 Food 
 history 
 Diet 
 Meal preparation 
 
   Food portal 
   Drink portal 
   Category 
   Commons 
   Cookbook 
   WikiProject 
   Outline 
 
 Authority control   National libraries 
 France 
 BnF data 
 Israel 
 United States 
 Other 
 IdRef 
 
  
NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw2392
Cached time: 20230310194533
Cache expiry: 1814400
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc, no‐toc‐conversion]
CPU time usage: 0.944 seconds
Real time usage: 1.168 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 20290/1000000
Post‐expand include size: 184684/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 13808/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 20/100
Expensive parser function count: 43/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 105813/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.505/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 20680127/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/400
 
 
Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  972.528      1 -total
 18.92%  183.988      1 Template:Reflist
 18.63%  181.165      2 Template:Navbox
 16.47%  160.172      1 Template:Asian_topic
 12.26%  119.267      1 Template:Culture_of_Afghanistan
 12.08%  117.508      1 Template:Culture_of_region
 11.84%  115.127      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 10.69%  103.962      1 Template:Lang-ps
  8.45%   82.221     52 Template:Iso2country
  7.75%   75.333      2 Template:Cite_news
 
  Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:idhash:8691437-0!canonical and timestamp 20230310194532 and revision id 1143162616. Rendering was triggered because: page-view
  
 esi <esi:include src="/esitest-fa8a495983347898/content" />  
 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Afghan_cuisine&oldid=1143162616 " 
 Categories :  Afghan cuisine South Asian cuisine Pashtun cuisine Uzbekistani cuisine Tajik cuisine Hidden categories:  CS1 maint: url-status Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing cleanup from November 2021 All pages needing cleanup Cleanup tagged articles with a reason field from November 2021 Wikipedia pages needing cleanup from November 2021 Articles containing Pashto-language text Articles containing Dari-language text Articles needing cleanup from February 2022 Articles with sections that need to be turned into prose from February 2022 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2014 Articles to be expanded from November 2021 All articles to be expanded Articles with empty sections from November 2021 All articles with empty sections Articles using small message boxes Articles prone to spam from January 2020 Commons category link is on Wikidata Region topic template using suffix Articles with BNF identifiers Articles with J9U identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers Articles with SUDOC identifiers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  This page was last edited on 6 March 2023, at 06:58  (UTC) . 
 Text is available under the  Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0 ;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the  Terms of Use  and  Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the  Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. 
 
 
 Privacy policy 
 About Wikipedia 
 Disclaimers 
 Contact Wikipedia 
 Mobile view 
 Developers 
 Statistics 
 Cookie statement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
