
 
 
 Jump to content 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle sidebar 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Create account Log in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Personal tools 
 
 
 
 
   Create account   Log in 
 
 
 
 
		Pages for logged out editors  learn more 
 
 
 Contributions Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Navigation 
 
 
 Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate 
 
 
 
 
 Contribute 
 
 
 Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file 
 
 
 
 
 Tools 
 
 
 What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item 
 
 
 
 
 Print/export 
 
 
 Download as PDF Printable version 
 
 
 
 
 In other projects 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons 
 
 
 
 
 Languages 
 
 On this Wikipedia the language links are at the top of the page across from the article title.  Go to top . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CentralNotice  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Contents 
 move to sidebar 
 hide 
 
 
 
 
 (Top) 
 
 
 
 
 
 1 History 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 Central Africa 
 
 
				Toggle Central Africa subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 2.1 Countries 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 East Africa 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4 North Africa 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5 Southern Africa 
 
 
				Toggle Southern Africa subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 5.1 Notable dishes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5.2 Countries 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6 West Africa 
 
 
				Toggle West Africa subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 6.1 Countries 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 7 See also 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8 References 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 9 Further reading 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
						Toggle the table of contents
					 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle the table of contents 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 African cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 21 languages 
 
 
 
 العربية Čeština Deutsch Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Hausa ქართული Kiswahili Kurdî Lietuvių Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk nynorsk Suomi Svenska Türkçe Yorùbá 
 Edit links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Article Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 English 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 More 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
 
 
 African cuisine is a staple of the continent's culture, and its history is entwined with the story of the people of Africa. The foods that Africans eat have been influenced by their religions, as well as by their climates and lifestyles. The first Africans to inhabit the continent were hunter-gatherers who ate what they could find in nature. As agriculture became more common in Africa, so did agriculture-based diets. [1] This article has multiple issues.  Please help  improve it  or discuss these issues on the  talk page .  ( Learn how and when to remove these template messages ) 
 
 This article  needs additional citations for  verification .  Please help  improve this article  by  adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources:   "African cuisine"  –  news   ·   newspapers   ·   books   ·   scholar   ·   JSTOR   ( May 2021 )  ( Learn how and when to remove this template message ) 
 This article's  lead section   may be too short to adequately  summarize  the key points .  Please consider expanding the lead to  provide an accessible overview  of all important aspects of the article.   ( November 2022 ) 
 
  ( Learn how and when to remove this template message ) 
 
Traditionally, the various  cuisines  of Africa  use a combination of plant-and seed-based ingredients, [2] [3]  without having food imported. In some parts of the continent, the traditional diet features an abundance of root tuber products. [4] [5] 
 Central Africa ,  East Africa ,  North Africa ,  Southern Africa  and  West Africa  each have distinctive dishes, preparation techniques, and consumption modes. [2] [6] 
 
 
 History [ edit ] 
 The roots of African cuisine goes back to thousands of years to the  Bronze Age  in  Northeast Africa , when early civilizations began cultivating grains such as barley and wheat. [7]  Part of North Africa is in the  Fertile Crescent  where settled agriculture was practiced by the  Ancient Egyptians  in this area. Animals such as donkeys and sheep were also domesticated starting the spread agriculture to other parts of Africa, notably  West Africa , although most tribes still lived a simple hunter-gather diet.
 Arab explorers  Leo Africanus  and  Ibn Battuta  provide accounts of African food ways encountered on their travels through sub-Saharan Africa. Most European travelers stayed close to coastal areas until the 19th century. Many of their diaries also recorded details on foods and crops. Many staples were introduced later when Africa was colonized by the Europeans. Foods that are now important parts of African cuisine such as  maize  and  potatoes  were not common until the 19th century. [8] 
 The influence of African food on Caribbean, Brazilian, American  Lowcountry cuisine , and  Cajun cuisine  from Louisiana is seen in rice dishes and green stews like the Afro-Caribbean  efo ,  duckanoo  and  callaloo . The vegetable  okra , introduced from Africa, is used in classic Louisiana  gumbos , and  American rice  growing in the Carolina. Lowcountry was influenced by West African techniques of rice cultivation and many slaves hailed from rice growing regions of West Africa. Lowcountry cuisine is still known for its distinctive rice dishes. [9] 
 
 Central Africa [ edit ] 
   Madesu  beans are a staple in Central Africa 
 Central Africa  expands from the  Tibesti Mountains  in the north to the vast  rainforest  basin of the  Congo River , the highlands of  Kivu  and the savannah of Katanga.
 This region has received culinary influence of the  Swahilis  (culture that evolved via the combination of Bantu, Yemeni, Omani and Indian cultures) during the  trans-Saharan slave trade . Swahili culinary influences can be found in dishes such as  mandazi ,  pilaf  rice,  kachumbari ,  sambusa , and  kuku paka . [10] 
 Central African cuisine has also been influenced by the Portuguese, by way of the  Kongo  and  Ndongo  Kingdoms. Salt fish was introduced following trade in the late 17th century, and the Kikongo term for  salt fish ,  makayabu , comes from the term  bacalhau  (ba-cal-ha-u). [11] 
 The Portuguese culinary influence is especially prominent in Angola, Sao Tomé and Equatorial Guinea. Central Africa has also been influenced by the cuisine of the regions East, West and Southern Africa because of their close proximity, e.g.  babuté  or  bobotie  is shared with the south,  nyama choma  with the east and  gombos  with West Africa.
 
   Ntaba  Central African-style lamb barbecue 
 In Central Africa, a variety of crops are grown, including yams, cassava, bananas and plantains, sweet potatoes, and cocoyams. These crops have become staples in the diet of many people in Central Africa. [12]   Fufu -like starchy foods are usually made from fermented cassava roots, but they can also be made with plantain, corn maize and yam. Fufu is served buffet-style with grilled meat, fish, stews, greens and  piment  . A variety of local ingredients are used while preparing other dishes, like  spinach  stew cooked with tomato, peppers, chilies, onions, and peanut butter. [13]  Eastern central Africa is also one of the few regions in Africa that uses potatoes as one of its main bases, since potatoes grow easily in the region.
 Cassava plants are also consumed as cooked  greens . Groundnut (peanut) stew is also prepared, containing  chicken ,  okra ,  ginger , and other spices. Beef and chicken are favorite meat dishes, but  game meat  preparations containing  crocodile ,  elephant ,  antelope  and  warthog  are also served occasionally. [14] [15] [16] [17] [18] 
 
 Countries [ edit ] 
 Angolan cuisine 
 Cameroonian cuisine 
 Cuisine of the Central African Republic 
 Chadian cuisine 
 Congolese cuisine 
 Cuisine of Equatorial Guinea 
 Gabonese cuisine 
 Cuisine of São Tomé and Príncipe 
 East Africa [ edit ] 
   Ugali  is pictured here with a side dish of  cabbage , though it is more typically eaten with  collard greens  ( sukuma wiki ). 
   Barbecued beef cubes and seafood in  Forodhani Gardens ,  Zanzibar 
   Kitcha fit-fit , a mainstay in  Ethiopian cuisine , is presented with a scoop of fresh yoghurt and topped with  berbere  (spice). 
 The cuisine of  East Africa  varies from area to area. In the inland savannah, the traditional cuisine of cattle-keeping peoples is distinctive meaning that meat products are generally absent.  Cattle ,  sheep ,  pigs  and  goats  were regarded as a form of  currency [19]  and a store of wealth. They are not generally consumed as food. [20] 
 In some areas, traditional  East Africans  consume the milk and blood of cattle, but rarely the meat. Elsewhere, other peoples are farmers who grow a variety of grains and vegetables.  Maize  (corn) is the basis of  ugali , the local version of West and Central Africa's  fufu .  Ugali  is a starch dish eaten with meats or stews. In  Uganda , steamed green  bananas  called  matoke  provide the starch filler of many meals.
 Around 1000 years ago,  Omani  and  Yemeni  merchants settled on the  Swahili Coast . Middle Eastern influences are especially reflected in the  Swahili  cuisine of the coast—steamed or cooked rice with spices in  Persian  style;  saffron ,  cloves ,  cinnamon  and several other spices; and  pomegranate  juice. [21] 
 Several centuries later, the British and the Indians came, and both brought with them foods such as Indian spiced vegetable  curries ,  lentil   soups ,  chapattis  and a variety of  pickles  which have influenced various local dishes. Some common ingredients used in this region include oranges, lemons, limes, chilies, capsicum peppers, maize, tomatoes, and strawberries.
 In the Horn of Africa, the main traditional dishes in  Eritrean cuisine  and  Ethiopian cuisine  are  tsebhis  (stews) served with  injera [3] [22]  (flatbread made from  teff , [22]   wheat , or  sorghum ) and  hilbet  (paste made from  legumes , mainly  lentils  and  fava beans ). Eritrean and Ethiopian cuisine (especially in the northern half) are very similar, given the shared history of the two countries.
 Eritrean and Ethiopian food habits vary regionally. In the  highlands ,  injera  is the staple diet and is eaten daily among the  Tigrinya .  Injera  is made out of teff, wheat, barley, sorghum or corn, and resembles a spongy, slightly sour pancake. When eating, diners generally share food from a large tray placed in the center of a low dining table. Many  injera  are layered on this tray and topped with various spicy stews. Diners then break into the section of  injera  in front of them, tearing off pieces and dipping them into the stews.
 In the lowlands, the main dish is  akelet , a porridge-like dish made from wheat flour dough. A  ladle  is used to scoop out the top, which is filled with  berbere  and butter sauce and surrounded by milk or yoghurt. A small piece of dough is broken and then used to scoop up the sauce.
 
   Typical  Ethiopian  and  Eritrean cuisine :  Injera  (pancake-like bread) and several kinds of  wat  (stew) 
 The best known Ethiopian/Eritrean cuisine consists of various vegetable or meat side dishes and entrées, usually a  wat , or thick  stew , served atop  injera , a large  sourdough   flatbread  made of teff flour. One does not eat with utensils, but instead uses injera to scoop up the entrées and side dishes.
 Tihlo , prepared from roasted barley flour, is very popular in Amhara, Agame, and Awlaelo (Tigray). Traditional Ethiopian cuisine employs no  pork  or  shellfish  of any kind, as they are forbidden in the Jewish and  Ethiopian Orthodox Christian  faiths. It is also very common to eat from the same dish in the center of the table with a group of people.
 
   Xalwo , the  Somali  version of  halva , is a festive dish in  Somali cuisine . 
 Somali cuisine  varies from region to region and consists of an exotic  mixture  of diverse culinary influences. It is the product of  Somalia 's rich  tradition of trade and commerce . Despite the variety, there remains one thing that unites the various regional cuisines: all food is served  halal . There are therefore no pork dishes,  alcohol  is not served, nothing that died on its own is eaten, and no blood is incorporated.  Qaddo  or lunch is often elaborate.
 Varieties of  bariis  (rice), the most popular being  basmati , usually serve as the main dish. Spices like  cumin ,  cardamom ,  cloves ,  cinnamon  and  sage  are used to aromatize these different rice dishes. Somalis serve dinner as late as 9 pm. During  Ramadan , dinner is often served after  Tarawih  prayers, sometimes as late as 11 pm.
 Xalwo  (halwo) or  halva  is a popular confection served during special occasions such as  Eid  celebrations or wedding receptions. It is made from sugar,  cornstarch ,  cardamom  powder,  nutmeg  powder, and  ghee . Peanuts are also sometimes added to enhance texture and flavor. [23]  After meals, homes are traditionally perfumed using  frankincense  ( lubaan ) or  incense  ( cuunsi ), which is prepared inside an  incense burner  referred to as a  dabqaad .
 Food and nutrition security in East Africa (Rwanda, Burundi and South Sudan) is a significant issue. The region has been plagued by drought, conflict and economic instability since the 1990s. The current situation is characterized by low levels of food availability and high levels of malnutrition among young children. The solution proposed for this problem is to increase local food production. This would be achieved by increasing agricultural productivity by improving soil fertility and water management, which will help farmers grow more crops per year. This will also help reduce poverty in the region by providing more employment opportunities for local people. [24] 
 
 North Africa [ edit ] 
 Main article:  North African cuisine In a study of food loss and waste in North Africa, researchers found that the region was wasting about 30% of its food, which is likely to increase as the population continues to grow. This waste occurs for a variety of reasons, including lack of refrigeration and storage facilities. to solve that issue the people had to get creative with new dishes and creative new ways of storing food. The more we looked, the more we found that people were using all parts of the plant in some way—the leaves, stems, flowers, fruits and seeds. They also used every edible part of animals as well—from fat to bones for making broth or soup. [25]   Fresh  couscous  with vegetables and chickpeas. 
 North Africa lies along the  Mediterranean Sea  and encompasses within its fold several nations, including  Morocco ,  Algeria ,  Libya ,  Tunisia ,  Egypt  and  Sudan . The roots of North African cuisine can be traced back to the ancient empires of North Africa, particularly in Egypt, where many of the country's dishes and culinary traditions date back to  African   antiquity .
 Over several centuries traders, travelers, invaders, migrants and immigrants all have influenced the cuisine of North Africa. The  Phoenicians  of the 1st century brought  sausages , while the  Carthaginians  introduced  wheat  and its by-product,  semolina . The  Berbers  adapted semolina into  couscous , one of the main  staple foods .  Olives  and  olive oil  were introduced before the arrival of the Romans.
 From the 7th century onwards, the  Arabs  introduced a variety of  spices , like  saffron ,  nutmeg ,  cinnamon ,  ginger  and  cloves , which contributed and influenced the culinary culture of North Africa. The  Ottoman Turks  brought sweet  pastries  and other  bakery  products, and from the  New World , North Africa got  potatoes ,  tomatoes ,  zucchini  and chili peppers.
 Most of the North African countries have several similar dishes, sometimes almost the same dish with a different name (the Moroccan  tangia  and the Tunisian  coucha  are both essentially the same dish, a meat stew prepared in an  urn  and cooked overnight in a public oven), sometimes with a slight change in ingredients and cooking style. To add on, two completely different dishes may also share the same name (for example, a  tajine  dish is a slow-cooked stew in Morocco, whereas the Tunisian  tajine  is a baked  omelette / quiche -like dish). There are noticeable differences between the cooking styles of different nations, from the sophisticated, full-bodied flavors of  Moroccan palace cookery  to the fiery dishes of  Tunisian cuisine  and the humbler, simpler cuisines of  Egypt  and  Algeria . [26] 
 
 Southern Africa [ edit ] 
   Traditional  South African cuisine . 
 The cooking of the region of Southern Africa (not to be confused with the country of  South Africa ) is sometimes called "rainbow cuisine", [27]  as the food in this region is a blend of many cultures:  indigenous   African  societies,  European , and  Asian . To understand indigenous  African  cuisine, it is important to understand the various native peoples of southern Africa.  The indigenous  Africans  of Southern Africa were roughly divided into two groups and several subgroups.
 The largest group consisted of the  Bantu -speakers, whose descendants today may identify themselves by various subgroup names such as Ndebele ( northern  and  southern ),  Shona ,  Venda ,  Zulu ,  Xhosa ,  Swazi ,  Sotho ,  Tswana ,  Pedi  and  Tsonga .  They arrived in the region around 2,000 years ago, bringing crop cultivation, animal husbandry, and iron toolmaking with them.  Hence the Bantu-speakers grew grain crops extensively and raised cattle, sheep and goats.  They also grew and continue to grow pumpkins, beans, and leafy greens as vegetables.
 A smaller group were the primeval residents of the region, the  Khoisan , who some archaeologists believe had lived in the region for at least 10,000 years.  Many descendants of the Khoisan people have now been incorporated into the population of South Africa.  The Khoisan originally were hunter-gatherers (who came to be known as "San" by the Bantu-speakers and as "bushmen" by Europeans).  After the arrival of the Bantu-speakers, however, some  Khoisan  adopted the Bantu-speakers' raising of cattle but did not grow crops.  The  Khoisan  who raised cattle called themselves "Khoi-Khoi" and came to be known by Europeans as "Hottentots."
 
   Potjiekos  is a traditional African stew (popularised by  Afrikaners ) made with meat and vegetables and cooked over coals in  cast-iron  pots. 
 People were, in other words, defined to some extent by the kinds of food they ate.  The Bantu-speakers ate dishes of grain, meat, milk and vegetables, as well as fermented grain and fermented milk products. While the Khoi-Khoi ate meat and milk and the San hunted wild animals and gathered wild tubers and vegetables.  In many ways, the daily food of native South African families can be traced to the indigenous foods that their native  African  ancestors ate. The  Khoisan  and  Bantu  traditionally ate roasted meat, and they also dried meat for later use.
 The influence of their diet is reflected in the universal Southern African love of barbecue (generally called in South Africa by its Afrikaans name, a "braai") and  biltong  (dried preserved meat). The traditional beer was ubiquitous in the southern African diet, and the fermentation added additional nutrients to the diet.  It was a traditional obligation for any family to be able to offer a visitor copious amounts of beer.  Beer brewing was done by women, and the status of a housewife in pre-colonial southern Africa depended significantly on her skill at brewing delicious beer.
 
   A carton and glass of  mageu , a traditional non-alcoholic drink made from  fermented   mealie   pap  that is popular among many of the  Nguni people . 
 Milk was historically one of the most important components of the southern African diet.  Cattle were considered a man's most important possession. In order to marry, a man had to compensate his prospective in-laws with a gift of cattle as a dowry for his bride.  A married man was expected to provide a generous supply of milk to his wife and children, along with meat whenever he slaughtered cattle, sheep or goats.  Because there was no refrigeration, most milks was soured into a kind of yogurt.
 The young men of the family often took care of the cattle far away from the villages at "cattle posts," and they sent a steady stream of yogurt home on behalf of their fathers.  Today, many South Africans of  African  origin enjoy drinking sour milk products that are sold in the supermarket, comparable to American buttermilk, yogurt, and sour cream.
On weekends they will have a "braai", and the meal usually consists of "pap and vleis", which is maize porridge and grilled meat as has historically been done in the region.
 The basic ingredients include seafood, meat products (including wild game), poultry, as well as grains, fresh fruits and vegetables. Fruits include  apples ,  grapes ,  mangoes ,  bananas  , papayas ,  avocado ,  oranges ,  peaches  and  apricots . Desserts may simply be fruit, but there are some more western-style puddings, such as  malva pudding , reminiscent of  sticky toffee pudding , which was inspired by both  British cuisine  and  Dutch cuisine . Meat products include lamb, and game like  venison ,  ostrich , and  impala . The seafood includes  crayfish ,  prawns ,  tuna ,  mussels ,  oysters , calamari,  mackerel , and  lobster . There are also several types of traditional and modern  alcoholic beverages  including many European-style  beers .
 
 Notable dishes [ edit ] 
 Inyama yenhloko 
 Countries [ edit ] 
 Botswana cuisine 
 Cuisine of Eswatini 
 Cuisine of Lesotho 
 Namibian cuisine 
 South African cuisine 
 Zimbabwe cuisine 
 Mozambican cuisine 
 West Africa [ edit ] 
 Main article:  West African cuisine 
   West African  maafe  or groundnut stew, prepared by a  Senegalese  cook. 
 A typical  West African  meal is made with  starchy  items and can contain meat, fish as well as various spices and herbs. A wide array of staples are eaten across the region, including  fufu ,  banku ,  kenkey  (originating from  Ghana ),  foutou ,  couscous ,  tô , and  garri , which are served alongside soups and stews.  Fufu  is often made from starchy  root vegetables  such as  yams ,  cocoyams , or  cassava , but also from cereal grains like millet, sorghum or plantains.
 The staple grain or starch varies between regions and ethnic groups, although corn has gained significant ground as it is cheap, swells to greater volumes and creates a beautiful white final product that is greatly desired.   Banku  and  kenkey  are maize dough staples, and  gari  is made from dried grated cassavas. Rice dishes are also widely eaten in the region, especially in the dry  Sahel  belt inland. Examples of these include  benachin  from  The Gambia  and  Jollof rice , a pan-West African rice dish similar to Arab  kabsah .
 Seeds of Guinea pepper ( Aframomum melegueta ,  also called grains of paradise or melegueta pepper), a native  West African  plant, were used as a spice and even reached Europe, through North African middlemen, during the Middle Ages. Centuries before the influence of Europeans,  West Africans  were trading with the  Arab world  and spices like  cinnamon ,  cloves , and  mint  were not unknown becoming part of the local flavorings. Centuries later, the Portuguese, French and British influenced the regional cuisines, but only to a limited extent.
 
   Jollof rice  is a popular dish throughout West Africa. 
 The local cuisine and recipes of  West Africa  continue to remain deeply entrenched in the local customs and traditions, with ingredients like native rice ( Oryza glaberrima ), rice,  fonio , millet, sorghum,  Bambara groundnuts  and  Hausa groundnuts ,  black-eyed peas , brown beans, and root vegetables such as yams,  cocoyams ,  sweet potatoes , and cassava. Cooking techniques include  roasting ,  baking ,  boiling ,  frying , mashing, and spicing. A range of sweets and savories are also prepared.
 
   Klouikloui , rings of fried peanut butter as served in  Benin . 
 Cooking techniques of West Africa are changing.  In the past  West Africans  ate much less meat and used native oils ( palm oil  on the coast and  shea butter  in Sahelian regions).  Baobob leaf and numerous local greens were everyday staples during certain times of the year. Today the diet is much heavier in meats, salt, and fats.  Many dishes combine fish and meat, including dried and fermented fish. Flaked and dried fish is often fried in oil, and sometimes cooked in sauce made up with hot peppers, onions, tomatoes, various spices (such as  soumbala ), and water to prepare a highly flavored stew.
 In some areas beef and mutton are preferred, and goat meat is the dominant red meat.  Suya , a popular grilled spicy meat  kebab  flavored with peanuts and other spices, is sold by street vendors as a snack or evening meal and is typically made with beef or chicken.  It is common to have a preponderance of seafood and the seafood, as earlier stated, is sometimes also mixed with other meat products. Guinea fowl eggs, eggs and chicken are also preferred.
 With regard to beverages, water has a very strong ritual significance in many West African nations (particularly in dry areas) and water is often the first thing an  African  host will offer their guest.  Palm wine  is also a common beverage made from the fermented sap of various types of  palm  trees and is usually sold in sweet (less-fermented, retaining more of the sap's sugar) or sour (fermented longer, making it stronger and less sweet) varieties.  Millet beer is another common beverage (Millet beer, also known as  Bantu  beer, is an alcoholic beverage made from malted millet.) [28] 
 
 Countries [ edit ] 
 Benin cuisine 
 Burkinabé cuisine , Burkina Faso 
 Gambian cuisine 
 Ghanaian cuisine 
 Cuisine of Guinea-Bissau 
 Cuisine of Guinea 
 Ivorian cuisine 
 Liberian cuisine 
 Malian cuisine 
 Mauritanian cuisine 
 Nigerian cuisine 
 Cuisine of Niger 
 Cuisine of Saint Helena 
 Senegalese cuisine 
 Cuisine of Sierra Leone 
 Togolese cuisine 
 See also [ edit ] 
 
 Africa portal Food portal 
 AfroFoodtv.com 
 List of African dishes 
 Cuisine of Seychelles 
 Tiep 
 Swallow 
 References [ edit ] 
 
 
 ^   Cusack, Igor (December 2000).  "African cuisines: Recipes for nationbuilding?" .  Journal of African Cultural Studies .  13  (2): 207–225.  doi : 10.1080/713674313 .  ISSN   1369-6815 .  S2CID   145320645 . 
 
 ^  a   b   School Foodservice Journal . American School Food Service Association. 1977. p. 36 . Retrieved  30 November  2017 . 
 
 ^  a   b   Neo-Africanism: The New Ideology for a New Africa . Trafford Publishing. 2008. p. 505.  ISBN   978-1-4251-7678-5 . Retrieved  30 November  2017 . 
 
 ^   "Food" .  African Fest USA . Archived from  the original  on 20 September 2020 . Retrieved  24 May  2020 . 
 
 ^   "Food Alive and Well" .  Carifika Canada . Retrieved  27 May  2020 . [ permanent dead link ] 
 
 ^   Njogu, K.; Ngeta, K.; Wanjau, M. (2010).  Ethnic Diversity in Eastern Africa: Opportunities and Challenges . Twaweza Communications. pp. 78–79.  ISBN   978-9966-7244-8-9 . Retrieved  30 November  2017 . 
 
 ^   "Ancient Egyptian Agriculture | Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations" .  www.fao.org . Retrieved  15 May  2022 . 
 
 ^   Cherniwchan, Jevan; Moreno-Cruz, Juan (1 January 2019).  "Maize and precolonial Africa" .  Journal of Development Economics .  136 : 137–150.  doi : 10.1016/j.jdeveco.2018.10.008 .  ISSN   0304-3878 .  S2CID   158678745 . 
 
 ^   Freedman, P., Chaplin, J.E., & Albala, K. (2014). Food in Time and Place: The American Historical Association Companion to Food History. Berkeley: University of California Press. 
 
 ^   Coquery-Vidrovitch, Catherine; Mésnard, Éric (2013).  L'esclavage intégré en Afrique (fin du xviiie-xixe siècle) . Cahiers Libres. 
 
 ^   Thronton, John (1981). "Early Kongo-Portuguese Relations: A New Interpretation".  History in Africa .  VIII  (I): 22. 
 
 ^   Albala, Ken, ed. (2011).  Food Cultures of the World Encyclopedia: Africa and the Middle East  (1 ed.). © ABC-Clio Inc.  doi : 10.5040/9781474208642 .  ISBN   978-1-4742-0864-2 . 
 
 ^   Newton, A. (1994).  Central Africa: a travel survival kit . Lonely Planet travel survival kit. Lonely Planet. p. 77.  ISBN   978-0-86442-138-8 . Retrieved  30 November  2017 . 
 
 ^   Huchzermeyer, F.W. (2003).  Crocodiles: Biology, Husbandry and Diseases . CABI. p. 130.  ISBN   978-0-85199-798-8 . Retrieved  30 November  2017 . 
 
 ^   Elephant meat trade in Central Africa : Republic of Congo case study . Iucn. p. 36.  ISBN   978-2-8317-1419-6 . Retrieved  30 November  2017 . 
 
 ^   Stiles, D. (2011).  Elephant Meat Trade in Central Africa: Summary Report . IUCN. p. 25.  ISBN   978-2-8317-1393-9 . Retrieved  30 November  2017 . 
 
 ^   Whitford, J. (1877).  Trading Life in Western and Central Africa . "Porcupine" Office. p.  212 . Retrieved  30 November  2017 . 
 
 ^   Gibbons, A.S.H. (1898).  Exploration and Hunting in Central Africa 1895-96 . Methuen & Company. p.  223 . Retrieved  30 November  2017 . 
 
 ^   " 'A cow is as good as a man - or better.' African Initiatives in Tanzania" .  The Big Issue . 7 August 2017 . Retrieved  30 November  2017 . 
 
 ^   "livestock farming | Definition, Methods, Breeds, & Facts | Britannica" .  www.britannica.com . Retrieved  15 May  2022 . 
 
 ^   "Africa" .  Issuu . Retrieved  27 May  2020 . 
 
 ^  a   b   "Eritrean Food Practices."   Webcitation.org . Accessed July 2011. 
 
 ^   Barlin Ali,  Somali Cuisine , (AuthorHouse: 2007), p.79 
 
 ^   Lokuruka, Michael N. I. (9 December 2020).  "Food and Nutrition Security in East Africa (Rwanda, Burundi and South Sudan): Status, Challenges and Prospects" .  Food Security in Africa . IntechOpen.  doi : 10.5772/intechopen.95037 .  ISBN   978-1-78985-734-4 .  S2CID   230576924 . 
 
 ^   El Bilali, Hamid (4 April 2018).  "Research on food losses and waste in North Africa" .  The North African Journal of Food and Nutrition Research .  2  (3): 51–58.  doi : 10.51745/najfnr.2.3.51-58 .  ISSN   2588-1582 . 
 
 ^   Wolfert, Paula.  "The Dishes of North Africa" .  National Association for the Specialty Food Trade , Inc. Archived from  the original  on 21 October 2007. 
 
 ^   Osseo-Asare, F. (2005).  Food Culture in Sub-Saharan Africa . Food culture around the world. Greenwood Press. p. 59.  ISBN   978-0-313-32488-8 . Retrieved  13 August  2017 . 
 
 ^   "The Oxford Companion to Beer Definition of millet" .  Craft Beer & Brewing . Retrieved  11 October  2022 . 
 
 
 Further reading [ edit ] 
 McCann, James C. (2009).  Stirring the Pot: A History of African Cuisine . Athens, Ohio: Ohio University Press.  ISBN   9780896802728 . Retrieved  30 October  2016 . 
 v t e African cuisine National cuisines 
 Algeria 
 Angola 
 Benin 
 Botswana 
 Burkina Faso 
 Burundi 
 Cameroon 
 Cape Verde 
 Central African Republic 
 Chad 
 Comoros 
 Democratic Republic of the Congo 
 Djibouti 
 Egypt 
 Equatorial Guinea 
 Eritrea 
 Eswatini (Swaziland) 
 Ethiopia 
 Gabon 
 Gambia 
 Ghana 
 Guinea 
 Guinea-Bissau 
 Ivory Coast 
 Kenya 
 Lesotho 
 Liberia 
 Libya 
 Madagascar 
 Malawi 
 Mali 
 Mauritania 
 Mauritius 
 Morocco 
 Mozambique 
 Namibia 
 Niger 
 Nigeria 
 Republic of the Congo 
 Rwanda 
 Saint Helena 
 São Tomé and Príncipe 
 Senegal 
 Seychelles 
 Sierra Leone 
 Somalia 
 South Africa 
 South Sudan 
 Sudan 
 Tanzania 
 Togo 
 Tunisia 
 Uganda 
 Western Sahara 
 Zambia 
 Zimbabwe 
 Ethnic and regional cuisines 
 Arab 
 Berber 
 Jewish 
 Ethiopian 
 Mizrahi 
 Sephardi 
 Mediterranean 
 North African 
 West African 
 Zanzibar 
 Lists 
 List of African cuisines 
 List of African dishes 
 
   Category 
 
 v t e Africa   articles History Chronology 
 Antiquity 
 North Africa 
 Archaeology 
 Pre-colonial kingdoms 
 Empires 
 Sahelian 
 Indian Ocean trade 
 Bantu expansion 
 Muslim conquest 
 European exploration 
 European colonisation 
 Slavery 
 Atlantic 
 Barbary 
 Indian Ocean 
 Trans-Saharan 
 Scramble for Africa 
 Decolonisation 
 By topic 
 Economy 
 Empires 
 Historiography 
 Military 
 conflicts 
 Science and technology 
 By region 
 Central 
 East 
 North 
 South 
 West 
 Geography 
 Countries and territories 
 Highest points 
 Impact craters 
 Islands 
 Natural history 
 Regions 
 Central 
 East 
 North 
 South 
 West 
 Rivers 
 Politics 
 African Union 
 Elections 
 Heads of government 
 Heads of state 
 Human rights 
 Freedom of religion 
 LGBT rights 
 Linguistic rights 
 Women's rights 
 feminism 
 International organisations 
 Pan-African Parliament 
 Pan-Africanism 
 Politics 
 parties 
 United States of Africa 
 Economy 
 Central banks 
 Countries by GDP (nominal) 
 Countries by GDP (PPP) 
 Countries by HDI 
 Billionaires 
 Education 
 Infrastructure 
 Internet 
 Natural resources 
 Poverty 
 Renewable energy 
 Stock exchanges 
 Society 
 Caste systems 
 Etiquette 
 Health 
 Languages 
 Religion 
 Culture 
 Architecture 
 Art 
 Cinema 
 Cuisine 
 Literature 
 Africanfuturism 
 Media 
 Music 
 Philosophy 
 World Heritage Sites 
 Sport 
 African Cricket Association 
 African Games 
 Afro-Asian Games 
 Australian-rules football 
 Confederation of African Football 
 FIBA Africa 
 Rugby Africa *  Stadiums by capacity 
 Tour d'Afrique 
 Demographics 
 Countries by population 
 density 
 Emigration 
 Ethnic groups 
 HIV/AIDS 
 Life expectancy 
 Urbanization 
 cities 
 urban areas 
 Youth in Africa 
 By year 
 2005 
 2006 
 2007 
 2008 
 2009 
 2010 
 2011 
 2012 
 2013 
 2014 
 2015 
 2016 
 2017 
 2018 
 2019 
 2020 
 Outline Index 
 Category 
 Portal 
 v t e Cuisines Continental 
 African 
 North 
 West 
 list 
 Americas 
 Caribbean 
 North 
 South 
 list 
 Asian 
 Caucasian 
 Central 
 Indian subcontinent 
 Levantine 
 list 
 European 
 Balkan 
 Central 
 Eastern 
 list 
 Oceanic 
 Intercontinental
 Global 
 Latin American 
 Mediterranean 
 Middle Eastern 
 National  and regional 
 Afghan 
 Albanian 
 Algerian 
 American 
 Californian 
 Floribbean 
 Hawaiian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Lowcountry (South Carolina) 
 New England 
 New Mexico 
 Pacific Northwest 
 Pennsylvania Dutch 
 Puerto Rican 
 Southern US 
 Southwest US 
 Texas 
 Angolan 
 Argentine 
 Armenian 
 Australian 
 Austrian 
 Azerbaijani 
 Bahraini 
 Bangladeshi 
 Barbadian 
 Belarusian 
 Belgian 
 Belizean 
 Beninese 
 Bhutanese 
 Bolivian 
 Bosnian-Herzegovinian 
 Botswana 
 Brazilian 
 British 
 Channel Islands 
 English 
 Gibraltarian 
 Northern Irish 
 Saint Helena 
 Scottish 
 Welsh 
 Bruneian 
 Bulgarian 
 Burkinabé 
 Burmese 
 Burundian 
 Cambodian 
 Cameroonian 
 Canadian 
 Acadian 
 Québécois 
 Central African Republic 
 Chadian 
 Chilean 
 Chinese 
 Cantonese 
 Hong Kong 
 Macanese 
 Tibetan 
 Xinjiang 
 Colombian 
 Congolese 
 Corsican 
 Croatian 
 Cuban 
 Cypriot 
 Czech 
 Danish 
 Faroese 
 Greenlandic 
 Djiboutian 
 Dominican 
 Dominican Republic 
 Dutch 
 East Timorese 
 Ecuadorian 
 Egyptian 
 Emirati 
 Equatorial Guinean 
 Eritrean 
 Estonian 
 Ethiopian 
 Fijian 
 Filipino 
 Finnish 
 French 
 Occitan 
 French Guianan 
 Gabonese 
 Gambian 
 Georgian 
 German 
 Ghanaian 
 Greek 
 Cretan 
 Epirotic 
 Greek Macedonian 
 Heptanesean 
 Guatemalan 
 Guinea-Bissauan 
 Guinean 
 Haitian 
 Honduran 
 Hungarian 
 Icelandic 
 Indian 
 Arunachalese 
 Assamese 
 Bengali 
 Bihari 
 Goan 
 Gujarati 
 Himachal Pradesh 
 Kashmiri 
 Jharkhandi 
 Karnataka 
 Kerala 
 Maharashtrian 
 Manipuri 
 Meghalayan 
 Mizo 
 Naga 
 Odia 
 Punjabi 
 Rajasthani 
 Sikkimese 
 Sindhi 
 Tamil 
 Telangana 
 Telugu 
 Indonesian 
 Acehnese 
 Balinese 
 Banjar 
 Batak 
 Betawi 
 Indo 
 Javanese 
 Madurese 
 Makassar 
 Minahasan 
 Minangkabau 
 Palembangese 
 Sundanese 
 Iranian 
 Iraqi 
 Irish 
 Israeli 
 Italian 
 Abruzzese 
 Ligurian 
 Lombard 
 Lucanian 
 Neapolitan 
 Roman 
 Sardinian 
 Sicilian 
 Venetian 
 Ivorian 
 Jamaican 
 Japanese 
 Okinawan 
 Jordanian 
 Kazakh 
 Kenyan 
 Korean 
 North Korean 
 South Korean 
 Kosovan 
 Kuwaiti 
 Kyrgyz 
 Lao 
 Latvian 
 Lebanese 
 Lesotho 
 Liberian 
 Libyan 
 Liechtensteiner 
 Lithuanian 
 Luxembourg 
 Macedonian 
 Malagasy 
 Malawian 
 Malaysian 
 Sabahan 
 Sarawakian 
 Maldivian 
 Malian 
 Maltese 
 Mauritanian 
 Mauritian 
 Mexican 
 Moldovan 
 Monégasque 
 Mongolian 
 Montenegrin 
 Moroccan 
 Mozambican 
 Namibian 
 Nauruan 
 Nepalese 
 New Zealand 
 Nicaraguan 
 Niger 
 Nigerian 
 Niuean 
 Norwegian 
 Omani 
 Pakistani 
 Palestinian 
 Panamanian 
 Peruvian 
 Polish 
 Portuguese 
 Qatari 
 Romanian  (incl.  Transylvanian Saxon ) 
 Russian 
 Bashkir 
 Chechen 
 Circassian 
 Komi 
 Mordovian 
 Sakha 
 Tatar 
 Udmurt 
 Yamal 
 Rwandan 
 Saint Lucian 
 Salvadoran 
 Sammarinese 
 São Tomé and Príncipe 
 Saudi Arabian 
 Senegalese 
 Serbian 
 Seychellois 
 Sierra Leonean 
 Singaporean 
 Slovak 
 Slovenian 
 Somali 
 South African 
 Spanish 
 Andalusian 
 Asturian 
 Balearic 
 Basque 
 Canarian 
 Cantabrian 
 Catalan 
 Extremaduran 
 Galician 
 Manchegan 
 Valencian 
 Sri Lankan 
 Sudanese 
 Swazi 
 Swedish 
 Swiss 
 Syrian 
 Taiwanese 
 Tajik 
 Tanzanian 
 Zanzibari 
 Thai 
 Togolese 
 Tunisian 
 Turkish 
 Turkmen 
 Trinidadian and Tobagonian 
 Ugandan 
 Ukrainian 
 Uruguayan 
 Uzbek 
 Venezuelan 
 Vietnamese 
 Western Saharan 
 Yemeni 
 Zambian 
 Zimbabwean 
 Ethnic 
 Ainu 
 Arab 
 Indonesian 
 Aromanian 
 Assyrian 
 Balochi 
 Berber 
 Cajun 
 Chinese 
 American 
 Canadian 
 Chifa 
 Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Crimean Tatar 
 Greek American 
 Hazaragi 
 Indian 
 Anglo-Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Indigenous American 
 Inuit 
 Italian American 
 Kurdish 
 Livonian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Malay 
 Ossetian 
 Parsi 
 Pashtun 
 Peranakan 
 Romani 
 Sámi 
 Soul food 
 Sylheti 
 Transylvanian Saxon 
 Yup'ik 
 Religious 
 Buddhist 
 Christian 
 Goan Catholic 
 Mangalorean Catholic 
 Mennonite 
 Hindu 
 Islamic 
 Chinese 
 Ital 
 Jain 
 Jewish 
 American 
 Ashkenazi 
 Bukharan 
 Ethiopian 
 Mizrahi 
 Sephardic 
 Syrian 
 Ritual slaughter 
 Sikh 
 Historical 
 Ancient Egyptian 
 Ancient Greek 
 Ancient Israelite 
 Ancient Roman 
 Antebellum America 
 Aztec 
 Byzantine 
 Early modern European 
 Historical Chinese 
 Historical Indian subcontinent 
 Historical North Indian and Pakistani 
 History of agriculture 
 History of alcoholic drinks 
 History of bread 
 History of seafood 
 History of vegetarianism 
 Historical Argentine 
 Historical Japanese 
 Inca 
 Mayan 
 Muisca 
 Mughal 
 Medieval 
 Ottoman 
 Peasant 
 Soviet 
 Thirteen Colonies 
 Styles 
 Classique 
 Fast food 
 Fusion 
 New American 
 Eurasian 
 Haute 
 Molecular gastronomy 
 Note by Note 
 Nouvelle 
 Lists 
 List of cuisines 
 List of historical cuisines 
 Lists of prepared foods 
 Related 
 Cookbook 
 Cooking 
 Culinary arts 
 Drink 
 Food 
 history 
 Diet 
 Meal preparation 
 
   Food portal 
   Drink portal 
   Category 
   Commons 
   Cookbook 
   WikiProject 
   Outline 
 
 Authority control   National libraries 
 France 
 BnF data 
 Israel 
 United States 
 Other 
 IdRef 
 
  
NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw2314
Cached time: 20230311055416
Cache expiry: 1814400
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc, no‐toc‐conversion]
CPU time usage: 0.713 seconds
Real time usage: 0.897 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3093/1000000
Post‐expand include size: 208447/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 21268/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 34/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 111406/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.393/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 8649026/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/400
 
 
Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  650.480      1 -total
 39.11%  254.416      1 Template:Reflist
 25.18%  163.818      3 Template:Ambox
 18.55%  120.649      1 Template:Multiple_issues
 15.14%   98.505      4 Template:Cite_journal
 14.10%   91.725      4 Template:Navbox
 12.73%   82.797      1 Template:Africa_topics
 12.45%   81.014     14 Template:Cite_book
 12.38%   80.509      1 Template:Region_topics
 11.58%   75.309      1 Template:Cuisine_of_Africa
 
  Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:idhash:1769393-0!canonical and timestamp 20230311055415 and revision id 1142958978. Rendering was triggered because: page-view
  
 esi <esi:include src="/esitest-fa8a495983347898/content" />  
 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=African_cuisine&oldid=1142958978 " 
 Categories :  African cuisine African culture Food- and drink-related lists Cuisine by continent Hidden categories:  All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from April 2021 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles needing additional references from May 2021 All articles needing additional references Wikipedia introduction cleanup from November 2022 All pages needing cleanup Articles covered by WikiProject Wikify from November 2022 All articles covered by WikiProject Wikify Articles with multiple maintenance issues Use dmy dates from October 2022 Articles with BNF identifiers Articles with J9U identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers Articles with SUDOC identifiers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  This page was last edited on 5 March 2023, at 05:40  (UTC) . 
 Text is available under the  Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0 ;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the  Terms of Use  and  Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the  Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. 
 
 
 Privacy policy 
 About Wikipedia 
 Disclaimers 
 Contact Wikipedia 
 Mobile view 
 Developers 
 Statistics 
 Cookie statement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
