
 
 
 Jump to content 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle sidebar 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Create account Log in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Personal tools 
 
 
 
 
   Create account   Log in 
 
 
 
 
		Pages for logged out editors  learn more 
 
 
 Contributions Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Navigation 
 
 
 Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate 
 
 
 
 
 Contribute 
 
 
 Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file 
 
 
 
 
 Tools 
 
 
 What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item 
 
 
 
 
 Print/export 
 
 
 Download as PDF Printable version 
 
 
 
 
 In other projects 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons 
 
 
 
 
 Languages 
 
 On this Wikipedia the language links are at the top of the page across from the article title.  Go to top . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CentralNotice  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Contents 
 move to sidebar 
 hide 
 
 
 
 
 (Top) 
 
 
 
 
 
 1 Overview 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 Ingredients 
 
 
				Toggle Ingredients subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 2.1 Game 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.2 Fish and sea creatures 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.3 Gathered plants 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.4 Crops 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 Primary dishes 
 
 
				Toggle Primary dishes subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 3.1 Citatap 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.2 Ohaw 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.3 Rataskep 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.4 Sayo 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.5 Sito 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4 Preserved Foods 
 
 
				Toggle Preserved Foods subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 4.1 Dried meat and fish 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.2 Cardiocrinum cordatum  starch 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.3 On turep 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.4 Pocche-imo 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5 Commodities 
 
 
				Toggle Commodities subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 5.1 Alcohol 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5.2 Drinks 
 
 
 
 
 
 5.2.1 Tea 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5.2.2 Tree Sap 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6 Utensils and eating habits 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 7 References 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8 Bibliography 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 9 External links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
						Toggle the table of contents
					 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle the table of contents 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ainu cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 9 languages 
 
 
 
 العربية বাংলা Français Jawa 日本語 Русский ไทย Українська 中文 
 Edit links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Article Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 English 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 More 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
 
 
 Culinary traditions of the Ainu 
   Ohaw , traditional Ainu soup 
 Ainu cuisine  is the  cuisine  of the ethnic  Ainu  in  Japan  and  Russia .  The cuisine differs markedly from that of the majority  Yamato people  of  Japan .  Raw meat like  sashimi , for example, is rarely served in Ainu cuisine, which instead uses methods such as  boiling ,  roasting  and  curing  to prepare meat. Also unlike Japanese cuisine, traditional Ainu cuisine did not use  miso , soy sauce, or sugar, though these seasonings make an appearance in modern Ainu cuisine. [1] : 30    The island of  Hokkaidō  in northern Japan is where most Ainu live today; however, they once inhabited most of the  Kuril islands , the southern half of  Sakhalin island , and parts of northern  Honshū Island .
 There are very few Ainu restaurants in the world, though some do exist. Examples of Ainu restaurants include  Haru Koro (Harukor)  in  Shinjuku ,  Tokyo ,  Ashiri Kotan Nakanoshima  in  Sapporo , and  Poron'no  and  Marukibune  in  Akan, Hokkaidō .
 
 
 Overview [ edit ] 
 Traditional Ainu cuisine used meats obtained through fishing and hunting such as salmon and deer, wild plants gathered in the mountains such as  Cardiocrinum cordatum  bulbs ( turep ) and  acorns , as well as various grains and potatoes obtained through farming. Another feature is its liberal use of oils as flavoring. [2] : 406–420  [3]  Due to the Ainu's reliance on local game and fauna, not all areas used all the same ingredients, instead utilizing what was most available. [1] : 4  
 In addition to salt, the fats ( sum ) from cod, sardines, herring, shark, seal, whale ( humpesum ),   sika deer  ( yuksum ), and bear ( pasum ) are used to flavor dishes. [4] : 98   Miso and soy sauce have also been used in modern times. Soup stocks may be made using kelp ( kombu ), animal bone, and dried fish. Seasoning and spices include  pukusa  ( Allium ochotense ), berries from the Amur corktree ( Phellodendron amurense ), and wavy bittercress ( Cardamine flexuosa ). [5] 
 
 Ingredients [ edit ] 
   Yuk , sika deer. 
   Tukar , seal. The Ainu of Sakhalin had various uses for its fat. 
   Ciporkeso , Japanese char. Native to Hokkaidō, and a member of the Dolly Varden trout species. 
   Traditionally, women usually gathered wild plants such as  pukusa . 
 Game [ edit ] 
 The most predominate game animal was the sika deer. [6]  Deer were hunted using poisoned arrows as well as by herding them off cliffs and gathering them from where they fell. [2] : 337   In the past, deer were so common and easily hunted in Hokkaidō that it was said one could “put the pot on the fire, then go hunting”. [4] : 89  
 
 
 Brown bear  ( kimun kamuy ) 
 Chipmunk  ( ruop ) 
 Eurasian jay  ( parkew ) 
 Eurasian tree sparrow  ( amameciri ) 
 Ezo red fox  ( cironnup ) 
 Hazel Grouse  ( humiruy ) 
 Japanese marten  ( hoinu ) 
 Mallard  ( kopeca ) 
 Oriental turtle dove  ( kusuyep ) 
 Rabbit  ( isopo kamuy ) 
 Raccoon dog  ( moyuk ) 
 Sika deer  ( yuk ) 
 
 Fish and sea creatures [ edit ] 
 The Ainu fished at sea in  dugout canoes  using harpoons to hunt a variety of large marine animals and used nets and fishing rods to bring in smaller creatures. [7] : 136–139   Beached whales were particularly prized, as generally it was impossible to bring a whale in using canoes and harpoons. However, there were some instances of whaling in Funka Bay using harpoons coated with wolfsbane poison, aided by the gentle tides. [2] : 356–360   The Ainu also used a number of tools including fishing rods, nets, traps ( uray ), and fishing baskets ( raomap ) to catch freshwater fish. [7] : 136–139  
 
 
 Bathyraja  lindbergi  ( uttap ) 
 Capelin  ( susam ) 
 Cod  ( erekus ) 
 Crucian carp  ( rampara ) 
 Dolphin  ( tannup ) 
 Flounder  ( samampe ) 
 Fur seal  ( unew ) 
 Japanese dace  ( supun ) 
 Japanese fluvial sculpin  ( cimikani ) 
 Japanese huchen  ( ciray ) 
 Japanese smelt  ( tokikar ) 
 Masu salmon  ( icankot ) 
 Ocean sunfish  ( kinapo ) 
 Pacific herring  ( heroki ) 
 Pond loach  ( cicira ) 
 Salmon  ( kamuycep ) 
 Saffron cod  ( komay ) 
 Sardine  ( iwashi ) 
 Sea Lion  ( etaspe ) 
 Seal  ( tukar ) 
 Shark  ( same ) 
 Sturgeon  ( yupe ) 
 Swordfish  ( sirkap ) 
 Trout  ( icaniw ) 
 Whitespotted char  ( tuksis ) 
 
 Gathered plants [ edit ] 
 While men were responsible for hunting and fishing, women were responsible for gathering edible plants, beginning in early spring. Tools used during gathering trips into the mountains included the  saranip  (a bag woven from the fibers of the  Japanese lime tree ), the  menoko makiri  (a small women's knife),  itani  (a type of digging stick), and the  shitap  (a small pick made from deer horn). [2] : 367–374   One of the most important mountain plants gathered in spring was the  Siberian onion  ( pukusa ), which is very similar to  wild leeks  found in Canada and the United States in taste, texture, and appearance. Large quantities of  Cardiocrinum cordatum  bulbs ( turep ) were gathered in summer as they were important as a preserved food.
 
 
 Spring 
 
 Anemone flaccida  ( ohaw kina  or  pukusakina ) 
 Angelica  ( cihue ) 
 Butterbur  ( makayo ) 
 Bracken  ( warumbi ) 
 Cow parsnip  ( pittok ) 
 Hog peanut  ( eha ) 
 Japanese butterbur  ( korkoni ) 
 Japanese mugwort  ( noya ) 
 Japanese spikenard  ( cimakina ) 
 Lance asiabell  roots ( topmuk ) 
 Long-stamen chive  bulbs ( mempiro ) 
 Maianthemum japonicum  ( pepero ) 
 Marsh-marigold  roots ( pui ) 
 Ostrich fern  ( sorma ) 
 Siberian onion  ( pukusa ) 
 Symplocarpus renifolius  ( sikerpe kina ) 
 Thistle  ( ancami ) 
 Summer 
 
 Cardiocrinum cordatum  bulbs ( turep ) 
 Fall 
 
 Amur cork tree  berries ( sikerpe ) 
 Crimson glory vine  fruit ( hat ) 
 Hardy kiwi  fruit ( kutci ) 
 Hen-of-the-woods  mushroom ( yuk karus ) 
 Japanese chestnuts  ( yam ) 
 Japanese emperor oak  acorns ( nisew ) 
 Japanese rose  fruit ( maw ) 
 Mushroom  ( karus ) 
 Oak  acorns ( pero ) 
 Walnuts  ( neshiko ) 
 Water caltrop  fruit ( pekampe ) 
 
 Crops [ edit ] 
 Farming was already taking place in Hokkaidō during the  Jōmon period , prior to the  Satsumon period  in which the Ainu culture first emerged. However, agriculture began to decline in the 12th century up until the Ainu period. This is thought to be caused by the increase in demand for dried fish and furs for trade with Honshū, leading to increased importance in hunting and fishing, rather than colder weather. [8]  Cultivated crops changed over the years as new crops were introduced, such as potatoes, kabocha, and beans. [9] 
 
 
 Bean  varieties ( mame ) 
 Buckwheat  ( soba ) 
 Foxtail millet  ( munchiro ) 
 Japanese millet  ( piyap ) 
 Potato  ( imo ) 
 Proso millet  ( menkul ) 
 Pumpkin  ( kabocha ) 
 Turnip  ( atane ) 
 
 Primary dishes [ edit ] 
   An Ainu-style meal with venison and mountain vegetable soup ( yuk ohaw ), fermented salmon liver ( mefun ) and rice mixed with grains. 
 Citatap [ edit ] 
 Citatap  translated from Ainu means “that which has been pounded”. As the name suggests,  citatap  is meat or fish that has been pounded in a way similar to the Japanese method  tataki .
 Making  citatap [7] : 50–51  
 
 Salmon head,  milt , and remains from filleting are placed on a cutting board-like round piece of wood sliced from a tree trunk ( itatani ). The meat is chopped and beaten with a sharp heavy object, such as a hatchet. 
 The resulting paste is flavored with minced spring onion,  pukusa , or long-stamen chive. 
 Finally, the  citatap  is seasoned with dried kelp and salt. 
 Other than salmon, a variety of meats and fish are used to add flavor to  citatap  such as Japanese dace,  bathyraja lindbergi , masu salmon, Japanese fluvial sculpin, deer, bear, tanuki, rabbit, and chipmunk.  Citatap  was well suited to the meat of older animals, as it made the tough meat easier to eat. [7] : 108–114  
 Citatap  was primarily made in the winter, when food spoiled more slowly, and was eaten over a number of days. If the  citatap  was not particularly fresh, it was formed into balls and added to soup. [7] : 109  
 
 Ohaw [ edit ] 
 Ohaw  is soup made from boiling fish or meats with various vegetables. It may have the consistency of soup, or be more like a Japanese  nabemono  (hot pot) that contains a high ratio of ingredients to broth. As a hunter-gatherer society, the Ainu did not have a staple food as such, but  ohaw  was a central dish in their food culture. It is thought to be the roots of Hokkaidō regional dishes such as Ishikari nabe and sanpei soup. There are no specific requirements of ingredients to use for  ohaw , but was generally made as described below. [7] : 35–37  
 
 A stock is created by heating animal bone or small dried fish in water. 
 Roughly chopped meat or fish is added to the stock and cooked. Dried meat and fish require longer cooking times. The scum that results from cooking the meats is not removed, as it was thought to have medicinal properties. [7] : 94  
 Root vegetables or those which required longer cooking times are added, followed by high fiber mountain vegetables, and finally leafy vegetables. The soup is allowed to cook further until all ingredients are soft. 
 The soup is flavored with animal or fish fats, a small amount of salt, and topped with ground dried kelp or dried  pukusa . 
 Different varieties of  ohaw  are named by their main ingredient such as  cep ohaw  (fish soup),  kamuy ohaw  (bear soup),  kam ohaw  (meat soup), and  kina ohaw  (vegetable soup).  Anemone flaccida  was particularly suited for use in soups and was therefore called  ohaw kina , which literally translates as “soup grass”.
 
 Rataskep [ edit ] 
   Cipor rataskep“ potato and salmon roe ” 
 Translated literally,  rataskep  means “mixed food”. Wild vegetables and beans are stewed until soft and the liquid has evaporated, at which point the mixture is mashed and seasoned with bear or fish oils and a small amount of salt. [7] : 40–44    Rataskep  was made as an everyday food, as well as for offerings at ceremonies, as it was considered a sacred food. There are unlimited varieties using different ingredients, below are a few examples. [7] : 40–44  
 Sikerpe kina rataskep 
 
 Dried  symplocarpus renifolius  ( sikerpe kina ) is rehydrated in hot water, then boiled over low heat for hours until the water evaporates. It is cut into easy-to-eat pieces and seasoned with animal fat and salt. 
 Pukusa rataskep 
 
 Beans are boiled until soft, at which point Siberian onion ( pukusa ) stalks are added and cooked further, then seasoned with animal fat and salt. 
 Cihue rataskep 
 
 Made from angelica ( cihue ) gathered in early summer. Beans are boiled until soft, then angelica is added and further boiled. Finally, it is seasoned with animal and fish fats. 
 Kabocha rataskep 
 
 Beans are boiled until soft. Dried strips of pumpkin ( kabocha ) are rehydrated in water then boiled along with the beans. Once the pumpkin begins to break apart, the  rataskep  is seasoned with fish fats and salt and topped with berries from the Amur corktree ( sikerpe ). 
 Cipor rataskep 
 
 Also called  cipor imo . Potatoes ( imo ) are boiled with skin on. Salmon roe ( cipor ) is placed in a separate pot and cooked over low heat until it starts to break down. The skin is removed from the cooked potatoes and they are sliced thickly before placing into the pot with the salmon roe. Salt is added and everything is mixed well. 
 Nisew rataskep 
 
 The hull is removed from acorns ( nisew ) which are then boiled and drained multiple times with the seed coat on to remove the bitter taste. They are then placed in water with beans and boiled together. The resulting broth is discarded. The water is replaced and the mixture is boiled further until soft, at which point corn flour is added. It is cooked to the desired consistency. Rice flour is added, the mixture is kneaded, and salt and animal fats are added for seasoning. 
 Sayo [ edit ] 
 A thin porridge made from boiling Japanese millet or rice. Generally, the grains are boiled alone, but occasionally gathered vegetables are added. Unlike other porridges in agricultural societies,  sayo  is not a staple food. Rather, Ainu would fill up on fatty soups and grilled meats then drink it like tea as a palate cleanser. [7] : 37–39   For that reason,  sayo  was made in a small dedicated pot so as to avoid mixing oils in from other dishes. Care was also taken to avoid mixing flavors when serving by using a separate ladle specifically for serving  sayo  ( sayo kasup ), rather than the usual ladle for serving soup ( kasup ). [2] : 406–420   As the porridge used very little grains to make, a month's supply for one person was approximately 1.8 liters. 108 liters would provide plenty for a family of five for a year. [10] : 158  
 The following are examples of  sayo  varieties. [7] : 37–39  
 Turep sayo 
 
 Sayo  which contains  on turep , the fermented remains from the process of making  Cardiocrinum cordatum  ( turep ) starch. The hard dried  on turep  is first ground with mortar and pestle, then rehydrated in water. The sediment is removed from the water then formed into dumplings approximately three centimeters in diameter, and cooked in the  sayo .  Sayo  which contains the  Cardiocrinum cordatum  bulbs themselves is also called  turep sayo . 
 Irup sayo 
 
 The starch from  Cardiocrinum cordatum  bulbs is made into dumplings ( sito ) and placed in the  sayo . 
 Ento sayo 
 
 Sayo  which contains  Elsholtzia ciliata  ( ento ), a mountain plant. This type of  sayo  was favored for its particular aroma. 
 Satsirari sayo 
 
 The  lees  ( satsirari ) left from the fermentation process of making rice wine ( tonoto ) is placed in  sayo . 
 Kikinni sayo 
 
 Sayo  which contains bark of the  bird cherry tree  ( kikinni ). 
 Cipor sayo 
 
 Salmon roe  ( cipor ) is boiled along with the grain porridge. Raw salmon roe was only eaten in the fall as a delicacy. During other seasons, salted and dried roe ( sat cipor ) was used. 
   Lacquerware containers inside a traditional Ainu home ( cise ). These were used to present  sito  or  tonoto  (a type of alcohol) to the gods at festivals. 
 Sito [ edit ] 
 A type of dumplings. The name  sito  is derived from the Japanese  shitogi  which refers to dumplings or a paste made from grinding raw grains. [2] : 406–420  [3] : 150   Traditionally,  sito  were considered a luxury due to the time and effort necessary to produce the flour by grinding the grains with mortar and pestle. It was therefore not a usual everyday food, but one made as offerings for sacred days such as the Bear Festival ( iomante ) and Ancestors’ Festival ( icarup ). [7] : 157–158  
 Usual ingredients were proso millet ( mankul ), foxtail millet ( munchiro ), and rice ( siamam ), though  sito  made with proso millet were considered the correct form. Over the years, other ingredients were added such as pumpkin ( kabocha ), and potato ( imo ). Similar to the Japanese  kusamochi , the Ainu also made  sito  which mixed in Japanese mugwort ( noya ). Their flavor was enjoyed as reminiscent of spring. [2] : 378  
 Making  sito [7] : 44–45  
 
 Polished grains are left to soak overnight, then drained. 
 The grains are placed in a large mortar and multiple people sing while pounding the grain with large pestles ( iutaupopo ). 
 The resulting flour is kneaded with hot water and formed into round flat dumplings approximately 7 or 8 centimeters in diameter and 1 centimeter thick. 
 The dumplings are boiled in a large pot, taking care not to allow them to burn on the bottom of the pot. 
 Sito  that were meant to be offerings were placed as is in ceremonial lacquerware boxes ( sintoko ), wooden bowls ( patci ), on small trays ( otcike ), or skewered with  cornus controversa  sticks and presented to the gods. [7]   When meant to be eaten by people, the  sito  were served with partially crushed salmon roe or a sauce made from mixing oils with dried and crushed kelp. [7] : 125–134  
 Sito  has a long history. Dumplings made from foxtail millet have been found in archeological  Satsumon  remains discovered in  Atsuma . [8]  Traditional Ainu cuisine did not use steamed rice to make dumplings, as the Japanese did with  mochi . The Ainu first came in contact with Japanese style mochi after the  Edo period  when more ethnic Japanese moved to live in the same areas as the Ainu under the land contract system. [10] : 171  
 
 Preserved Foods [ edit ] 
 Dried meat and fish [ edit ] 
   Saketoba, a famous local delicacy from Hokkaidō, said to have developed from Ainu preserved foods. 
 The Ainu word for dried meat is  satkam  while dried fish is called  satcep ,  nikeruy , or  atat .
 Salmon was fished in quantities greater than what could be eaten immediately, especially in fall, and processed into preserved food so it could last up to six months. The first step in the process was to remove the head and internal organs of the fish, which was then dried on a rack outside before being taken inside and smoked in the hearth. Trout ( icaniw ) and Japanese char ( tuksis ) caught in summer were dried over a fire to prevent flies damaging the fish. These dried fish were eaten as is by pulling off the meat, or by rehydrating in water and eating as ingredients in soup or as a final cooked item itself. Salmon that was dried after the fish had laid eggs lost much of its flavor, so it was often stewed with added fish fats to improve the taste. [7] : 79–85  
 Milt ( up ) and salmon roe ( cipor ) obtained when slicing open the fish were also dried and preserved then later used in  sayo  or to make stock for  ohaw . [7] : 157–158  
 While it was common to eat everything of a bear raw while it was still fresh, including its meat and its internal organs, the Ainu would also preserve some of the meat for consumption during the off season. Meat from deer ( yuk ) and brown bears ( kimun kamuy ) was cut into narrow strips and simmered in a large pot. Once the juices were removed, the meat was hung over the fire inside to dry and smoke. This  satkam  would be eaten as is, or boiled again to create a soup. [7] : 95  
 
 Cardiocrinum cordatum  starch [ edit ] 
 The starch obtained from  Cardiocrinum cordatum  bulbs ( turep ) held a more important position in the Ainu diet than grains.
 
   Cardiocrinum cordatum  plant. 
 The Ainu word for the fourth month of the lunar calendar is  mo kiwtacup , which translates to “soon to be time to dig up  turep  month”, while the fifth month is  si kiwtacup , or “digging up  turep  month”. [4] : 129    This was the time when Ainu women would take their sacks ( saranip ) and digging sticks ( itani ) and head into the mountains to gather the bulbs. The gathered bulbs were processed into starch using the following method. [7] : 196–201  
 
 Remove leaves and roots from the bulb, peel the scales off one by one, and rinse in water. 
 Place the scales in a large bucket. Grind until a sticky paste is formed using the head of a hatchet as a pestle. Pour large quantities of water into the bucket and let sit for about two days. 
 Fine fibers and skins will float to the surface of the water forming a scum after a few days have passed and the starch will settle to the bottom. The fibrous scum is removed and set aside for use in on turep. The starch collected on the bottom of the bucket is divided into two types of starch: the semi-liquid secondary starch and the powdered primary starch. 
 These two types of starch were dried and preserved, but before that, they were also used to make fresh foods. The primary starch was mixed with water and poured into the hollow of plant stems from the Japanese knotweed ( kuttar ) or  Parasenecio hastatus  ( wakkakutu ) and placed into the ashes of a fire to cook into a thin noodle-like shape. The secondary starch was formed into round dumplings, wrapped in the leaves of the Japanese butterbur ( korkoni ) or magnolia ( pusni ), then placed in the ashes of a fire to bake. They were then eaten with salmon roe or animal fats.
 The secondary starch was the one which was used on a daily basis once it had been dried for preservation. It was often formed into dumplings and added to  sayo . The primary starch was rarely eaten, instead being reserved for gifts or used as medicine. [7] : 188  
 It was considered taboo to speak of alcohol or love affairs while working on any part of the starch making process. It was said such discussions would agitate the starch and it would fail to settle properly. [7] : 200  
 
 On turep [ edit ] 
 On turep  translates as “fermented  turep ”. It is a preserved food fermented from the fiber and skin byproduct of the  turep  starch extraction process. It was made using the following method. [7] : 201  
 
 A sieve ( icari ) is used to gather the fiber and skins that float in or on the water after the  turep  bulbs have been crushed and soaked in water. 
 The water is thoroughly wrung from the fiber, then it is wrapped in leaves from the Japanese butterbur ( korkoni ) or  Parasenecio hastatus  ( wakkakutu ) and left to ferment for three to ten days. This fermenting process is called “ on ”. 
 The fermented product is ground thoroughly with a mortar and pestle. Once pounded, it is kneaded, formed into donut-like shapes, and dried. 
 A cord is passed through the center and the  on turep  is stored hung from a rack above the hearth. 
 The  on turep  was eaten by smashing and rehydrating it to form into dumplings and placed in  sayo .
 
 Pocche-imo [ edit ] 
 Pocche-imo  is a preserved potato food also known as  penekoshoi-imo  or  munini-imo . The process involved uses the extreme cold of Hokkaidō in a fashion similar to the production of  chuño  in South America.
 Once potatoes were harvested in the fall, the poorly shaped and small potatoes were left outside. The winter's cold would soon come and freeze the potatoes, which would thaw again in spring. This process of freezing and thawing would break down the structure of the potatoes, turning them soft. Once in that state, the potatoes were soaked in water and thawed completely. The starch that settled to the bottom of the water was collected, formed into spheres, and arranged in a warm place to ferment. This resulted in a fine textured potato flour. The flour was formed into cakes and baked in the ashes of the fire, then bear fat or  cipor  (salmon roe) was added and together placed in  sayo  to eat. [11]  In modern times with the influence of ethnic Japanese culture, it became more common to flavor  pocche-imo  with artificial flavorings such as  saccharin  then deep fry them. The fried product is then eaten with nori or a mixture of sugar and soy sauce. [7] : 128  
 
 Commodities [ edit ] 
   A group of men offering alcohol to the gods during an iomante ceremony that took place in 1930. The alcohol in the bowls ( itanki ) placed on top of the serving trays ( otcike ) or tea bowl stands ( takaysara ) is delivered to the heavens through the  ikupasuy  (the spatula-shaped utensil over the bowls). On the right, there is a lacquerware container ( sintoko ) used in the preparation of the alcohol. 
 Alcohol [ edit ] 
 Words for alcohol in the Ainu language include  sake ,  tonoto , and  askur . The word sake is a loanword from Japanese, and  tonoto  is also a word developed under Japanese influence as it originally referred to food or beverages given by an influential Japanese person, who was called a  ton . [10] : 161–167   Ainu alcohol is an undistilled alcohol made from Japanese millet that is similar in appearance and flavor to homebrewed sake. 
 All alcohol was produced by the women. Virtuous, respected  katkemat  (ladies/wives) from nearby were considered suitable for leading the task. Conversely, young women, particularly those during  menokotasum  (menstruation, literally translated as “women sickness”) were considered impure and did not assist. [7] : 163  
 The ingredients considered best for making alcohol were Japanese millet ( piyapa ) or proso millet ( menkul ). First, the grains were heated in a large pot with water until a porridge formed. Once cool to the touch,  malt  was mixed in. The Ainu either acquired malted grain from trade with the Japanese or they produced their own by boiling Japanese millet, acorns, and  Cardiocrinum cordatum  then sprinkling powdered bark from the  Cercidiphyllum  tree on the finished product. Furthermore, the Ainu word for malt,  kamtaci , is the same as the old Japanese word for malted rice,  kamutachi . [4] : 99  
 The alcohol was stored in a lacquered vessel ( sintoko ) and left to set in hot embers as a warding against evil. Using a portion of  Apehuci-kamuy , the goddess of fire, like this would protect the alcohol from evil spirits, and was a prayer for the success of the alcohol making process. [7] : 163   As an additional warding against evil spirits, a hatchet ( tasiro ) or an Ainu blade ( emus ) was placed atop the sintoko as it was left to set for ten days near the  kamuy puyar , the window furthest inside the cise, which was considered sacred. Once the alcohol had fermented enough, the spent coals were returned to the hearth and the mash was strained through a sieve ( icari ) to remove the lees ( sirari ) and finish the alcohol. [7] : 165   It was stirred using a sake ladle ( sake-pisakku ), ladled into a spouted bowl ( etosup ), then poured into bowls ( itanki ). [7] : 162–169   When offering alcohol to the spirits, an  ikupasuy , a ceremonial stick, was dipped into a bowl of sake set on a  takaysara , a bowl stand. The alcohol on the  ikupasuy  was then spread onto the  inau . It was believed that by going through the  ikupasuy , one drop of alcohol in the human world would become an entire barrel of alcohol in the spirit world. The Ainu said that alcohol was something that everyone enjoyed, along with the spirits. Drinking alone was not an option. [10] : 161–167  
 The Ainu of the  Hidaka  region, such as those near  Shizunai , had a legend that tsunami spirits hated lees, so they spread the lees around their homes to ward off tsunamis. [5] : 113–114  
 
 Drinks [ edit ] 
 Tea [ edit ] 
   A seed of the Japanese bigleaf magnolia, steeped to make a drink. 
 The teas drunk by Ainu were not made with the evergreen  Camellia sinensis , but from the seeds and bark of trees, or medicinal herbs native to the cool climate of Hokkaidō. [2] : 406–420  
 The Ainu would brew various plant materials to make tea such as Japanese bigleaf magnolia ( pusni ) twigs and seeds,  kobushi magnolia  ( omawkusni ) twigs and seeds,  Lindera umbellata  twigs ( sumnuhas ), bird cherry ( kikinni ) bark,  Ledum palustre  leaves ( haspo ),  Vietnamese balm  stems and leaves ( ento ),  Libanotis coreana  roots ( upew ),  Heracleum lanatum  ( pittok ) roots, and  Angelica genuflexa  ( munusi ) roots. [2] : 406–420  [4] : 94  Cinnamomum camphora  ( ciprasu ) which grows along the coast was used in a similar way. In the  Sakhalin  region, drinks were made of boiled  Ledum palustre  ( nuxca ) stems and leaves,  Rose rugosa  ( otaruxni ), and  Rubus matsumuranus  ( kinakaoxni ) stems and leaves. [12] 
 Japanese tea imported from Honshu has become widespread in modern times.
 
   Trunk of a white birch. The sap is consumed as a beverage, while the oily bark is stripped and braided in order to make torches. 
 Tree Sap [ edit ] 
 There are some trees native to Hokkaid ō  that contain a sweet sap. The Ainu used the sap of these trees ( niwakka,  literally translated as “tree water”) as a drink and flavoring for foods.
 Large amounts of sap run from the trunk of the white birch ( kapattatni ) if it is damaged in the summer. This sap is called  tatni wakka  and was used as water for cooking when there was none available in the area. A drink was also made by adding chopped  Symplocarpus nipponicus  to the sap along with flavoring. [4] : 94   The Sakhalin Ainu would make alcohol by placing set white birch sap into blackcurrant juice and leaving it to ferment.
 The painted maple ( topeni , meaning “milk tree”) is related to the  sugar maple  of North America. A sweet sap flows from the trunk if it is damaged. The trunks would be scored during the winter to make “sap icicles” that were eaten like popsicles. The sap was also boiled down to create a sweetener. This was then boiled with beans or water chestnuts to make a high-quality  rataskep . [2] : 416   Sap fell out of use along with the influx of sugar during the  Meiji Period , but it experienced a temporary resurgence during the shortages of World War II.
 
 Utensils and eating habits [ edit ] 
   Ainu spoons,  parapasuy 
   A sketch of an Ainu meal scene by  Isabella Bird . 
 “Meal” in Ainu is “ ipe ”. Traditionally, two meals were eaten per day, breakfast ( kunneywa ipe ) and dinner ( onuman ipe ), and a third meal, lunch ( tokes ipe ), was added during the  Taisho period . A night meal ( kunne ipe ) was sometimes eaten during night fishing or other late activities. [2] : 416  
 Food was transferred from the cooking pot using a ladle ( kasup ) into a lacquerware bowl ( itanki ) for eating. These bowls were obtained through trade with the ethnic Japanese and were large enough to hold 400 ml worth of food. Chunks of meat or fish that were too large to fit in the bowl were placed on mats woven from reeds. [2] : 406–420   Items such as fish roasted on a spit or  sito  were eaten by hand, but otherwise, most foods were eaten with chopsticks ( pasuy ) or spoons ( parapasuy ).  Parapasuy  translated literally means “wide chopstick”. Both spoons and chopsticks were carved from wood. [2] : 406–420  
 When guests were over for food, the head woman of the house would offer food and say “ ipeyan ” (please eat). The guest would express their gratitude, and, if it were a valuable meal such as bear meat, they would raise the food to their forehead in thanks before beginning. However, the family would not say anything before eating if there were no guests. Once finished, it was customary to say “ hunna ” to express their gratitude for the food. [2] : 412  
 Similar to the ethnic Japanese, it was considered polite to eat all food that was provided. Because of this, it was considered polite to use one's finger to wipe the remaining sauce from inside the bowl and lick it. This custom is the reason for the Ainu name for the pointer finger, “ itanki kem atsukep ”, literally meaning “bowl-licking finger”. [2] : 406–420  [8] 
 
 References [ edit ] 
 
 
 ^  a   b   Ipe Taberu   (PDF)  (in Japanese and English). Hokkaido Ainu Culture Research Center. 2014. 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   e   f   g   h   i   j   k   l   m   n   o   Ainu Bunka Hozon Taisaku Kyōgikai (1970).  Ainu minzokushi  (in Japanese). Dai-ichi Hōki Shuppan Kabushiki Gaisha.  ASIN   B000J9FZ8E . 
 
 ^  a   b   Nihon no shoku to kokoro: sono rūtsu to yukue  (in Japanese). Kokugakuin University Institute for Japanese Culture and Classics. 2003.  ISBN   4874492339 . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   e   f   更科, 源蔵 (1968).  Ainu rekishi to minzoku . 社会思想社.  ASIN   B000JA5YH0 . 
 
 ^  a   b   Sarashina, Genzō (1981).  Ainu densetsu shū  (in Japanese). Miyama Shobō.  ASIN   B000J6XEOO . 
 
 ^   岸上, 伸啓; 木原, 仁美; 葛野, 浩昭; 佐々木, 史郎; 手塚, 薫; 吉田, 睦 (1995).  Sekai no shokubunka 20: Kyokuhoku  (in Japanese). Rural Culture Association Japan. p. 93.  ISBN   978-4540050060 . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   e   f   g   h   i   j   k   l   m   n   o   p   q   r   s   t   u   v   w   x   y   z   aa   Haginaka, Mie; Fujimura, Hisakazu; Muraki, Miyuki; Hatai, Asako; Kohara, Toshihiro (1992).  Kikigaki Ainu no shokuji  (in Japanese). Rural Culture Association Japan.  ISBN   9784540920042 . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   Segawa, Takaroi (2007).  Ainu no rekishi: umi to takara no nomado  (in Japanese). Kōdansha. p. 94.  ISBN   978-4062584012 . 
 
 ^   アイヌ民族博物館.  "とる" . アイヌ民族博物館. Archived from  the original  on 28 March 2016 . Retrieved  12 September  2018 . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   林喜, 茂 (1969).  Ainu no noukou . Keiyūsha.  ASIN   B000J9W90Q . 
 
 ^   Kayano, Shigeru (2000).  Ainu saijiki : Nibutani no kurashi to kokoro  (Shohan ed.). Heibonsha. p. 50.  ISBN   4582850545 . 
 
 ^   Chiri, Mashiho.  Bunrui Ainugo Jiten Shokubutsuhen  (in Japanese). Heibonsha.  ASIN   B000JB3WQ4 . 
 
 
 Bibliography [ edit ] 
 
 Kayano, Shigeru (萱野茂)  (1996).  萱野茂のアイヌ語辞典 (Kayano Shigeru no ainu go jiten) . Sanseidō. 
 Batchelor, John (1905).  Ainu-English-Japanese Dictionary: (including A Grammar of the Ainu Language . London: Methodist Publishing House. 
 Batchelor, John; Miyabe, Kingo (1893),  "Ainu economic plants" ,  Transactions of the Asiatic Society of Japan ,  221 : 198–240 
 
 External links [ edit ] 
 
 Japan portal Food portal 
 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons has media related to  Ainu food . 
 
 Ainu Agriculture 
 Origins of Ainu 
 English site of the Ainu Museum 
 Official site of an Ainu restaurant in Ainu Kotan, " Poron'no "   (in Japanese) 
 Official site of an Ainu restaurant in Ainu Kotan, " Marukibune by Moshiri "   (in Japanese) 
 v t e Cuisines Continental 
 African 
 North 
 West 
 list 
 Americas 
 Caribbean 
 North 
 South 
 list 
 Asian 
 Caucasian 
 Central 
 Indian subcontinent 
 Levantine 
 list 
 European 
 Balkan 
 Central 
 Eastern 
 list 
 Oceanic 
 Intercontinental
 Global 
 Latin American 
 Mediterranean 
 Middle Eastern 
 National  and regional 
 Afghan 
 Albanian 
 Algerian 
 American 
 Californian 
 Floribbean 
 Hawaiian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Lowcountry (South Carolina) 
 New England 
 New Mexico 
 Pacific Northwest 
 Pennsylvania Dutch 
 Puerto Rican 
 Southern US 
 Southwest US 
 Texas 
 Angolan 
 Argentine 
 Armenian 
 Australian 
 Austrian 
 Azerbaijani 
 Bahraini 
 Bangladeshi 
 Barbadian 
 Belarusian 
 Belgian 
 Belizean 
 Beninese 
 Bhutanese 
 Bolivian 
 Bosnian-Herzegovinian 
 Botswana 
 Brazilian 
 British 
 Channel Islands 
 English 
 Gibraltarian 
 Northern Irish 
 Saint Helena 
 Scottish 
 Welsh 
 Bruneian 
 Bulgarian 
 Burkinabé 
 Burmese 
 Burundian 
 Cambodian 
 Cameroonian 
 Canadian 
 Acadian 
 Québécois 
 Central African Republic 
 Chadian 
 Chilean 
 Chinese 
 Cantonese 
 Hong Kong 
 Macanese 
 Tibetan 
 Xinjiang 
 Colombian 
 Congolese 
 Corsican 
 Croatian 
 Cuban 
 Cypriot 
 Czech 
 Danish 
 Faroese 
 Greenlandic 
 Djiboutian 
 Dominican 
 Dominican Republic 
 Dutch 
 East Timorese 
 Ecuadorian 
 Egyptian 
 Emirati 
 Equatorial Guinean 
 Eritrean 
 Estonian 
 Ethiopian 
 Fijian 
 Filipino 
 Finnish 
 French 
 Occitan 
 French Guianan 
 Gabonese 
 Gambian 
 Georgian 
 German 
 Ghanaian 
 Greek 
 Cretan 
 Epirotic 
 Greek Macedonian 
 Heptanesean 
 Guatemalan 
 Guinea-Bissauan 
 Guinean 
 Haitian 
 Honduran 
 Hungarian 
 Icelandic 
 Indian 
 Arunachalese 
 Assamese 
 Bengali 
 Bihari 
 Goan 
 Gujarati 
 Himachal Pradesh 
 Kashmiri 
 Jharkhandi 
 Karnataka 
 Kerala 
 Maharashtrian 
 Manipuri 
 Meghalayan 
 Mizo 
 Naga 
 Odia 
 Punjabi 
 Rajasthani 
 Sikkimese 
 Sindhi 
 Tamil 
 Telangana 
 Telugu 
 Indonesian 
 Acehnese 
 Balinese 
 Banjar 
 Batak 
 Betawi 
 Indo 
 Javanese 
 Madurese 
 Makassar 
 Minahasan 
 Minangkabau 
 Palembangese 
 Sundanese 
 Iranian 
 Iraqi 
 Irish 
 Israeli 
 Italian 
 Abruzzese 
 Ligurian 
 Lombard 
 Lucanian 
 Neapolitan 
 Roman 
 Sardinian 
 Sicilian 
 Venetian 
 Ivorian 
 Jamaican 
 Japanese 
 Okinawan 
 Jordanian 
 Kazakh 
 Kenyan 
 Korean 
 North Korean 
 South Korean 
 Kosovan 
 Kuwaiti 
 Kyrgyz 
 Lao 
 Latvian 
 Lebanese 
 Lesotho 
 Liberian 
 Libyan 
 Liechtensteiner 
 Lithuanian 
 Luxembourg 
 Macedonian 
 Malagasy 
 Malawian 
 Malaysian 
 Sabahan 
 Sarawakian 
 Maldivian 
 Malian 
 Maltese 
 Mauritanian 
 Mauritian 
 Mexican 
 Moldovan 
 Monégasque 
 Mongolian 
 Montenegrin 
 Moroccan 
 Mozambican 
 Namibian 
 Nauruan 
 Nepalese 
 New Zealand 
 Nicaraguan 
 Niger 
 Nigerian 
 Niuean 
 Norwegian 
 Omani 
 Pakistani 
 Palestinian 
 Panamanian 
 Peruvian 
 Polish 
 Portuguese 
 Qatari 
 Romanian  (incl.  Transylvanian Saxon ) 
 Russian 
 Bashkir 
 Chechen 
 Circassian 
 Komi 
 Mordovian 
 Sakha 
 Tatar 
 Udmurt 
 Yamal 
 Rwandan 
 Saint Lucian 
 Salvadoran 
 Sammarinese 
 São Tomé and Príncipe 
 Saudi Arabian 
 Senegalese 
 Serbian 
 Seychellois 
 Sierra Leonean 
 Singaporean 
 Slovak 
 Slovenian 
 Somali 
 South African 
 Spanish 
 Andalusian 
 Asturian 
 Balearic 
 Basque 
 Canarian 
 Cantabrian 
 Catalan 
 Extremaduran 
 Galician 
 Manchegan 
 Valencian 
 Sri Lankan 
 Sudanese 
 Swazi 
 Swedish 
 Swiss 
 Syrian 
 Taiwanese 
 Tajik 
 Tanzanian 
 Zanzibari 
 Thai 
 Togolese 
 Tunisian 
 Turkish 
 Turkmen 
 Trinidadian and Tobagonian 
 Ugandan 
 Ukrainian 
 Uruguayan 
 Uzbek 
 Venezuelan 
 Vietnamese 
 Western Saharan 
 Yemeni 
 Zambian 
 Zimbabwean 
 Ethnic 
 Ainu 
 Arab 
 Indonesian 
 Aromanian 
 Assyrian 
 Balochi 
 Berber 
 Cajun 
 Chinese 
 American 
 Canadian 
 Chifa 
 Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Crimean Tatar 
 Greek American 
 Hazaragi 
 Indian 
 Anglo-Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Indigenous American 
 Inuit 
 Italian American 
 Kurdish 
 Livonian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Malay 
 Ossetian 
 Parsi 
 Pashtun 
 Peranakan 
 Romani 
 Sámi 
 Soul food 
 Sylheti 
 Transylvanian Saxon 
 Yup'ik 
 Religious 
 Buddhist 
 Christian 
 Goan Catholic 
 Mangalorean Catholic 
 Mennonite 
 Hindu 
 Islamic 
 Chinese 
 Ital 
 Jain 
 Jewish 
 American 
 Ashkenazi 
 Bukharan 
 Ethiopian 
 Mizrahi 
 Sephardic 
 Syrian 
 Ritual slaughter 
 Sikh 
 Historical 
 Ancient Egyptian 
 Ancient Greek 
 Ancient Israelite 
 Ancient Roman 
 Antebellum America 
 Aztec 
 Byzantine 
 Early modern European 
 Historical Chinese 
 Historical Indian subcontinent 
 Historical North Indian and Pakistani 
 History of agriculture 
 History of alcoholic drinks 
 History of bread 
 History of seafood 
 History of vegetarianism 
 Historical Argentine 
 Historical Japanese 
 Inca 
 Mayan 
 Muisca 
 Mughal 
 Medieval 
 Ottoman 
 Peasant 
 Soviet 
 Thirteen Colonies 
 Styles 
 Classique 
 Fast food 
 Fusion 
 New American 
 Eurasian 
 Haute 
 Molecular gastronomy 
 Note by Note 
 Nouvelle 
 Lists 
 List of cuisines 
 List of historical cuisines 
 Lists of prepared foods 
 Related 
 Cookbook 
 Cooking 
 Culinary arts 
 Drink 
 Food 
 history 
 Diet 
 Meal preparation 
 
   Food portal 
   Drink portal 
   Category 
   Commons 
   Cookbook 
   WikiProject 
   Outline 
 
  
NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw2277
Cached time: 20230311123938
Cache expiry: 1814400
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc, no‐toc‐conversion]
CPU time usage: 1.539 seconds
Real time usage: 1.715 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 18137/1000000
Post‐expand include size: 188825/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 6096/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 16/100
Expensive parser function count: 3/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 61608/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.851/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 28188579/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/400
 
 
Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1400.688      1 -total
 35.54%  497.811    251 Template:Lang
 26.18%  366.763     55 Template:Rp
 25.11%  351.735     55 Template:R/superscript
 12.71%  178.087    165 Template:R/where
 12.33%  172.688      1 Template:Reflist
 10.41%  145.852     13 Template:Cite_book
  8.24%  115.433      1 Template:Cuisines
  8.08%  113.232      1 Template:Navbox
  4.34%   60.847      1 Template:Short_description
 
  Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:idhash:2812881-0!canonical and timestamp 20230311123936 and revision id 1116921330. Rendering was triggered because: page-view
  
 esi <esi:include src="/esitest-fa8a495983347898/content" />  
 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ainu_cuisine&oldid=1116921330 " 
 Categories :  Ainu cuisine Japanese cuisine Siberian cuisine Culture articles needing translation from Japanese Wikipedia Cuisine by ethnicity Hidden categories:  CS1 Japanese-language sources (ja) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Ainu (Japan)-language text Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with Japanese-language sources (ja) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  This page was last edited on 19 October 2022, at 01:17  (UTC) . 
 Text is available under the  Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0 ;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the  Terms of Use  and  Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the  Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. 
 
 
 Privacy policy 
 About Wikipedia 
 Disclaimers 
 Contact Wikipedia 
 Mobile view 
 Developers 
 Statistics 
 Cookie statement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
