
 
 
 Jump to content 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle sidebar 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Create account Log in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Personal tools 
 
 
 
 
   Create account   Log in 
 
 
 
 
		Pages for logged out editors  learn more 
 
 
 Contributions Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Navigation 
 
 
 Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate 
 
 
 
 
 Contribute 
 
 
 Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file 
 
 
 
 
 Tools 
 
 
 What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item 
 
 
 
 
 Print/export 
 
 
 Download as PDF Printable version 
 
 
 
 
 In other projects 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons Wikibooks 
 
 
 
 
 Languages 
 
 On this Wikipedia the language links are at the top of the page across from the article title.  Go to top . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CentralNotice  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Contents 
 move to sidebar 
 hide 
 
 
 
 
 (Top) 
 
 
 
 
 
 1 History 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 Characteristics and meals 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 Ingredients 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4 Drinks 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5 Pastries and desserts 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6 Appetizers and salads 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 7 Meat and fish 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8 Pies 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 9 Health effects 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 10 See also 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 11 References 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
						Toggle the table of contents
					 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle the table of contents 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Albanian cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 31 languages 
 
 
 
 العربية Azərbaycanca Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Català Čeština Deutsch Español فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Italiano ქართული Kurdî Македонски 日本語 Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Русский Shqip Simple English Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Svenska Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 
 Edit links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Article Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 English 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 More 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
 
 
 Culinary traditions of Albania 
 This article  needs additional citations for  verification .  Please help  improve this article  by  adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources:   "Albanian cuisine"  –  news   ·   newspapers   ·   books   ·   scholar   ·   JSTOR   ( November 2022 )  ( Learn how and when to remove this template message ) 
 This article is part of a series in Culture of Albania 
 History 
 Illyrians 
 Middle Ages 
 Ottoman period 
 Independent Albania 
 
 People 
 Albanians 
 Clans 
 Noble families 
 Diaspora 
 LGBT 
 
 Language 
 Gheg 
 Arbanasi (Dalmatia) 
 Upper Reka dialect 
 Istrian Albanian 
 Tosk 
 Lab 
 Cham 
 Arvanitika   Arvanitic 
 Arbëresh 
 
 Tradition 
 Besa 
 Kanun 
 Oda 
 Sworn virgins 
 Costumes 
 
 Religion and folklore 
 Islam 
 Christianity 
 Judaism 
 Irreligion 
 Secularism 
 Folk beliefs 
 
 Art 
 Art galleries 
 Architecture 
 
 Cuisine 
 Arbëreshë 
 Cham 
 Kosovan 
 Çaj mali 
 Tavë kosi 
 Flia 
 Kabuni 
 Kanojë 
 Likëngë 
 Trileçe 
 Verë 
 
 Festivals 
 Flag Day 
 Summer Day 
 
 Literature 
 Language 
 Alphabet 
 Writers 
 Epic poetry 
 Poets 
 
 Media 
 Radio 
 
 Sport 
 Football 
 Weightlifting 
 Basketball 
 Volleyball 
 Swimming 
 Olympics 
 Athletes 
 
 Symbols 
 Crossed hands 
 Sign language 
 Awards 
 Logos 
 .al 
 
   Albania   •     Society portal v t e 
 
 Albanian cuisine  ( Albanian :  kuzhina shqiptare   [kuˈʒina ʃcipˈtaɾɛ] ) is a representative of the  cuisine  of the  Mediterranean . It is also an example of the  Mediterranean diet  based on the importance of olive oil, fruits, vegetables and fish. [1]  The cooking traditions of the  Albanian people  are diverse in consequence of the  environmental factors  that are more importantly suitable for the cultivation of nearly every kind of  herbs ,  vegetables  and  fruits . [2]   Olive oil  is the most ancient and commonly used  vegetable fat  in Albanian cooking, produced since  antiquity  throughout the country particularly along the coasts. [3] [4] [5] [6] [7] 
 Hospitality  is a fundamental custom of  Albanian  society and serving food is integral to the hosting of guests and visitors. It is not infrequent for visitors to be invited to eat and drink with locals. The medieval Albanian  code of honour , called  besa , resulted to look after guests and strangers as an act of recognition and gratitude. [8] 
 Albanian cuisine can be divided into three major regional cuisines. [9]  The cuisine of the northern region has a rural, coastal and mountainous origin. Meat, fish and vegetables are central to the cuisine of the northern region. The people there use many kinds of ingredients, which usually grow in the region including  potatoes ,  carrots ,  maizes ,  beans ,  cabbages  but also  cherries ,  walnuts  and  almonds .  Garlic  and  onions  are as well important components to the local cuisine and added to almost every dish.
 The cuisine of the central region is threefold of rural, mountainous and coastal. The central region is the flattest and rich in  vegetation  and  biodiversity  as well as culinary specialties. It has Mediterranean characteristics due to its proximity to the sea, which is rich in  fish . Dishes here include several meat specialties and desserts of all kinds.
 In the south, the cuisine is composed of two components:  the rural products of the field including  dairy products ,  citrus fruits  and olive oil, and coastal products, i.e.  seafood . Those regions are particularly conducive to raising  animals , as  pastures  and feed resources are abundant.
 Besides garlic, onions are arguably the country's most widely used ingredient. [10]  Albania is ranked fourth in the world in terms of onion consumption per capita. [11] [12] 
 
 
 History [ edit ] 
 This section  needs expansion . You can help by  adding to it .   ( January 2022 ) 
 Characteristics and meals [ edit ] 
 The location of Albania in the western  Balkan Peninsula  and on the  Mediterranean Sea  has a large influence on Albanian cuisine. Many foods that are common in the  Mediterranean Basin , such as olives, wheat, chickpeas, dairy products, fish, fruits and vegetables, are prominent in the Albanian cooking tradition. Albania has a distinctly  Mediterranean climate . [13]  Across the country, a range of  microclimates  due to differing  soil  types and  topography  allows a variety of products to be grown. Citrus fruits such as oranges and lemons, figs and olives thrive.
 
   Citrus fruits  are mostly cultivated in the south of Albania. 
   Breakfast in Albania 
 Every region has its own typical  breakfast . Breakfast is generally light.  Bread  is common, served with  butter ,  cheese ,  jam  and  yogurt , and accompanied with  olives ,  coffee ,  milk ,  tea  or  raki . Trahaná (tarhana) is also a common breakfast in many rural areas. It is common to have only fruit or a slice of bread and a cup of coffee or tea for breakfast. Coffee and tea are enjoyed both in homes and in cafés. [ citation needed ] 
 Lunch  is traditionally the biggest meal of the day, for everyone from school children to shop workers and government officials. In the past, people went home to have lunch with their families, but it is now common to have lunch with friends at restaurants or cafeterias. Lunch sometimes consists of  gjellë , a  main dish  of slowly cooked meat with various vegetables, accompanied by a  salad  of fresh  vegetables , such as  tomatoes ,  cucumbers , green  peppers ,  onions  and  olives . Salads are typically served with meat dishes and are dressed with  salt ,  olive oil , white  vinegar  or lemon juice. Grilled or fried  vegetables  and  sausages  and various forms of  omelettes  are also eaten. Common beverages are coffee, tea, fruit juices and milk. [ citation needed ] 
 Supper in Albania is a smaller meal, often consisting only of a variety of breads, meat, fresh fish or seafood, cheese, eggs and various kind of vegetables, similar to breakfast, or possibly sandwiches. [ citation needed ] 
 
 
 Ingredients [ edit ] 
   Garlic is popular throughout the country. 
 Located in  Southern Europe  with a direct proximity to the  Mediterranean Sea , the Albanian cuisine features a wide range of fresh  fruits , growing naturally in the fertile Albanian  soil  and under the warm sun. In consideration of being an  agricultural  country, Albania is a significant fruit importer and exporter. [14]  Besides  citrus fruits , cherries, strawberries, blueberries and raspberries are among the most cultivated fruits. [14]  Many Albanians keep fruit trees in their yards. Fresh and dried fruits are eaten as snacks and desserts.
 Fruits that are traditionally associated with Albanian cuisine include  apple ,  grape ,  olive ,  orange ,  nectarine ,  blackberry ,  cherry ,  persimmon ,  pomegranate ,  figs ,  watermelon ,  avocado ,  lemon ,  peach ,  plum ,  strawberries ,  raspberry ,  mulberry  and  cornelian cherry .
 
   Albanian olive gatherers by American artist  John Singer Sargent . 
 A wide variety of  vegetables  are frequently used in Albanian cooking. Due to the different climate and soil conditions across Albania, cultivars of  cabbages ,  turnips ,  beetroots ,  beans ,  potatoes ,  leeks  and  mushrooms  can be found in a rich variety. [14]  Dried or pickled vegetables are also processed, especially in drier or colder regions such as in the remote  Albanian Alps , where fresh vegetables were hard to get out of season. Particularly used  vegetables  include  onion ,  garlic ,  tomato ,  cucumber ,  carrot ,  pepper ,  spinach ,  lettuce ,  grape leaves ,  bean ,  eggplant  and  zucchini .
 
   Oregano  is among the most commonly used herbs in Albanian cuisine. 
 Herbs  are very popular. A wide variety are readily available at supermarkets or local produce stands across the country. The proximity to the Mediterranean Sea and the ideal climatic conditions allows the cultivation of about 250 aromatic and medical plants.  Albania  is among the leading producers and exporter of herbs in the world. [15]  Further, the country is a worldwide significant producer of  oregano ,  thyme ,  sage ,  salvia ,  rosemary  and  yellow gentian . [16] [17]  Most commonly used herbs and other seasonings in Albanian cooking include  artichoke ,  basil ,  chili pepper ,  cinnamon ,  coriander ,  lavender ,  oregano ,  peppermint ,  rosemary ,  thyme ,  bay ,  vanilla ,  saffron .
 
 
 Drinks [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Albanian wine 
   Mountain tea  has a long tradition in Albania and is the most popular tea of the locals. 
 Tea  is a widely consumed beverage throughout Albania and particularly served at cafés, restaurants or at home. [ citation needed ]  The country is rich in the cultivation of a wide range of  herbs . The most popular varieties of tea drinking in Albania include Albanian-style  mountain tea , which grows in the Albanian mountains and villages, and Russian- and Turkish-style  black tea  with sugar to tea with lemon, milk or honey. [18] [19] 
 Coffee  is another popular beverage in Albania, but more particularly in the cities and villages. There are various varieties of coffee popular in Albania, such as  espresso ,  cappuccino ,  macchiato ,  mocha  and  latte . As Albania was formerly part of the  Ottoman Empire , coffee in the  Turkish style  is also common.  Filter coffee  and  instant coffee  are also available. Cafés are found everywhere in urban areas and function as meeting places for socializing and conducting business. Almost all serve baked goods and sandwiches and many also serve light meals.  Tirana  is particularly well known for its café culture. [20] 
 
   Cafes along Mustafa Matohiti St near Blloku district in central Tirana 
 In 2016, Albania surpassed Spain by becoming the country with the most coffee houses per capita in the world. In fact, there are 654 coffee houses per 100,000 inhabitants in Albania, a country with only 2.5 million inhabitants. [ citation needed ] 
 Dhallë  is a traditional and healthy yogurt-based drink in Albania made by blending yogurt with water or milk and spices. It is especially popular during the summer month and it may be served with salt, according to taste. [ citation needed ] 
 Boza , is a  malt  drink made from  maize  (corn) and  wheat  which is widely consumed with desserts in Albania.
 
   Grapes in  Berat . Albanian wine is known for its local varieties and distinct sweetness. 
 Raki  is the most popular  spirit  in Albania. It is considered as the national spirit beverage of the country. [21]  The most common types of raki in the country are grape, plum or blackberry. It is commonly served to the older people and is heated and sweetened with honey or sugar, with added spices. Although in the south of the country,  Raki rigoni  is very popular among the people and is made of white oregano, that is cultivated in the region.
 Albania is a traditionally  wine  drinking country. The people of Albania drink wine in moderation and almost always at meals or social occasions. Islam is the majority religion in Albania and while observant Muslims tend to avoid the consumption of alcohol, it is available in the country. Albanians drink about 5.83 liters of wine per person per year, which has been increasing since the Albanian production of high-quality wine grows to meet demand. [22]  The origins of wine production in Albania can be traced back to 6,000 years and evidence suggesting wine production confirm that Albania is among the earliest wine producers in  Europe . [23] [24] [25] 
 
 
 Pastries and desserts [ edit ] 
 There is a strong tradition of home baking in the country and  pâtisseries  are present in every city and village across the country. Entirely Albanian desserts and pastries consist primarily of fruits including  oranges  and  lemons  that grow as well as in the country. Traditionally, fresh fruits are often eaten after a meal as a dessert. Those dishes are inspired from both Western and Eastern civilizations. [ citation needed ] 
 
   Baklava 
 Kanojët  is a typical  Sicilian  pastry and very common among the  Arbëreshë people , which brought that dish back into their homelands, Albania where it is popular [ citation needed ] . It is made of tube-shaped shells of fried  pastry   dough , filled with a sweet, creamy filling usually containing  ricotta . The kanojët from  Piana degli Albanesi , an Arbëreshë village, are often referred to be the best cannolo.
 Baklava  is made frequently in Albania, especially around certain religious holidays of Muslims, Catholics and Orthodox. It is prepared on large trays and cut into a variety of shapes. Baklava is either with  hazelnuts  or  walnuts  sweetened with syrup.
 Petulla is a traditional fried dough made from wheat or buckwheat flour, which is as well a popular dish among the Albanians and served with powdered sugar or feta cheese and raspberry jam.
 Pandispanjë  is a traditional base for several Albanian desserts and cakes based on  flour ,  sugar ,  butter  and  eggs . A variety of fillings are used, such as jelly, chocolate, fruit and pastry cream.
 
   Blackberry jam 
 Ballokume  is an Albanian cookie, which originated in  Elbasan  during the  Middle Ages  and prepared every year on  Summer Day , a  public holiday  in the country. It has to be brewed in large copper pots, tightly whipped with a wooden spoon and baked in a wood oven. [ citation needed ] 
 Fruit jam , also known as Reçel, is enjoyed all year in Albania and a major component of the Albanian cooking tradition. The fruit preserve is made by cooking the juice of the fruit or the fruit itself, which usually grow in Albania, with sugar. It is served to many dishes as a side dish. [ citation needed ] 
 Zupa  is a popular dessert and assembled by alternating layers of  cookies or sponge cake with pastry cream. Another similar dessert is an Albanian  custard  dessert called  krem karamele  very similar to  crème brûlée . This dessert is made with milk, cream, egg yolks, sugar,  vanilla  and flavored with orange or lemon zest and  cinnamon .
 
   Tambëloriz 
 Various kinds of  hallvë  are prepared across the country with some of the most common types being flour halva. Although home-cooked semolina halva and shop-produced sesame halva are also consumed. It is a typical sweet in local religious fairs around Albania. [ citation needed ] 
 Tambëloriz , also known as sultjash, is a popular sweet among the Albanian population across the world. It is a kind of  rice pudding  made from  milk ,  rice , cinnamon and  nuts ,  raisins  can be added, too.
 Tollumba  is a fried, crispy, and sweet dessert traditionally eaten in the  Balkan Peninsula . Further, it is made of bits of fried dough, similar to doughnuts, steeped in much lemony syrup. The dough contains starch and semolina, which keeps it light and crispy.
 
   Akullore 
 Akullore  is the Albanian word for  ice cream  and it is enjoyed both summer and winter.
 Kadaif  is a pastry made from long thin noodle threads filled with walnuts or pistachios and sweetened with syrup, it is sometimes served alongside baklava.
 Kabuni  is a traditional cold-served Albanian dessert made of rice fried in butter, mutton broth, raisins, salt and caramelized sugar. It is then boiled before sugar, cinnamon, and ground cloves are added.
 
   Pastashu 
 Pastashu  is made from  choux pastry , filled with a cream, vanilla, coffee or chocolate-flavoured  custard  and then topped usually with  fondant icing . This dessert is known as  Éclair  in France and Bignè in Italy
 Trileçe  is an Albanian adaptation of the Spanish  Tres leches . It is a  sponge cake  made of three milks from cow's, goat's and water buffaloes, while cow's milk and cream are used commonly. According to  Hürriyet , Albania was the first country to introduce the dessert from  South America  into the area. It is believed that the popularity of  Brazilian soap operas  in Albania led local chefs to reverse-engineer the dessert and then the speciality spread over to Turkey. [26] [27] 
 Ashure , the world oldest dessert, is served especially during Muslim (Bektashi) holidays in Albania. It is a congee that is made of a mixture consisting of  grains ,  nuts  as well as  fruits  and  dried fruits . [28] 
 Homemade  panettone , an Italian type of sweet bread loaf, is usually prepared and particularly enjoyed for Christmas and New Year in Albania. [ citation needed ] 
 Lokum  is a Turkish candy eaten in Albania. [ citation needed ] 
 
 
 Appetizers and salads [ edit ] 
   A typical Albanian vegetable salad 
 Popular appetizers in Albania includes  wheat   bread  or  cornbread , which remains one of the most important foods and are ever-present on the Albanian table. Hence the expression for 'going to eat a meal' ( Albanian :  për të ngrënë bukë ) can be literally translated as 'going to eat bread'. In Albania, bread is also used in the authentic Albanian hospitality saying of " bread, salt and heart " (bukë, kripë e zemër). [ citation needed ] 
 Vegetable salads are almost served along with both lunch and dinner, which in majority are dishes based on meat. The ingredients that are used always in salads are green or red peppers, onions, tomatoes, olives and cucumbers. Salads that are representative of the Albanian cuisine are dressed with salt, olive oil or lemon and vinegar. The usual dressings are based on garlic, lemon and black pepper. [ citation needed ] 
 
   Speca të ferguara (roasted peppers) served with pite 
 An Albanian-style  meze  of fresh and cooked vegetable salads, pickled cucumbers and other vegetables, hard boiled eggs,  prosciutto  ham, salami and feta cheese, accompanied with roasted bell peppers, olive oil and garlic is served at festive meals and in restaurants. Nowadays, the modern interpretations of the Albanian meze blend traditional and modern combination of various appetizers. [ citation needed ] 
 Fërgesë verorë  (summer fërgesë) is the vegetarian version of fërgesë, [29]  a national dish in Albania made of green and red peppers, along with skinned tomatoes and onions and often served as a side dish to various meat dishes.
 Japrak  is a stuffed vegetable dish made with grape leaves, olive oil and stuffed with rice, grilled beef and chopped onions and generally served cold with bread and tarator.
 
   Bukë misri (cornbread) 
 Tarator  is a cold appetizer and usually served cold as a side dish during the hot summer months. The ingredients of tarator include cucumber, garlic, olive oil, salt and yoghurt. Fried and grilled vegetables and seafood are usually offered with tarator.
 Large white  kidney beans  ( fasulle plaqi ) are a typical appetizer or side dish, baked in an earthen pot with tomatoes, onions, peppermint, oregano, bay leaves and black pepper. [29] 
 A variety of  soups  are enjoyed, particularly in the winter. Especially popular soups are potato, cabbage, bean and fish soups.  Trahana  is a popular soup in the  Eastern Mediterranean . It based on a fermented mixture of wheat and fermented milk. Other dishes include Groshët and Shqeto, which originated from  Lunxheri  region of  Gjirokastër . [ citation needed ] 
 Other dishes include  mëlci   pule ,  eggplant appetizers , panaret which is famous among  Arbëreshës ,  stuffed peppers  composed of green peppers stuffed with rice, meat, other vegetables and herbs,  turshi lakre , fried  sardele  me  Limon , papare, which are bread leftovers cooked with water, egg, butter, and Gjizë (salted  curd  cheese) and bread and cheese referred as Bukë me djathë. [ citation needed ] 
 
 Meat and fish [ edit ] 
   Ohrid trout  is an ancient trout and only found in  Lake Ohrid . 
 The country's cuisine is largely meat-based.  Beef  and  veal  are the most commonly consumed meats in Albania, followed by  pork . [30]  Albania has many small eateries specializing in  beef  and  lamb ,  goat  and veal. In high elevation localities, smoked meat and pickled preserves are common.  Animal organs  are also used in dishes such as intestines and the head among other parts, which are considered a delicacy.
 
   Scampi  are popular along the coasts. 
 Fresh fish is readily available and caught off the coastal areas of the  Adriatic  and  Ionian Sea  inside the  Mediterranean Sea  but also from the  Lake Butrint ,  Lake Shkodër ,  Lake Ohrid ,  Lake Prespa  as well as  Karavasta Lagoon ,  Narta Lagoon  and  Patos Lagoon . Fresh fish is served whole, in the Mediterranean style,  grilled ,  boiled ,  fried  whole or in slices, dressed only with freshly squeezed  lemon juice . Fish dishes are often flavoured with white  vinegar  and virgin  olive oil , which particularly grows in Southern Albania. [ citation needed ] 
 Albanians  living on the coastal cities, especially in  Durrës ,  Sarandë  and  Vlorë  are passionate about their  seafood  specialties. Popular seafood dishes include  trout ,  calamari ,  octopus ,  cuttlefish ,  red mullet ,  sea bass ,  gilt-head bream  and other. Baked  whiting ,  carp ,  mullet  or  eel  with  olive oil  and  garlic  are also widely consumed in the country. [ citation needed ] 
 
   Plate with  qebapa 
 Fërgesë is the most iconic dish from Tirana and Central Albania. It consists of peppers, tomatoes, onions and  gjizë  (Albanian ricotta). [29]  Ingredients are cooked on the stove and then in the oven to make a relatively dense sauce. Some versions of the dish include liver or cooked beef. Fërgesë with liver is considered more traditional in Tirana and is thus sometimes called just fërgesë tirane. [ citation needed ] 
 
   Fergesë with beef 
 Tavë kosi  is a national dish in Albania that is beloved throughout the country. [31]  The speciality is a simple dish of baked lamb and rice, served with a flavored yogurt sauce. Recently, it has become very popular among the Greeks and Turks associated to the large  Albanian diaspora  in Greece and Turkey. [ citation needed ] 
 Qebapa  are small homemade grilled meat skinless  sausages  made of lamb and beef mix. It is primarily served with onions, sour cream,  ajvar  and pita bread called pitalka. [ citation needed ] 
 
   A plate of  gullash 
 Gullash , or tasqebap, is actually eaten very frequently in the mountainous areas of Albania. It's a traditional paprika-spiced meat stew originating in  Hungary  that is popular throughout Central Europe and the Balkans. [ citation needed ] 
 Gjel deti me përshesh ( turkey  with  përshesh ) is the usual New Year's dish in many Albanian families and also consumed in other kind of celebrations. Turkey is first boiled and then roasted and served with  përshesh , which is prepared by baking pieces of  kulaç  (a kind of bread) with turkey broth, along with mint and other spices. [29] 
 Paçe is traditionally common in Albania. It is made with a sheep's, pig's or any cattle's head, boiled until meat comes off easily. It is then stewed with garlic, onion, black pepper and vinegar. Sometimes a little flour is added to thicken the stew. [ citation needed ] 
 Proshute  is a term used in Albania for many types of  salami  and  ham , which has been seasoned, cured and air-dried. It is served rather at breakfast or lunch as an appetizer. Dishes which consist of proshute include  omelete me proshute dhe djathe ,  role buke me proshute  and  sallate orizi me pjeper dhe proshute . [ citation needed ] 
 Qofte  are  fried meatballs , which are usually made of minced meat, herbs and spices and cooked with tomato sauce and vegetables or beans. Throughout the country there are few specialized shops called  qofteri , which offer qofte and beer. [ citation needed ] 
 Mimilige  is made of  cornmeal  that is boiled in water with the intestines of lamb, butter, cheese and corn flour. This warm dish can be baked, grilled, fried or served creamy. It is a very prominent dish in the  Labëria  region. [ citation needed ] 
 
 Pies [ edit ] 
   Pite me mish, or byrek 
 Pite is considered as well as one of the national food of Albania and most of  Albanians .  Several internationally renowned musicians of  Albanian heritage  such as  Rita Ora ,  Dua Lipa  and  Action Bronson  spread their passion about this Albanian dish. [32] [33] [34] 
 
   Flia 
 It is often served hot, fresh and with pickled vegetables, honey, yogurt or fruit jam. Nowadays, flia mainly features in large social gatherings, weddings, births and other ceremonies and events. Fli is a dish mainly cooked in Kosovo. It is important to note that the dishes may differ depending on the region of Albania. [35] 
Bakllasarëm is a layered pie, otherwise known as pite, without anything inside, which is covered with yogurt and garlic and then heated again. It is particularly eaten for lunch. Another popular dish is  Kungullur , which is made of filo pastry layers filled with mashed  pumpkin ,  butter ,  salt  or  sugar . [ citation needed ] 
 
   Lakror with spinach filling 
 Notable pies include  Byrek , Pepeq, Shaprak, Qollopita or Lakror.  Lakror  is a pie that has layers of dough thinner than a byrek and it is traditionally cooked on embers, covered with a metal semispherical lid. Common fillings are leek and  gjizë  or tomato and onion. It is a specialty of Southern Albanian regions, like  Lunxheri  or  Korça . [ citation needed ] 
 
 Health effects [ edit ] 
 Albanian cuisine falls within the category of the " Mediterranean diet ," which includes a high consumption of seafood, vegetables, fruit, nuts, and olive oil; however, beef, veal, lamb, and pork are commonly consumed as well. [36]  It is believed that because of this diet  Albania  has a very high life expectancy when its economic power is compared to other countries, characterized by some researchers as the "Albanian paradox". [36] 
 
 See also [ edit ] 
 
 
 
 Wikibooks  Cookbook  has a recipe/module on
 
  Albanian cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons has media related to  Cuisine of Albania . 
 
 Culture of Albania 
 Mediterranean cuisine 
 Arbëreshë cuisine 
 Kosovan cuisine 
 Albanian wine 
 Mediterranean diet 
 References [ edit ] 
 
 
 ^   Mediterranean Diet: Dietary Guidelines and Impact on Health and Disease  (Donato F. Romagnolo, Ornella I. Selmin ed.). Humana Press, 2016. 2016-02-29. p. 47.  ISBN   9783319279695 . 
 
 ^   L. Maggioni, European Cooperative Programme for Plant Genetic Resources (2006).  Report of a Working Group on Prunus: Sixth Meeting, 20-21 June, 2003, Budapest, Hungary : Seventh Meeting, 1-3 December 2005, Larnaca, Cyprus . Bioversity International. pp. 29–32.  ISBN   9789290437321 . 
 
 ^   S. Velo; D. Topi.  "The Production Potential of the Olive Oil from Native Cultivars in Albania"   (PDF) .  ijoer.com . Tirana. {{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) 
 
 ^   "THE OLIVE AND OLIVE OIL VALUE CHAIN IN ALBANIA"   (PDF) .  eastagri.org . pp. 38–39. 
 
 ^   "Consumer Preferences for Olive Oil in Tirana, Albania"   (PDF) .  ifama.org . pp. 2–3. 
 
 ^   "Assessing the Comparative Advantage of Albanian Olive Oil Production"   (PDF) .  ageconsearch.umn.edu . pp. 2–3. 
 
 ^   "Olive and Olive Oil in Albania, From Antiquity Until the Middle Ages"   (PDF) .  anglisticum.org.mk . Tirana. pp. 1–12. [ permanent dead link ] 
 
 ^   Mirjona SADIKU.  "Page 1 A Tradition of Honor, Hospitality and Blood Feuds: Exploring the Kanun Customary Law inContemporary Albania"   (PDF) .  js.ugd.edu.mk . pp. 11–14.  Archived  from the original on 2017-07-05. 
 
 ^   "Traditional Food of Albania" .  albaniainside.com .  Albanian cuisine can be nominally divided into three regions 
 
 ^   Martha Jay (2016-06-15).  Onions and Garlic: A Global History . Reaktion Books, 2016.  ISBN   9781780236209 . 
 
 ^   "Onion Consumption Per Capita by Country" .  helgilibrary.com . 
 
 ^   agroweb.  "Red Onions vs White Onions, Which One's Healthier?" .  agroweb.org . Tirana. p. 1. 
 
 ^   Ministry of Environment of Albania .  "Albania's Second National Communication to the Conference of Parties under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change"   (PDF) .  unfccc.int . Tirana. p. 28. 
 
 ^  a   b   c   Institute of Statistics of Albania .  "Agriculture and Livestock Statistics, 2016"   (PDF) .  instat.gov.al . Tirana. 
 
 ^   "THE MEDICINAL AND AROMATIC PLANTS VALUE CHAIN IN ALBANIA"   (PDF) .  pdf.usaid.gov . June 2010. 
 
 ^   Stefano Padulosi, International Plant Genetic Resources Institute (1997).  Oregano: Proceedings of the IPGRI International Workshop on Oregano  (Stefano Padulosi ed.). Bioversity International, 1997. p. 5.  ISBN   9789290433170 . 
 
 ^   Dhimitër Doka.  "Albaniens vergessener Exportschlager" .  humboldt-foundation.de  (in German). Archived from  the original  on 1 December 2017 . Retrieved  10 May  2016 . 
 
 ^   "Medicinal & Aromatic Plants (MAPs) Sector in Albania"   (PDF) .  usaid.gov . p. 7. 
 
 ^   "Assessment report on Sideritis scardica Griseb.; Sideritis clandestina (Bory & Chaub.) Hayek; Sideritis raeseri Boiss. & Heldr.; Sideritis syriaca L., herba"   (PDF) .  ema.europa.eu . pp. 9, 11. 
 
 ^   Mark Hillsdon (27 February 2017).  "The European capital you'd never thought to visit (but really should)" .  telegraph.co.uk .  Archived  from the original on 2022-01-12. 
 
 ^   "Encyclopædia Britannica" . Retrieved  4 September  2013 . 
 
 ^   "PER CAPITA WINE CONSUMPTION BY COUNTRY - RANKED BY PER CAPITA CONSUMPTION 2008 - 2011 AND % CHANGE 201112008LITERS PER CAPITA"   (PDF) .  wineinstitute.org . p. 2. Archived from  the original   (PDF)  on 2017-11-18 . Retrieved  2017-12-17 . 
 
 ^   PATTI MORROW (5 January 2017).  "Why Albania Is A Great Destination For Wine Drinkers" .  epicureandculture.com . 
 
 ^   The Oxford Companion to Wine  (Julia Harding, Jancis Robinson ed.). Oxford University Press, 2015. 2015.  ISBN   9780198705383 . 
 
 ^   The Sotheby's Wine Encyclopedia  (Tom Stevenson ed.). London: Dorling Kindersley. 2005.  ISBN   0-7566-1324-8 . 
 
 ^   "Trileçe kazan dünya kepçe" .  Hürriyet . 1 March 2015 . Retrieved  13 April  2015 . 
 
 ^   Dan Nosowitz / (November 12, 2015).  "How a South American Soap Opera Created a Turkish Dessert Craze" . Atlas Obscura . Retrieved  November 13,  2015 . 
 
 ^   Daily Sabah (3 November 2014).  "The oldest dessert in the world: Ashura" .  dailysabah.com . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   "An introduction to Albanian food in 10 dishes" .  drivemefoody.com . 
 
 ^   "Meat consumption in Albania: Beef and veal at 48%" .  scan-tv.com . 18 December 2017. 
 
 ^   James Minahan (2009-12-23).  The Complete Guide to National Symbols and Emblems [2 Volumes] . ABC-CLIO, 2009. p. 303.  ISBN   9780313344978 . 
 
 ^   "Action Bronson i thotë në sy Rita Orës: Do të bëja "fli" për ty (Video)" .  telegrafi.com  (in Albanian). 26 March 2015. 
 
 ^   "Dua Lipa bëri pite duke folur shqip me Action Bronson teksa Merita Halili dhe Raif Hyseni kënduan "Doli Goca n'Penxhere" (Video)" .  telegrafi.com  (in Albanian). 20 December 2017. 
 
 ^   "Dua Lipa gatuan pite në emisionin e reperit shqiptar" .  koha.net  (in Albanian). 30 November 2017. 
 
 ^   "Fli" .  Britannica . Retrieved  2 April  2021 . 
 
 ^  a   b   Gjonça, Arjan; Bobak, Martin (December 1997). "Albanian paradox, another example of protective effect of Mediterranean lifestyle?".  The Lancet .  350  (9094): 1815–1817.  doi : 10.1016/S0140-6736(97)08347-5 .  PMID   9428253 .  S2CID   22486355 .  ProQuest   198996405 . 
 
 
   Topics related to the Albanian Cuisine 
 v t e Albania   articles History Illyrians 
 Ardiaei 
 Albanoi 
 Amantes 
 Amantini 
 Balaites 
 Bylliones 
 Dassaretii 
 Enchele 
 Labeatae 
 Parthini 
 Taulantii 
 Middle Ages (1190–1385) 
 Principality of Arbanon 
 Kingdom of Albania 
 Despotate of Arta 
 House of Kastrioti 
 Ottoman period (1385–1912) 
 Skanderbeg's rebellion 
 League of Lezhë 
 Kanun of Lekë Dukagjini 
 Arbëni Council 
 Islamization of Albania 
 Albanian Pashaliks 
 Massacre of the Albanian Beys 
 Revolts of 1833–39 
 Uprising of Dervish Cara 
 Albanian National Awakening 
 League of Prizren 
 Congress of Manastir 
 Revolt of 1910 
 Albanian revolt of 1911 
 Taksim meeting 
 Albanian revolt of 1912 
 Kimza Government 
 Independence (1912–present) 
 Declaration of Independence 
 Anthem 
 Provisional Government of Albania 
 Albania during the Balkan Wars 
 Republic of Central Albania 
 Principality of Albania (1914–25) 
 Albania during World War I 
 Autonomous Province of Korçë 
 Italian protectorate 
 Vlora War 
 Republic of Mirdita 
 Albanian Republic (1925–28) 
 Albanian Kingdom (1928–39) 
 Italian Fascist occupation 
 German Nazi occupation 
 The Holocaust in Albania 
 Albanian resistance during World War II 
 Communist Albania (1946–91) 
 Orthography Congress (1972) 
 Post-Communist Albania 
 1997 Civil Unrest 
 NATO membership 
 EU Accession 
 See also 
 Origins 
 Timeline 
 Archives 
 Geography Landscape 
 Mountains 
 Rivers 
 Lakes 
 Lagoons 
 Islands 
 Bays 
 Rock formations 
 Environment 
 Climate 
 Biodiversity 
   Habitat 
 Protected areas 
 Politics Executive 
 Government   ( agencies ) 
 Head of state   ( list ) 
 Prime Minister 
 Foreign relations 
 Political parties 
   Treaties 
 Visa policy 
 Judiciary Vetting Institutions 
 KPA 
 IKP 
 ONM 
 KPK 
 
 Constitution 
 Corruption 
 EURALIUS 
 SPAK 
 Prosecutor General Subdivisions 
 NUTS 
 Counties 
 Municipalities 
 Cities 
 Administrative units 
 Villages 
 Maps 
 Legislature 
 Elections 
 Assembly   ( speakers ) 
 Members 
 Opposition 
 Human rights 
 Abortion 
 Capital punishment 
 Assassinations 
 LGBT 
 Ombudsman 
 Security 
 Military 
 Police 
 Organized crime 
 Prisons 
 Border crossings 
 Economy Finance 
 Banking 
 Lek  (currency) 
 Taxation 
 Trade unions 
 State Supreme Audit 
 Retail 
 Shopping centers 
 Supermarkets 
 Industry 
 Agriculture 
 Healthcare 
 Companies 
 Energy Operators 
 KESH 
 OST 
 OSHEE 
 ERE 
 
 Hydropower plants 
   Wind farms 
 Solar power Natural resources 
 Oil and gas 
   Mining 
 Infrastructure 
 Highways 
 Aviation 
 Ports 
 Railways 
 Bridges 
 Tunnels 
 Highrises   ( structures ) 
 Telecommunications 
 Posta Shqiptare 
 Squatting 
 Tourism Monuments 
 Castles 
 Mosques 
 Tekkes 
 Churches 
 Lighthouses 
 
 Adriatic Sea Coast 
 Ionian Sea Coast 
 Riviera 
 National Parks 
 AKB 
   Images of Albania Society People 
 Demographics 
 Census 
 Tribes 
 Noble families 
 Diaspora 
 Culture Art   (galleries) 
 Architecture 
 Photography 
 Museums 
 Theatres 
 Education 
 Alphabet 
 scripts 
 Abetare 
 Language 
 Literature 
 Research institutes 
 Libraries 
 Universities 
 Publishers 
   Proverbs 
 Albanology 
 Tradition 
 Folk beliefs 
 Besa 
 Oda 
 Secularism 
 Religion 
 Nevruz 
 Sworn virgins 
 Costumes 
 Qeleshe 
 Fustanella 
 Xhubleta 
 Brez 
 Opinga 
 Xhamadan 
 Cuisine 
   Gjellë 
 Tavë kosi 
 Kabuni 
 Raki 
 Beer 
 Wine 
 Cognac Skënderbeu 
 Sports Football 
 National team 
 Clubs 
 Players 
 Stadiums 
 Other sports 
 Weightlifting 
 Athletics 
 Cycling 
 Basketball 
 Volleyball 
 Swimming 
 Olympics 
 Indoor arenas 
 Entertainment 
 Music 
 Television 
 Radio 
 Cinema 
 Symbols 
 Heraldry 
 Flag   ( list ) 
 Coat of arms   ( list ) 
 Epitaph of Gllavenica 
 Sign language 
 Orders, decorations and medals 
 Passport 
 .al 
 Other 
 Public holidays 
 Smoking 
 Copyright law 
 Outline Index Bibliography 
 Category 
 v t e Albanian cuisine Ingredients 
 Vegetables 
 Artichoke 
 Bean 
 Bell pepper 
 Eggplant 
 Garlic 
 Grape leaves 
 Onion 
 Pepper 
 Tomato 
 Fruits 
 Olive 
 Apple 
 Avocado 
 Blackberry 
 Grape 
 Orange 
 Nectarine 
 Cherry 
 Pomegranate 
 Figs 
 Lemon 
 Peach 
 Plum 
 Strawberries 
 Raspberry 
 Mulberry 
 Herbs and Spices 
 Basil 
 Chili pepper 
 Cinnamon 
 Coriander 
 Lavender 
 Oregano 
 Peppermint 
 Rosemary 
 Thyme 
 Bay 
 Vanilla 
 Saffron 
 Drinks 
 Mountain tea 
 Black tea 
 Coffee 
 Bozë 
 Dhallë 
 Raki 
 Cognac Skënderbeu 
 Beer 
 Wine 
 Cold meals 
 Japrak 
 Sallatë Ruse 
 Tarator 
 Sweets 
 Kanojë 
 Pandispanjë 
 Zupa 
 Krem karamele 
 Bakllava 
 Ballokume 
 Gurabie 
 Hallvë 
 Hashure 
 Hasude 
 Hoshaf 
 Kabuni 
 Kadaif 
 Kek 
 Kompekaj 
 Mafishe 
 Mualebi 
 Pistil 
 Revani 
 Sheqerpare 
 Shëndetlie 
 |Sultjash 
 Tullumba 
 Hot meals 
 Burani 
 Çomlek 
 Fli 
 Fërgesë 
 Hithenik 
 Imam Bajalldi 
 Kavurme 
 Kukurec 
 Lakror 
 Mantie 
 Mashurka 
 Paçe 
 Qofte 
 Resenik 
 Shpargull 
 Tavë Dheu 
 Tavë kosi 
 Trahana 
 Turli perimesh 
 Turshi 
 Baked goods 
 Byrek 
 Krelanë 
 Kulaç 
 Petulla 
 Pastiçe 
 Pogaçe 
 Qahi 
 Pite 
 Related cuisines 
 Arbëreshë 
 Balkan 
 Cham 
 Epirotic 
 Kosovan 
 Mediterranean 
 
 v t e European cuisine Sovereign states European Union 
 Austria 
 Belgium 
 Bulgaria 
 Croatia 
 Cyprus 
 Czech Republic 
 Denmark 
 Estonia 
 Finland 
 France 
 Germany 
 Greece 
 Hungary 
 Republic of Ireland 
 Italy 
 Latvia 
 Lithuania 
 Luxembourg 
 Malta 
 Netherlands 
 Poland 
 Portugal 
 Romania 
 Slovakia 
 Slovenia 
 Spain 
 Sweden 
 Other 
 Albania 
 Andorra 
 Armenia 
 Azerbaijan 
 Belarus 
 Bosnia and Herzegovina 
 Georgia 
 Iceland 
 Kazakhstan 
 Liechtenstein 
 Moldova 
 Monaco 
 Montenegro 
 North Macedonia 
 Norway 
 Russia 
 San Marino 
 Serbia 
 Switzerland 
 Turkey 
 Ukraine 
 United Kingdom 
 Vatican City 
 States with limited recognition 
 Abkhazia 
 Kosovo 
 Nagorno-Karabakh 
 Northern Cyprus 
 South Ossetia 
 Transnistria 
 Dependencies  and other territories 
 Faroe Islands 
 Gibraltar 
 Guernsey 
 Isle of Man 
 Jersey 
 
 v t e Mediterranean cuisine Regions Southern Maghrebi 
 Algerian 
 Chakhchoukha 
 Berber 
 Libyan 
 Bazin 
 Moroccan 
 Méchoui 
 Tajine 
 Tunisian 
 Shakshouka 
 Regional
 Couscous 
 Egyptian 
 Duqqa 
 Ful medames 
 Kushari 
 Mulukhiyah 
 Levant 
 Israeli 
 Hamin 
 Lebanese 
 Kibbeh 
 Palestinian 
 Musakhan 
 Syrian 
 Regional 
 Baba ghanoush 
 Hummus 
 Northern Turkish 
 Cheeses 
 Desserts 
 Kebabs 
 Rakı 
 Turkish tea 
 Greek 
 Gyros 
 Greek salad 
 Stifado 
 Feta 
 Skordalia 
 Loukaniko 
 Melomakarono 
 Ionian Islands 
 Bourdeto 
 Pastitsada 
 Crete 
 Dakos 
 Paximadi 
 Other Balkan 
 Albanian 
 Aromanian 
 Bosnia and Herzegovina 
 Croatian 
 Montenegrin 
 Slovenian 
 Regional
 Pita 
 Shish kebab 
 Yogurt 
 Baklava 
 Moussaka 
 Italian 
 Regional
 Pasta 
 Pizza 
 Abruzzese 
 Arrosticini 
 Mortadella di Campotosto 
 Maccheroni alla chitarra 
 Pizzelle 
 Timballo 
 Bocconotto 
 Parrozzo 
 Apulian 
 Arbëreshë 
 Ligurian 
 Ciuppin 
 Focaccia 
 Pesto 
 Ravioli 
 Lombard 
 Mantuan 
 Lucanian 
 Neapolitan 
 Neapolitan ragù 
 Pasta e fagioli 
 Roman 
 Carbonara 
 Sardinian 
 Pane carasau 
 Malloreddus 
 Mirto (liqueur) 
 Abbamele 
 Pecorino sardo 
 Culurgiònes 
 Bottarga 
 Seada 
 Sicilian 
 Cannoli 
 Caponata 
 Pasta alla Norma 
 Scaccia 
 Tuscan 
 Ribollita 
 Venetian 
 Carpaccio 
 Polenta 
 Risotto 
 French 
 Corsican 
 Brocciu 
 Occitan 
 Cassoulet 
 Brandade 
 Provencal 
 Bouillabaisse 
 Ratatouille 
 Salade niçoise 
 Spanish 
 Andalusian 
 Gazpacho 
 Sherry 
 Balearic 
 Caldereta 
 Tombet 
 Catalan 
 Escalivada 
 Escudella 
 Ollada 
 Valencian 
 Paella 
 Other 
 Gibraltarian 
 Monégasque 
 Islands 
 Cypriot 
 Afelia 
 Halloumi 
 Maltese 
 Staples 
 Wheat 
 Bread 
 Couscous 
 Pasta 
 Pizza 
 Semolina 
 Olive 
 Olive oil 
 Grape 
 Wine 
 Shared 
 Anise spirits 
 Bottarga 
 Lamb 
 Exemplars 
 Elizabeth David 
 A Book of Mediterranean Food 
 
 Category 
 
 v t e Cuisines Continental 
 African 
 North 
 West 
 list 
 Americas 
 Caribbean 
 North 
 South 
 list 
 Asian 
 Caucasian 
 Central 
 Indian subcontinent 
 Levantine 
 list 
 European 
 Balkan 
 Central 
 Eastern 
 list 
 Oceanic 
 Intercontinental
 Global 
 Latin American 
 Mediterranean 
 Middle Eastern 
 National  and regional 
 Afghan 
 Albanian 
 Algerian 
 American 
 Californian 
 Floribbean 
 Hawaiian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Lowcountry (South Carolina) 
 New England 
 New Mexico 
 Pacific Northwest 
 Pennsylvania Dutch 
 Puerto Rican 
 Southern US 
 Southwest US 
 Texas 
 Angolan 
 Argentine 
 Armenian 
 Australian 
 Austrian 
 Azerbaijani 
 Bahraini 
 Bangladeshi 
 Barbadian 
 Belarusian 
 Belgian 
 Belizean 
 Beninese 
 Bhutanese 
 Bolivian 
 Bosnian-Herzegovinian 
 Botswana 
 Brazilian 
 British 
 Channel Islands 
 English 
 Gibraltarian 
 Northern Irish 
 Saint Helena 
 Scottish 
 Welsh 
 Bruneian 
 Bulgarian 
 Burkinabé 
 Burmese 
 Burundian 
 Cambodian 
 Cameroonian 
 Canadian 
 Acadian 
 Québécois 
 Central African Republic 
 Chadian 
 Chilean 
 Chinese 
 Cantonese 
 Hong Kong 
 Macanese 
 Tibetan 
 Xinjiang 
 Colombian 
 Congolese 
 Corsican 
 Croatian 
 Cuban 
 Cypriot 
 Czech 
 Danish 
 Faroese 
 Greenlandic 
 Djiboutian 
 Dominican 
 Dominican Republic 
 Dutch 
 East Timorese 
 Ecuadorian 
 Egyptian 
 Emirati 
 Equatorial Guinean 
 Eritrean 
 Estonian 
 Ethiopian 
 Fijian 
 Filipino 
 Finnish 
 French 
 Occitan 
 French Guianan 
 Gabonese 
 Gambian 
 Georgian 
 German 
 Ghanaian 
 Greek 
 Cretan 
 Epirotic 
 Greek Macedonian 
 Heptanesean 
 Guatemalan 
 Guinea-Bissauan 
 Guinean 
 Haitian 
 Honduran 
 Hungarian 
 Icelandic 
 Indian 
 Arunachalese 
 Assamese 
 Bengali 
 Bihari 
 Goan 
 Gujarati 
 Himachal Pradesh 
 Kashmiri 
 Jharkhandi 
 Karnataka 
 Kerala 
 Maharashtrian 
 Manipuri 
 Meghalayan 
 Mizo 
 Naga 
 Odia 
 Punjabi 
 Rajasthani 
 Sikkimese 
 Sindhi 
 Tamil 
 Telangana 
 Telugu 
 Indonesian 
 Acehnese 
 Balinese 
 Banjar 
 Batak 
 Betawi 
 Indo 
 Javanese 
 Madurese 
 Makassar 
 Minahasan 
 Minangkabau 
 Palembangese 
 Sundanese 
 Iranian 
 Iraqi 
 Irish 
 Israeli 
 Italian 
 Abruzzese 
 Ligurian 
 Lombard 
 Lucanian 
 Neapolitan 
 Roman 
 Sardinian 
 Sicilian 
 Venetian 
 Ivorian 
 Jamaican 
 Japanese 
 Okinawan 
 Jordanian 
 Kazakh 
 Kenyan 
 Korean 
 North Korean 
 South Korean 
 Kosovan 
 Kuwaiti 
 Kyrgyz 
 Lao 
 Latvian 
 Lebanese 
 Lesotho 
 Liberian 
 Libyan 
 Liechtensteiner 
 Lithuanian 
 Luxembourg 
 Macedonian 
 Malagasy 
 Malawian 
 Malaysian 
 Sabahan 
 Sarawakian 
 Maldivian 
 Malian 
 Maltese 
 Mauritanian 
 Mauritian 
 Mexican 
 Moldovan 
 Monégasque 
 Mongolian 
 Montenegrin 
 Moroccan 
 Mozambican 
 Namibian 
 Nauruan 
 Nepalese 
 New Zealand 
 Nicaraguan 
 Niger 
 Nigerian 
 Niuean 
 Norwegian 
 Omani 
 Pakistani 
 Palestinian 
 Panamanian 
 Peruvian 
 Polish 
 Portuguese 
 Qatari 
 Romanian  (incl.  Transylvanian Saxon ) 
 Russian 
 Bashkir 
 Chechen 
 Circassian 
 Komi 
 Mordovian 
 Sakha 
 Tatar 
 Udmurt 
 Yamal 
 Rwandan 
 Saint Lucian 
 Salvadoran 
 Sammarinese 
 São Tomé and Príncipe 
 Saudi Arabian 
 Senegalese 
 Serbian 
 Seychellois 
 Sierra Leonean 
 Singaporean 
 Slovak 
 Slovenian 
 Somali 
 South African 
 Spanish 
 Andalusian 
 Asturian 
 Balearic 
 Basque 
 Canarian 
 Cantabrian 
 Catalan 
 Extremaduran 
 Galician 
 Manchegan 
 Valencian 
 Sri Lankan 
 Sudanese 
 Swazi 
 Swedish 
 Swiss 
 Syrian 
 Taiwanese 
 Tajik 
 Tanzanian 
 Zanzibari 
 Thai 
 Togolese 
 Tunisian 
 Turkish 
 Turkmen 
 Trinidadian and Tobagonian 
 Ugandan 
 Ukrainian 
 Uruguayan 
 Uzbek 
 Venezuelan 
 Vietnamese 
 Western Saharan 
 Yemeni 
 Zambian 
 Zimbabwean 
 Ethnic 
 Ainu 
 Arab 
 Indonesian 
 Aromanian 
 Assyrian 
 Balochi 
 Berber 
 Cajun 
 Chinese 
 American 
 Canadian 
 Chifa 
 Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Crimean Tatar 
 Greek American 
 Hazaragi 
 Indian 
 Anglo-Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Indigenous American 
 Inuit 
 Italian American 
 Kurdish 
 Livonian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Malay 
 Ossetian 
 Parsi 
 Pashtun 
 Peranakan 
 Romani 
 Sámi 
 Soul food 
 Sylheti 
 Transylvanian Saxon 
 Yup'ik 
 Religious 
 Buddhist 
 Christian 
 Goan Catholic 
 Mangalorean Catholic 
 Mennonite 
 Hindu 
 Islamic 
 Chinese 
 Ital 
 Jain 
 Jewish 
 American 
 Ashkenazi 
 Bukharan 
 Ethiopian 
 Mizrahi 
 Sephardic 
 Syrian 
 Ritual slaughter 
 Sikh 
 Historical 
 Ancient Egyptian 
 Ancient Greek 
 Ancient Israelite 
 Ancient Roman 
 Antebellum America 
 Aztec 
 Byzantine 
 Early modern European 
 Historical Chinese 
 Historical Indian subcontinent 
 Historical North Indian and Pakistani 
 History of agriculture 
 History of alcoholic drinks 
 History of bread 
 History of seafood 
 History of vegetarianism 
 Historical Argentine 
 Historical Japanese 
 Inca 
 Mayan 
 Muisca 
 Mughal 
 Medieval 
 Ottoman 
 Peasant 
 Soviet 
 Thirteen Colonies 
 Styles 
 Classique 
 Fast food 
 Fusion 
 New American 
 Eurasian 
 Haute 
 Molecular gastronomy 
 Note by Note 
 Nouvelle 
 Lists 
 List of cuisines 
 List of historical cuisines 
 Lists of prepared foods 
 Related 
 Cookbook 
 Cooking 
 Culinary arts 
 Drink 
 Food 
 history 
 Diet 
 Meal preparation 
 
   Food portal 
   Drink portal 
   Category 
   Commons 
   Cookbook 
   WikiProject 
   Outline 
 
 Authority control : National libraries  
 Israel 
 United States 
 
  
NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw2361
Cached time: 20230310194554
Cache expiry: 1814400
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc, no‐toc‐conversion]
CPU time usage: 1.373 seconds
Real time usage: 1.655 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 24863/1000000
Post‐expand include size: 620000/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 200125/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 19/100
Expensive parser function count: 33/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 163572/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.679/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 24467686/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/400
 
 
Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1235.973      1 -total
 29.77%  367.961     18 Template:Navbox
 28.01%  346.231      1 Template:Navboxes
 19.80%  244.757      1 Template:Reflist
 18.06%  223.207     30 Template:Citation_needed
 14.39%  177.904     31 Template:Fix
 12.78%  157.924      1 Template:European_topic
 10.67%  131.876      1 Template:Albania_topics
 10.48%  129.540      1 Template:Country_topics
  8.01%   99.040     55 Template:Iso2country
 
  Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:idhash:333059-0!canonical and timestamp 20230310194552 and revision id 1138556201. Rendering was triggered because: page-view
  
 esi <esi:include src="/esitest-fa8a495983347898/content" />  
 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Albanian_cuisine&oldid=1138556201 " 
 Categories :  Albanian cuisine Albanian culture European cuisine Mediterranean cuisine Balkan cuisine Hidden categories:  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from September 2019 Articles with permanently dead external links CS1 German-language sources (de) CS1 Albanian-language sources (sq) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from November 2022 All articles needing additional references Articles containing Albanian-language text Articles to be expanded from January 2022 All articles to be expanded Articles using small message boxes All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2022 Articles with unsourced statements from June 2018 Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with J9U identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  This page was last edited on 10 February 2023, at 08:57  (UTC) . 
 Text is available under the  Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0 ;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the  Terms of Use  and  Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the  Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. 
 
 
 Privacy policy 
 About Wikipedia 
 Disclaimers 
 Contact Wikipedia 
 Mobile view 
 Developers 
 Statistics 
 Cookie statement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
