
 
 
 Jump to content 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle sidebar 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Create account Log in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Personal tools 
 
 
 
 
   Create account   Log in 
 
 
 
 
		Pages for logged out editors  learn more 
 
 
 Contributions Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Navigation 
 
 
 Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate 
 
 
 
 
 Contribute 
 
 
 Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file 
 
 
 
 
 Tools 
 
 
 What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item 
 
 
 
 
 Print/export 
 
 
 Download as PDF Printable version 
 
 
 
 
 In other projects 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons 
 
 
 
 
 Languages 
 
 On this Wikipedia the language links are at the top of the page across from the article title.  Go to top . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CentralNotice  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Contents 
 move to sidebar 
 hide 
 
 
 
 
 (Top) 
 
 
 
 
 
 1 History 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 Differences from other regional cuisines in China 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 Dishes 
 
 
				Toggle Dishes subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 3.1 Menu items not found in China 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.1.1 Other American Chinese dishes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.2 Versions of dishes also found in China 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4 Regional variations 
 
 
				Toggle Regional variations subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 4.1 New York City 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.1.1 Kosher preparation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.2 Los Angeles County 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.3 San Francisco Bay Area 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.4 Boston 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.5 Philadelphia 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.6 Washington, D.C. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.7 Puerto Rico 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.8 Hawaii 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.9 Other regions 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5 Chain restaurants 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6 Popular culture 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 7 See also 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8 Citations 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 9 References and further reading 
 
 
				Toggle References and further reading subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 9.1 Studies 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 9.2 Cookbooks 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 10 External links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
						Toggle the table of contents
					 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle the table of contents 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 American Chinese cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 9 languages 
 
 
 
 العربية Español فارسی 한국어 עברית Bahasa Melayu 日本語 Português 中文 
 Edit links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Article Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 English 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 More 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
 
 
 Chinese cuisine developed by Chinese Americans 
 
 
   A Chinese American restaurant in the  Hưng Yên province ,  Vietnam 
 Part of a series on Chinese cuisine 
 Regional cuisines 
 Four Great Traditions 
 Chuan (Sichuan) 
 Lu (Shandong) 
 Yue (Guangdong) 
 Huaiyang (Jiangsu) 
 Eight Great Traditions (+all above) 
 Anhui 
 Fujian 
 Hunan 
 Zhejiang 
 Ten Great Traditions (+all above) 
 Beijing 
 Shanghai 
 Twelve Great Traditions (+all above) 
 Henan 
 Shaanxi 
 Fourteen Great Traditions (+all above) 
 Hubei 
 Liaoning 
 Sixteen Great Traditions (+all above) 
 Tianjin 
 Yunnan 
 New Eight Great Traditions 
 Gansu 
 Hangzhou 
 Jilin 
 Liaoning 
 Ningbo 
 Shaanxi 
 Shanghai 
 Shanxi 
 Beijing and the vicinity 
 Beijing 
 Imperial 
 Aristocrat 
 Tianjin 
 Other regional styles 
 Teochew 
 Guangxi 
 Guizhou 
 Hainan 
 Haipai 
 Hakka 
 Hong Kong 
 Jiangxi 
 Macanese 
 Manchu 
 Northeastern 
 Putian (Henghwa) 
 Qinghai 
 Taiwan 
 Tibetan 
 Xinjiang 
 
 Overseas cuisine 
 Australia 
 Britain 
 Burma 
 Canada 
 Caribbean 
 Philippines 
 India 
 Indonesia 
 Japan 
 Latin America 
 Perú 
 Puerto Rico 
 Korea 
 Malaysia 
 Pakistan 
 Singapore 
 United States 
 
 Religious cuisines 
 Buddhist 
 Islamic 
 Taoist 
 
 Ingredients and types of food 
 Main dishes 
 Desserts 
 Noodles 
 
 Preparation and cooking 
 Stir frying 
 Double steaming 
 Red cooking 
 
 See also 
 Customs and etiquette 
 List of Chinese desserts 
 List of Chinese dishes 
 List of Chinese restaurants 
 List of restaurants in China 
 
   Asia portal 
   China portal 
   Hong Kong portal 
   Taiwan portal v t e 
 Part of a series on American cuisine 
 Regional cuisines 
 Northeastern 
 
 New England 
 New Jersey 
 New York City 
 Philadelphia 
 Midwestern 
 
 Chicago 
 Michigan 
 North Dakota 
 Omaha 
 St. Louis 
 Wisconsin 
 Mid-Atlantic 
 
 Baltimore 
 Pittsburgh 
 Southern  ( list ) 
 
 Atlanta 
 Cajun 
 Floribbean 
 Kentucky 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Lowcountry 
 Houston 
 New Orleans 
 Texas 
 Tex-Mex 
 Western 
 
 California 
 California fusion 
 Los Angeles 
 Pacific Northwest 
 Rocky Mountain 
 Southwestern 
 
 New Mexican 
 Other 
 
 Hawaiian 
 Military rations 
 Puerto Rican 
 Roadkill 
 Tailgate party 
 
 History 
 Thirteen Colonies 
 Antebellum America 
 Chuckwagon 
 Culinary Revolution 
 
 Ingredients and foods 
 List of American foods 
 Apple 
 Beef 
 Blueberry 
 Chocolate 
 Collard greens 
 Corn 
 Okra 
 Pecan 
 Potato 
 Pumpkin 
 Sunflower seed 
 Tomato 
 Turkey 
 Vanilla 
 
 Styles 
 Barbecue in the United States 
 Kansas City 
 Memphis 
 North Carolina 
 Santa Maria 
 St. Louis 
 Texas 
 Fast food 
 Fusion 
 New American 
 Pizza in the United States 
 
 Ethnic and cultural 
 American Chinese 
 Filipino-American cuisine 
 Greek-American 
 Indian 
 Italian-American 
 Japanese 
 Jewish 
 Mexican-American 
 Native American 
 Pennsylvania Dutch 
 Soul food 
 Tlingit 
 
 Holidays and festivals 
 Fourth of July 
 Christmas 
 Thanksgiving 
 
   United States portal 
   Food portal v t e 
 
 American Chinese cuisine  is a  cuisine  derived from  Chinese cuisine  that was developed by  Chinese Americans . The dishes served in many North American  Chinese restaurants  are adapted to American tastes and often differ significantly from those found in China.
 
 
 History [ edit ] 
   Theodore Wores , 1884,  Chinese Restaurant,  oil on canvas, 83 x 56 cm,  Crocker Art Museum , Sacramento 
 Chinese immigrants  arrived in the United States seeking employment as miners and railroad workers. As larger groups arrived, laws were put in place preventing them from owning land. They mostly lived together in ghettos, individually referred to as " Chinatown ". Here the immigrants started their own small businesses, including restaurants and  laundry services . [1] 
 By the 19th century, the Chinese community in  San Francisco  operated sophisticated and sometimes luxurious restaurants patronized mainly by Chinese. The restaurants in smaller towns (mostly owned by Chinese immigrants) served food based on what their customers requested, anything ranging from  pork chop  sandwiches and  apple pie , to beans and eggs. Many of these small-town restaurant owners were self-taught family cooks who improvised on different cooking methods using whatever ingredients were available. [1] 
 These smaller restaurants were responsible for developing American Chinese cuisine, where the food was modified to suit a more American palate. First catering to miners and railroad workers, they established new eateries in towns where Chinese food was completely unknown, adapting local ingredients and catering to their customers' tastes. [2]  Even though the new flavors and dishes meant they were not strictly Chinese cuisine, these Chinese restaurants have been cultural ambassadors to Americans. [3] 
 Chinese restaurants in the United States began during the  California Gold Rush  (1848–1855), which brought 20,000–30,000 immigrants across from the  Canton  (Guangdong) region of China. The first Chinese restaurant in America is debated. Some say it was Macau and Woosung, while others cite Canton Restaurant. [4] [5]  Both unphotographed establishments were founded in 1849 in San Francisco. Either way, these and other such restaurants were central features in the daily lives of immigrants. They provided a connection to home, particularly for the many bachelors who did not have the resources or knowledge to cook for themselves. In 1852, the ratio of male to female Chinese immigrants was a 18:1. [6]  These restaurants served as gathering places and cultural centers for the Chinese community. By 1850, there were five Chinese  restaurants in San Francisco. Soon after, significant amounts of food were being imported from China to America's  west coast . [ citation needed ] 
 The trend spread steadily eastward with the growth of the American railways, particularly to  New York City . [7]   The  Chinese Exclusion Act  allowed merchants to enter the country, and in 1915, restaurant owners became eligible for merchant visas. This fueled the opening of Chinese restaurants as an immigration vehicle. [8]   Pekin Noodle Parlor , established in 1911, is the oldest operating Chinese restaurant in the country. [9]  As of 2015 [update] , the United States had 46,700 Chinese restaurants. [10] 
 Along the way, cooks adapted southern Chinese dishes and developed a style of Chinese food not found in China, such as  chop suey . Restaurants (along with Chinese laundries) provided an ethnic niche for small businesses at a time when Chinese people were excluded from most jobs in the wage economy by ethnic discrimination or lack of language fluency. [11]  By the 1920s, this cuisine, particularly chop suey, became popular among middle-class Americans. However, after World War II it began to be dismissed for not being "authentic", [ by whom? ]  though it continued to be popular.
 Late 20th-century tastes have been more accommodating. [12]  By this time, it had become evident that Chinese restaurants no longer catered mainly to Chinese customers. [13]  Chinese-American restaurants played a key role in ushering in the era of take-out and delivery food in the United States.
 In New York City, delivery was pioneered in the 1970s by Empire Szechuan Gourmet Franchise, which hired Taiwanese students studying at  Columbia University  to do the work. Chinese American restaurants were among the first restaurants to use picture menus in the US. [14] 
 Beginning in the 1950s, Taiwanese immigrants replaced Cantonese immigrants as the primary labor force in American Chinese restaurants. These immigrants expanded American-Chinese cuisine beyond  Cantonese cuisine  to encompass dishes from many different regions of China as well as Japanese-inspired dishes. [14] 
 In 1955, the Republic of China evacuated the  Dachen Islands  in the face of the encroaching Communists. Many who evacuated to Taiwan later moved to the United States as they lacked strong social networks and access to opportunity in Taiwan. Chefs from the Dachen Islands had a strong influence on American Chinese food. [14] 
 Taiwanese immigration largely ended in the 1990s due to an economic boom and democratization in Taiwan. From the 1990s onward, immigrants from China once again made up the majority of cooks in American Chinese restaurants. [14]  There has been a consequential component of  Chinese emigration  of illegal origin, most notably  Fuzhou people  from  Fujian Province [15]  and  Wenzhounese  from  Zhejiang Province  in Mainland China, specifically destined to work in Chinese restaurants in New York City, beginning in the 1980s.
 Adapting Chinese cooking techniques to local produce and tastes has led to the development of American Chinese cuisine. Many of the Chinese restaurant  menus  in the US are printed in  Chinatown, Manhattan , [16]  which has a strong  Chinese-American  demographic.
 In 2011, the  Smithsonian National Museum of American History  displayed some of the historical background and cultural artifacts of American Chinese cuisine in its exhibit entitled,  Sweet & Sour: A Look at the History of Chinese Food in the United States . [17] 
 
 Differences from other regional cuisines in China [ edit ] 
 American Chinese food builds from styles and food habits brought from the southern province of  Guangdong , often from the  Toisan  district of Toisan, the origin of most Chinese immigration before the  closure of immigration from China  in 1924. These Chinese families developed new styles and used readily available ingredients, especially in California. [18]  The type of Chinese-American cooking served in restaurants was different from the foods eaten in Chinese-American homes.  [19] [12]  Of the various  regional cuisines in China ,  Cantonese cuisine  has been the most influential in the development of American Chinese food. [20] [21] 
 One major difference between Chinese and American-Chinese cuisine is in the use of vegetables.  Salads  containing raw or uncooked ingredients are rare in traditional Chinese cuisine. [22]  However, an increasing number of American Chinese restaurants, including some upscale establishments, have started to offer these items in response to customer demand. While cuisine in China makes frequent use of Asian  leaf vegetables  like  bok choy  and  gai-lan , American Chinese cuisine makes use of some ingredients not native to and very rarely used in China, for example, Western  broccoli  ( Chinese :  西蘭 ;  pinyin :  xīlán ) instead of Chinese broccoli (gai-lan,  芥蘭 ;  jièlán ). [23]  (Occasionally, Western broccoli is also referred to as  sai 1  laan 4  fa 1  in Cantonese ( 西蘭花 ) in order to distinguish the two.)
 Chinese ingredients considered "exotic" in North America have become more available over time, including fresh fruits and vegetables which previously had been hard to find. For example, edible  snow pea  pods have become widely available, while the less-known  dau miu  (also called "pea sprouts", "pea pod stems", or "pea shoots") are also appearing on menus, and even in supermarkets in North America.
 
   A  Chinese   buffet  restaurant in the United States 
 American-Chinese food also has had a reputation for high levels of  MSG  to enhance flavor; however, in recent years, market forces and customer demand have encouraged many restaurants to offer "MSG Free" or "No MSG" menus, or to omit this ingredient on request. [23] 
 
   Carryout Chinese food is commonly served in a paper carton with a wire bail, known as an  oyster pail . 
 Egg fried rice  in American Chinese cuisine is also prepared differently, with more soy sauce added for more flavor whereas the traditional egg fried rice uses less soy sauce. Some food styles, such as  dim sum , were also modified to fit American palates, such as added batter for fried dishes and extra soy sauce. [24] 
 Both Chinese and American-Chinese cooking utilize similar methods of preparation, such as  stir frying ,  pan frying , and  deep frying , which are all easily done using a  wok .
 Ming Tsai , the owner of the Blue Ginger restaurant [25]  in  Wellesley, Massachusetts , and host of  PBS  culinary show  Simply Ming , said that American Chinese restaurants typically try to have food representing 3-5 regions of China at one time, have  chop suey , or have "fried vegetables and some protein in a thick sauce", "eight different sweet and sour dishes", or "a whole page of 20 different chow meins or fried rice dishes". Tsai said "Chinese-American cuisine is 'dumbed-down' Chinese food. It's adapted... to be blander, thicker and sweeter for the American public". [26] 
 Most American Chinese establishments cater to non-Chinese customers with menus written in English or containing pictures. If separate Chinese-language menus are available, they typically feature items such as  liver ,  chicken feet , or other meat dishes that might deter American customers (such as  offal ).  In  Chinatown, Manhattan , some restaurants are known for having a "phantom" menu with food preferred by ethnic Chinese, but believed to be disliked by non-Chinese Americans. [23] 
 
   Chop suey, made with garlic chicken and peapods, on  fried rice 
   An unopened fortune cookie 
 Dishes [ edit ] 
 Menu items not found in China [ edit ] 
 Dishes that often appear on American Chinese restaurant menus include:
 
 Almond  chicken — chicken breaded in batter containing ground almonds, fried and served with almonds and onions. [27] 
 Beef and broccoli —  flank steak  cut into small pieces, stir fried with broccoli, and covered in a dark sauce made with  soy sauce  and  oyster sauce  and thickened with  cornstarch . [28] [29] [30] 
 Chicken and broccoli — similar to beef and broccoli, but with chicken instead of beef. 
 Chinese chicken salad  — usually containing sliced or shredded chicken, uncooked  leafy greens , crispy noodles (or fried wonton skins) and sesame dressing. Some restaurants serve the salad with  mandarin oranges . 
 Chop suey  — connotes "assorted pieces" in Chinese. It is usually a mix of vegetables and meat in a brown sauce but can also be served in a white sauce. 
 Crab rangoon  — fried  wonton  skins stuffed with (usually) artificial  crab  meat ( surimi ) and  cream cheese . 
 Fortune cookie  — invented in  California  as a Westernized version of the Japanese  omikuji   senbei , [31]  fortune cookies have become sweetened and found their way to many American Chinese restaurants. 
 Fried wontons  — somewhat similar to crab rangoon, a filling, (most often pork), is wrapped in a wonton skin and deep fried. [32] [33] [34] [35] [36] [37] 
 General Tso's chicken  — chunks of chicken that are dipped in batter, deep fried, and seasoned with ginger, garlic, sesame oil, scallions, and hot  chili peppers . Believed to be named after  Qing dynasty  statesman and military leader  Zuo Zongtang , often referred to as General Tso. 
 Mongolian beef  — fried beef with scallions or white onions in a spicy and often sweet brown sauce. 
 Pepper steak  — sliced steak, green bell peppers, tomatoes, and white or green onions stir fried with salt, sugar, and soy sauce.  Bean sprouts  are a less common addition. 
 Royal beef—deep-fried sliced beef, doused in a wine sauce and often served with steamed broccoli. 
 Sesame chicken  — boned, marinated, battered, and deep-fried chicken which is then dressed with a translucent red or orange, sweet and mildly spicy sauce, made from soy sauce, corn starch, vinegar, chicken broth, and sugar. 
   Wonton  strips are commonly served as complimentary appetizers along with  duck sauce  and hot mustard 
 Sushi  — despite being served in the Japanese and American styles, some American Chinese restaurants serve various types of sushi, usually on buffets. 
 Sweet roll — yeast rolls, typically fried, covered in granulated sugar or powdered sugar. Some variants are stuffed with  cream cheese  or icing. 
 Wonton strips — these deep-fried strips of dough are commonly offered as complimentary appetizers, along with  duck sauce  and hot mustard, or with soup when ordering take-out. 
 Other American Chinese dishes [ edit ] 
 Dau miu   is a Chinese vegetable that has become popular since the early 1990s, and now not only appears on English-language menus, usually as "pea shoots", but is often served by upscale non-Asian restaurants as well. Originally it was only available during a few months of the year, but it is now grown in greenhouses and is available year-round.
 
 Versions of dishes also found in China [ edit ] 
   Egg foo young 
 Beijing beef — in China, this dish uses  gai lan  (Chinese broccoli) rather than American  broccoli . 
 Cashew chicken  — stir-fried tender chicken pieces with  cashew nuts . 
 Chow mein  — literally means "stir-fried  noodles ". Chow mein consists of fried crispy noodles with bits of meat and vegetables. It can come with chicken, pork, shrimp or beef. 
 Egg foo young  — Chinese-style  omelet  with vegetables and meat, usually served with a brown gravy. While some restaurants in North America deep fry the omelet, versions found in Asia are more likely to fry in the wok. 
 Egg roll  — while  spring rolls  have a thin, light beige crispy skin that flakes apart, and is filled with mushrooms,  bamboo , and other vegetables inside, the American-style egg roll has a thicker, chewier, dark brown bubbly skin stuffed with cabbage and usually bits of meat or seafood (such as pork or shrimp), but no egg. 
 Fried rice  — fried-rice dishes are popular offerings in American Chinese food due to the speed and ease of preparation and their appeal to American tastes.   
 Fried rice is generally prepared with rice cooled overnight, allowing restaurants to put leftover rice to good use (freshly cooked rice is actually less suitable for fried rice).   
 The Chinese-American version of this dish typically uses more soy sauce than the versions found in China.   
 Fried rice is offered with different combinations of meat (pork, chicken and shrimp are the most popular) and vegetables. 
 Ginger beef  ( 生薑牛肉 ;  shēngjiāng niúròu ) — tender beef cut in chunks, mixed with ginger and Chinese mixed vegetables. 
 Ginger fried beef  ( 乾炒牛肉絲 ;  gānchǎo niúròu-sī ) — tender beef cut in strings, battered, deep fried, then re-fried in a wok mixed with a sweet sauce, a variation of a popular Northern Chinese dish. 
 Hulatang  — a traditional Chinese soup with hot spices, often called "spicy soup" on menus. 
 Hot and sour soup  - The North American soups tend to have starch added as a thickener. 
 Kung Pao chicken  — a spicy  Sichuan  dish that is served with peanuts, scallions, and  Sichuan peppers . Some versions in North America may include zucchini and bell peppers. 
 Lo mein  ("stirred noodles") — frequently made with eggs and flour, making them chewier than a recipe simply using water. Thick, spaghetti-shaped noodles are pan fried with vegetables (mainly bok choy and Chinese cabbage or  napa ) and meat. Sometimes this dish is referred to as chow mein (which literally means "stir-fried noodles" in Cantonese). 
 Mei Fun  — noodles usually  simmered  in  broth  with other ingredients such as  fish balls ,  beef balls , and/or slices of  fishcake . 
 Moo shu pork  — the original version uses more typically Chinese ingredients (including  wood ear  fungi and  daylily  buds) and thin flour pancakes, while the American version often uses vegetables more familiar to Americans, and thicker pancakes. This dish is quite popular in Chinese restaurants in the United States, but not as popular in China. 
 Orange chicken  — chopped, battered, fried chicken with a sweet orange flavored chili sauce that is thickened and glazed. The traditional version consists of stir-fried chicken in a light, slightly sweet soy sauce flavored with dried orange peels. 
 Wonton soup  — In most American Chinese restaurants, only wonton dumplings in broth are served, while versions found in China may come with noodles. (In Canton, it can be a full meal in itself, consisting of thin egg noodles and several pork and prawn wontons in a pork or chicken soup broth or noodle broth). Especially in takeout restaurants, wonton are often made with thicker dough skins, to withstand the rigors of delivery. 
 Regional variations [ edit ] 
 New York City [ edit ] 
 The  New York metropolitan area  is home to the largest Chinese population outside of Asia, [38] [39]  which also constitutes the largest metropolitan  Asian-American  group in the United States and the largest Asian-national metropolitan  diaspora  in the  Western Hemisphere . The  Chinese-American  population of the New York City metropolitan area was an estimated 893,697 as of 2017. [40] 
 Given the New York metropolitan area's continuing status as by far the leading gateway for Chinese immigrants to the United States, all popular styles of every Chinese regional cuisine have commensurately become ubiquitously accessible in  New York City , [41]  including  Hakka ,  Taiwanese ,  Shanghainese ,  Hunanese ,  Szechuan ,  Cantonese ,  Fujianese ,  Xinjiang ,  Zhejiang , and  Korean Chinese cuisine . Even the relatively obscure  Dongbei  style of cuisine indigenous to  Northeast China  is now available in  Flushing, Queens , [42]  as well as  Mongolian cuisine  and  Uyghur cuisine . [43] 
 The availability of regional variations of Chinese cuisine coming from so many  provinces of China  is most apparent in the city's  Chinatowns in Queens , particularly the  Flushing Chinatown (法拉盛華埠) , but is also notable in the city's  Chinatowns in Brooklyn  and  Manhattan .
 
 Kosher preparation [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Jewish American Chinese restaurant patronage 
 Kosher  preparation of Chinese food is also widely available in New York City, given the metropolitan area's large  Jewish  and particularly  Orthodox Jewish  populations.
 The perception that American Jews eat at Chinese restaurants on  Christmas Day  is documented in media. [44] [45] [46]  The tradition may have arisen from the lack of other open restaurants on Christmas Day, the close proximity of Jewish and Chinese immigrants to each other in New York City, and the absence of  dairy foods combined with meat .
 Kosher Chinese food is usually prepared in New York City, as well as in other large cities with Orthodox Jewish neighborhoods, under strict  rabbinical  supervision as a prerequisite for Kosher certification.
 
 Los Angeles County [ edit ] 
 Chinese populations in  Los Angeles  represent at least 21 of the 34 provincial-level administrative units of China, along with the largest population of Taiwanese-born immigrants outside of Taiwan, making greater Los Angeles home to a diverse population of Chinese people in the United States. [47] 
 Chinese-American cuisine in the  Greater Los Angeles area  is concentrated in Chinese  ethnoburbs  rather than traditional  Chinatowns . The oldest Chinese ethnoburb is Monterey Park, considered to be the nation's first suburban Chinatown. [48] 
 Although  Chinatown  in Los Angeles is still a significant commercial center for Chinese immigrants, the majority are centered in the  San Gabriel Valley  which is the one of the largest concentration of Asian-Americans in the country, stretching from  Monterey Park  into the cities of  Alhambra ,  San Gabriel ,  Rosemead ,  San Marino ,  South Pasadena ,  West Covina ,  Walnut ,  City of Industry ,  Diamond Bar ,  Arcadia , and  Temple City .
 The  Valley Boulevard corridor  is the main artery of Chinese restaurants in the San Gabriel Valley. Another hub with a significant Chinese population is  Irvine  ( Orange County ). More than 200,000 Chinese Americans live in the San Gabriel Valley alone, with over 67% being foreign born. [49]  The valley has become a brand-name tourist destination in China, although  droughts in California  are creating a difficult impact upon its  water security  and existential viability. [50]  Of the ten cities in the United States with the highest proportions of Chinese Americans, the top eight are located in the San Gabriel Valley, making it one of the largest concentrated hubs for Chinese Americans in North America. [51] 
 Some regional styles of Chinese cuisine include  Beijing ,  Chengdu ,  Chonqing ,  Dalian ,  Hangzhou ,  Hong Kong ,  Hunan ,  Mongolian  hot pot,  Nanjing ,  Shanghai ,  Shanxi ,  Shenyang ,  Wuxi ,  Xinjiang ,  Yunnan , and  Wuhan . [52] 
 
 San Francisco Bay Area [ edit ] 
 Since the early 1990s, many American Chinese restaurants influenced by  California cuisine  have opened in the  San Francisco Bay Area . The trademark dishes of American Chinese cuisine remain on the menu, but there is more emphasis on fresh vegetables, and the selection is vegetarian-friendly.
 This new cuisine has exotic ingredients like  mangos  and  portobello mushrooms .  Brown rice  is often offered as an alternative to  white rice .
 Some restaurants substitute grilled wheat flour  tortillas  for the rice pancakes in  mu   shu  dishes. This occurs even in some restaurants that would not otherwise be identified as California Chinese, both the more Westernized places and the more authentic places. There is a Mexican bakery that supplies some restaurants with thinner  tortillas  made for use with mu   shu. Mu   shu purists do not always react positively to this trend. [53] 
 In addition, many restaurants serving more native-style Chinese cuisines exist, due to the high numbers and proportion of ethnic Chinese in the San Francisco Bay Area.
 Restaurants specializing in Cantonese, Sichuanese, Hunanese, Northern Chinese, Shanghainese, Taiwanese, and Hong Kong traditions are widely available, as are more specialized restaurants such as seafood restaurants,  Hong Kong-style diners and cafes , also known as  Cha chaan teng  ( 茶餐廳 ;  chácāntīng ),  dim sum  teahouses, and  hot pot  restaurants. Many Chinatown areas also feature  Chinese bakeries ,  boba milk tea  shops,  roasted meat ,  vegetarian cuisine , and specialized dessert shops.
 Chop suey  is not widely available in  San Francisco , and the area's chow mein is different from  Midwestern  chow mein.
 
 Boston [ edit ] 
 Chinese cuisine in  Boston  results from a combination of economic and regional factors, in association with the wide Chinese  academic  scene. The growing  Boston Chinatown  accommodates  Chinese-owned bus lines  shuttling an increasing number of passengers to and from the numerous  Chinatowns in New York City , and this has led to some exchange between Boston Chinese cuisine and that in New York.
 A large immigrant  Fujianese  immigrant population has made a home in Boston, leading to  Fuzhou cuisine  being readily available there. An increasing  Vietnamese  population has also had an influence on Chinese cuisine in  Greater Boston .
 In addition, innovative dishes incorporating  chow mein  and  chop suey  as well as  locally farmed  produce and regionally procured  seafood  are found in Chinese as well as non-Chinese food in and around Boston. The selection of  Chinese bakery products  has increased markedly in the 21st century, although the range of choices in New York City remains supreme.
 Joyce Chen  introduced northern Chinese (Mandarin) and Shanghainese dishes to Boston in the 1950s, including  Peking duck ,  moo shu pork ,  hot and sour soup , and  potstickers , which she called "Peking Ravioli" or "Ravs". [54]  Her restaurants would be frequented by early pioneers of the  ARPANET , [55]  as well as celebrities such as  John Kenneth Galbraith ,  James Beard ,  Julia Child ,  Henry Kissinger ,  Beverly Sills , and  Danny Kaye . [56]  A former  Harvard University  president called her eating establishment "not merely a restaurant, but a cultural exchange center". [57]  In addition, her single-season  PBS  national television series  Joyce Chen Cooks  popularized some dishes which could be made at home, and she often encouraged using substitute ingredients when necessary.
 
 Philadelphia [ edit ] 
 The evolving American Chinese cuisine scene in  Philadelphia  has similarities with the situation in both New York City and Boston. As with Boston, Philadelphia is experiencing significant  Chinese immigration  from  New York City , 95 miles (153 km) to the north, [58]  and from China, the top country of birth by a significant margin for a new arrivals there . [59] 
 There is a growing Fujianese community in Philadelphia as well, and Fuzhou cuisine is readily available in the  Philadelphia Chinatown . Also, emerging  Vietnamese cuisine  in Philadelphia is contributing to evolution in local Chinese cuisine, with some Chinese-American restaurants adopting Vietnamese influences or recipes.
 
 Washington, D.C. [ edit ] 
 Although  Washington, D.C. 's Chinese community has not achieved as high of a local profile as that in other major cities along the  Mid-Atlantic United States , it is now growing, and rapidly so, due to the  gentrification  of  DC's Chinatown  and the status of Washington, D.C., as the  capital of the United States . The growing Chinese community in DC. and its suburbs has revitalized the influence of Chinese cuisine in the area.
 Washington, D.C.'s population is 1% Chinese, making them the largest single Asian ancestry in the city. However, the Chinese community in the DC area is no longer solely concentrated in the Chinatown, which is about 15% Chinese and 25% Asian, but is mostly concentrated throughout various towns in  suburban   Maryland  and  Virginia . The largest concentration of Chinese and Taiwanese in the DC area is in  Rockville, Maryland , in Montgomery county.
 In DC proper, there are Chinese-owned restaurants specializing in both Chinese American and authentic Chinese cuisine. Regional variations of Chinese cuisine that restaurants in DC specialize in include  Shanghainese cuisine ,  Cantonese cuisine ,  Uyghur cuisine ,  Mongolian cuisine , and  Sichuan cuisine . In the suburbs of DC in Maryland and Virginia, many of which have a much higher Chinese population than DC, regional variations present aside from the ones previously mentioned include  Hong Kong cuisine ,  Hunan cuisine ,  Shaanxi cuisine ,  Taiwanese cuisine , and  Yunnan cuisine . [ citation needed ] 
 
 Puerto Rico [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Puerto Rican Chinese cuisine 
 Hawaii [ edit ] 
 Hawaiian-Chinese food developed somewhat differently from Chinese cuisine in the  continental United States .
 Owing to the diversity of  Pacific  ethnicities in Hawaii and the history of the  Chinese influence in Hawaii , resident Chinese cuisine forms a component of the  cuisine of Hawaii , which is a  fusion  of different culinary traditions. Some Chinese dishes are typically served as part of  plate lunches  in Hawaii.
 The names of foods are different as well, such as  Manapua , from the Hawaiian contraction of "Mea ono pua'a" or "delicious  pork  item" from the dim sum  bao , though the meat is not necessarily pork.
 
 Other regions [ edit ] 
 Chow mein sandwich  — sandwich of chow mein and gravy ( Southeastern Massachusetts  and  Rhode Island ) 
 Chop suey sandwich  — sandwich of chicken chop suey on a hamburger bun ( North Shore  of  Massachusetts ) 
 St. Paul sandwich  —  egg foo young  patty in plain white  sandwich bread  ( St. Louis, Missouri ) 
 Springfield-style cashew chicken  — a style of cashew chicken that combines breaded deep- fried chicken ,  cashew nuts , and  oyster sauce  ( Springfield, Missouri ) 
 War/wor sue gai (boneless almond chicken) — bite-sized Southern-style fried chicken with yellow sauce ( Columbus, Ohio ) 
 Yaka mein  — Chinese-Creole food found in  New Orleans  that evolved from  beef noodle soup 
 Chain restaurants [ edit ] 
   A typical  Panda Express  meal: Kung Pao chicken, orange chicken, chow mein and steamed vegetables 
 China Coast  — closed in 1995; owned by  General Mills  Corporation, formerly 52 locations throughout the United States 
 Chinese Gourmet Express  — throughout the United States 
 Leeann Chin  — Minnesota and North Dakota; owned at one time by General Mills Corp. [60] 
 Manchu Wok  — throughout the United States and Canada, as well as Guam, Korea and Japan 
 Panda Express  — throughout North America (including Canada and Mexico), plus locations in Asia and the Middle East [61] 
 Pei Wei Asian Diner  — throughout the United States; formerly a subsidiary of P.F. Chang's 
 P. F. Chang's China Bistro  — throughout the United States; featuring California-Chinese fusion cuisine 
 Pick Up Stix  — California, Arizona, and Nevada 
 Stir Crazy  — Illinois, Missouri, Wisconsin, Minnesota, New York, Florida, Indiana, Texas, and Ohio 
 Popular culture [ edit ] 
 Many American films (for example:  The Godfather ;  Ghostbusters ;  The Lost Boys ;  The Naked Gun ;  Crossing Delancey ;  Paid in Full ; and  Inside Out ) involve scenes where Chinese take-out food is eaten from  oyster pails . A consistent choice of cuisine in all these cases, however, might just be an indicator of its popularity. A running gag in  Dallas  is  Cliff Barnes ' fondness for inexpensive Chinese take-out food, as opposed to his  nemesis   J. R. Ewing  frequenting fine restaurants. [62] 
 Among the numerous American television series and films that feature Chinese restaurants as a setting include   A Christmas Story ,  Seinfeld  (particularly the episode " The Chinese Restaurant "),  Sex and the City ,  Big Trouble in Little China ,  South Park ,  Year of the Dragon ,  Lethal Weapon 4 ,  Mickey Blue Eyes ,  Booty Call ,  Rush Hour 2 , and  Men in Black 3 . [63] [64]  In most cases, it is not an actual restaurant but a  movie set  that typifies the stereotypical American Chinese eatery, featuring "paper lanterns and intricate woodwork", with "numerous fish tanks and detailed [red] wallpaper [with gold designs]" and "golden dragons", plus " hanging ducks  in the window". [63] [64] 
 
 See also [ edit ] 
 Portals :   Food   United States   China 
 
 Fusion cuisine 
 Canadian Chinese cuisine 
 Australian Chinese cuisine 
 Chinese bakery products 
 Chinese cuisine 
 American cuisine 
 British Chinese cuisine 
 Indian Chinese cuisine 
 Fortune Cookie 
 List of Chinese restaurants 
 Oyster pail 
 
 Citations [ edit ] 
 
 
 ^  a   b   Wu, David Y. H.; Cheung, Sidney C. H. (2002).  The Globalization of Chinese Food . Great Britain: Curzon Press. p. 57.  ISBN   978-0-8248-2582-9 . 
 
 ^   Ch Six, "The Globalization of Chinese Food: The Early Stages", in J. A. G. Roberts.  China to Chinatown: Chinese Food in the West  (London: Reaktion, 2002)  ISBN   1-86189-133-4 . 
 
 ^   Liu, Yinghua; Jang, SooCheong (Shawn) (September 1, 2009). "Perceptions of Chinese restaurants in the U.S.: What affects customer satisfaction and behavioral intentions?".  International Journal of Hospitality Management .  28  (3): 338–348.  doi : 10.1016/j.ijhm.2008.10.008 . 
 
 ^   Smith, Peter.  "Was Chop Suey the Greatest Culinary Joke Ever Played?" .  Smithsonian Magazine . Retrieved  September 12,  2021 . 
 
 ^   Liu, Haiming (2015).  From Canton Restaurant to Panda Express: A History of Chinese Food in the United States  (First ed.). New Jersey: Rutgers University Press. p. 8.  ISBN   978-0-8135-7477-6 .  JSTOR   j.ctt16nzfbd . Retrieved  September 12,  2021 . 
 
 ^   Chen, Yong (2017).  "The Rise of Chinese Food in the United States" .  Oxford Research Encyclopedia of American History .  Oxford Research Encyclopedia of American History . Oxford Research Encyclopedia.  doi : 10.1093/acrefore/9780199329175.013.273 .  ISBN   978-0-19-932917-5 . Retrieved  September 12,  2021 . 
 
 ^   Smith, Andrew F. (October 1, 2009).  Eating history: 30 turning points in the making of American cuisine . Columbia University Press. p. 47.  ISBN   978-0-231-14092-8 . Retrieved  June 22,  2011 . 
 
 ^   Godoy, Maria (February 23, 2016).  "Lo Mein Loophole: How U.S. Immigration Law Fueled A Chinese Restaurant Boom" .  NPR . Retrieved  February 23,  2016 . 
 
 ^   Grant, Richard (September 2022).  "The First Chinese Restaurant in America Has a Savory—and Unsavory—History" .  Smithsonian Magazine . Retrieved  February 20,  2023 . 
 
 ^   Passy, Charles (August 26, 2015).  "Meet the Pilot Who Doubles as Block Island's Chinese-Food Delivery Guy" .  The Wall Street Journal . pp. A1 . Retrieved  August 26,  2015 . 
 
 ^   Andrew Coe  Chop Suey: A Cultural History of Chinese Food in the United States  (New York: Oxford University Press, 2009). 
 
 ^  a   b   Hayford (2011) , p. 11-12. 
 
 ^   China to Chinatown .  University of Chicago Press . Retrieved  December 10,  2015 . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   Pio Kuo, Chunghao.  "Taiwanese Immigrants Spark a Golden Age for Chinese Food" .  www.nyfoodstory.com . NY Food Story . Retrieved  April 29,  2020 . 
 
 ^   "Chinese Immigrants Chase Opportunity in America" . NPR Morning Edition. November 19, 2007 . Retrieved  July 9,  2011 . 
 
 ^   Mindlin, Alex (December 12, 2004).  "The Kings of Sweet and Sour" .  The New York Times .  Archived  from the original on September 28, 2017 . Retrieved  January 2,  2020 . 
 
 ^   "Sweet & Sour: A Look at the History of Chinese Food in the United States" .  Smithsonian Asian Pacific American Center . Smithsonian National Museum of American History. Archived from  the original  on April 14, 2013 . Retrieved  March 20,  2013 . 
 
 ^   Kohnhorst, Adam (June 25, 2020).  "The Legend of American Chinese Food: 8 Dishes and Their Authentic Counterparts" .  RADII | Stories from the center of China’s youth culture . Retrieved  January 29,  2022 . 
 
 ^   Hom (1997) . 
 
 ^   Solomon, Charmaine (April 15, 2006).  The Complete Asian Cookbook . p. 281.  ISBN   9780804837576 . 
 
 ^   Parkinson, Rhonda.  "Regional Chinese Cuisine" . About.com. Archived from  the original  on February 17, 2007 . Retrieved  July 8,  2014 . 
 
 ^   Ashe, Stephanie.  "The 9 biggest differences between Chinese and American Diets" .  Insider . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   Zenouzi, Darian (March 27, 2018).  "American Chinese Food vs Chinese Chinese Food" .  The Odyssey Online . Retrieved  January 29,  2022 . 
 
 ^   Chen, Yong (2017). "The Rise of Chinese Food in the United States".  Oxford Research Encyclopedia of American History .  Oxford Research Encyclopedia of American History . Oxford Research Encyclopedia.  ISBN   978-0-19-932917-5 . 
 
 ^   "Ming.com" .  Ming.com . Retrieved  April 1,  2021 . 
 
 ^   " Chef Ming Tsai wants you to have a Chinese friend ".  CNN . January 19, 2011. Retrieved on January 19, 2011. 
 
 ^   Jung (2010) , p.  197 etc. . 
 
 ^   "History and Culture: Chinese Food" . New University. June 2, 2008 . Retrieved  April 16,  2018 . 
 
 ^   "Beef and Broccoli | Can You Stay For Dinner?" . Canyoustayfordinner.com. June 30, 2010 . Retrieved  April 16,  2018 . 
 
 ^   "The Best Easy Beef And Broccoli Stir-Fry Recipe - Food.com - 99476" . Archived from  the original  on September 10, 2012. 
 
 ^   "Solving a Riddle Wrapped in a Mystery Inside a Cookie" .  The New York Times . January 16, 2008. 
 
 ^   Fried Wonton ,  About.com 
 
 ^   Fried Wontons Recipe ,  BlogChef.net 
 
 ^   Fried Wontons Recipe ,  ThaiTable.com 
 
 ^   Fried Wontons (Zhá Yúntūn) ,  Chow.com 
 
 ^   Chinese New Year: Fried Wontons ,  FromAway.com 
 
 ^   Fried Wontons Recipe ,  RasaMalaysia.com 
 
 ^   Yee, Vivian (February 22, 2015).  "Indictment of New York Officer Divides Chinese-Americans" .  The New York Times . Archived from  the original  on January 1, 2022 . Retrieved  February 23,  2015 . 
 
 ^   "Chinese New Year 2012 in Flushing" . QueensBuzz.com. January 25, 2012 . Retrieved  February 23,  2015 . 
 
 ^   "Selected Population Profile in the United States 2017 American Community Survey 1-Year Estimates New York-Newark, NY-NJ-CT-PA CSA Chinese alone" .  United States Census Bureau . Archived from  the original  on February 14, 2020 . Retrieved  January 27,  2019 . 
 
 ^   Moskin, Julia (July 30, 2008).  "Let the Meals Begin: Finding Beijing in Flushing" .  The New York Times . Retrieved  November 26,  2017 . 
 
 ^   Moskin, Julia (February 9, 2010).  "Northeast China Branches Out in Flushing" .  The New York Times . Archived from  the original  on September 6, 2012 . Retrieved  December 17,  2021 . 
 
 ^   Falkowitz, Max (August 25, 2018).  "Food Outside the U.S. Open Gates" .  The New York Times . Archived from  the original  on August 26, 2018 . Retrieved  December 17,  2021 . 
 
 ^   "Why Do American Jews Eat Chinese Food on Christmas? — The Atlantic" . Theatlantic.com. December 23, 2014 . Retrieved  April 16,  2018 . 
 
 ^   " 'Tis the season: Why do Jews eat Chinese food on Christmas? - Jewish World Features - Israel News" .  Haaretz . December 24, 2014 . Retrieved  April 16,  2018 . 
 
 ^   "Movies and Chinese Food: The Jewish Christmas Tradition | Isaac Zablocki" . Huffingtonpost.com. December 6, 2017 . Retrieved  April 16,  2018 . 
 
 ^   Wei, Clarissa (April 28, 2017).  "The Best Chinese Restaurants in LA, According to Chinese People" . 
 
 ^   "Monterey Park : Nation's 1st Suburban Chinatown" .  Los Angeles Times . April 6, 1987. 
 
 ^   Radio, Southern California Public (February 21, 2018).  "Two-thirds of San Gabriel Valley's Asian-Americans are immigrants" .  Southern California Public Radio . 
 
 ^   "San Gabriel becomes brand-name destination for Chinese tourists" .  Los Angeles Times . February 13, 2014. 
 
 ^   "History of Asians in the San Gabriel Valley – IMDiversity" .  imdiversity.com . 
 
 ^   "Jonathan Gold's best Chinese restaurants in L.A., by regional cuisine" .  Los Angeles Times . February 15, 2013. 
 
 ^   "Mu Shu Tortilla Flats: Chinese restaurant needs better mu shu wraps" .  AsianWeek . February 27, 2004. Archived from  the original  on October 7, 2007.  Everything was well and good with one huge exception: The mu shu wrappers were flour tortillas! 
 
 ^   Mennies, Leah.  "The Story of Peking Ravioli" .  Lucky Peach . Archived from  the original  on March 17, 2015. 
 
 ^   Hafner, K. , & Lyon, M. (1996).  Where wizards stay up late: The origins of the Internet.  New York: Simon and Schuster, p. 112. 
 
 ^   "Joyce Chen, 76, U.S. Popularizer Of Mandarin Cuisine" .  New York Times . Associated Press. August 26, 1994 . Retrieved  April 12,  2019 . 
 
 ^   Robertson, Rain.  "Joyce Chen" .  Culinary Cambridge . Cambridge Historical Society. Archived from  the original  on April 10, 2015 . Retrieved  June 12,  2013 . 
 
 ^   Katz, Matt (July 20, 2018).  "Leaving New York to Find the American Dream in Philadelphia" .  The New York Times . Archived from  the original  on January 1, 2022 . Retrieved  April 18,  2019 . 
 
 ^   Gammage, Jeff (May 10, 2019).  "Welcome to Philly: Percentage of foreign-born city residents has doubled since 1990" .  The Philadelphia Inquirer . Retrieved  May 10,  2019 .  China is, far and away, the primary sending country, with 22,140 city residents who make up about 11 percent of the foreign-born population, according to a Pew Charitable Trusts analysis of Census data. Next is the Dominican Republic with 13,792, followed by Jamaica, 13,500; India, 11,382; and Vietnam, 10,132...About 230,000 Philadelphians are foreign-born. More than a quarter of residents are immigrants or have a foreign-born parent, Pew reported, and 23 percent speak a foreign language at home. 
 
 ^   "How a Chinese restaurant in America's Midwest won Sean Connery's heart" .  Public Radio International . Retrieved  June 5,  2017 . 
 
 ^   "Panda Restaurant Group, Inc. - Manager of Panda Express, Panda Inn and Hibachi-San" . Archived from  the original  on May 18, 2013 . Retrieved  April 21,  2013 . 
 
 ^   Chakraborty, Sucheta (February 3, 2018).  "AN AMERICAN STORY" .  The Hindu . 
 
 ^  a   b   "Why Everyone Films At The Same Damn New York Chinese Restaurant" . Scouting NY. January 14, 2013. 
 
 ^  a   b   "10 Binge-Worthy Movies to Watch With Chinese Take-Out" . 
 
 
 References and further reading [ edit ] 
 Studies [ edit ] 
 Chen, Yong (2014).  Chop Suey, USA: The Story of Chinese Food in America . New York: Columbia University Press.  ISBN   9780231168922 . 
 Coe, Andrew (2009).  Chop Suey: A Cultural History of Chinese Food in the United States . New York: Oxford University Press.  ISBN   9780195331073 . 
 Hayford, Charles (2011).  "Who's Afraid of Chop Suey?"   (PDF) .  Education About Asia .  16  (3): 7–12. Archived from  the original   (PDF)  on June 17, 2012.  Free download: 
 Jung, John (2010).  Sweet and Sour: Life in Chinese Family Restaurants . Cypress, CA: Yin and Yang Press.  ISBN   9780615345451 . 
 Lee, Jennifer 8.  (2008).  The Fortune Cookie Chronicles: Adventures in the World of Chinese Food . New York: Twelve.  ISBN   9780446580076 . 
 Roberts, J. A. G. (2002).  China to Chinatown: Chinese Food in the West . London: Reaktion.  ISBN   1861891334 . 
 Wu, David Y. H.; Cheung, Sidney C. H. (2002).  The Globalization of Chinese Food . Richmond, Surrey: Curzon.  ISBN   0700714030 . 
 Cookbooks [ edit ] 
 Sara Bosse,  Onoto Watanna , with an Introduction by  Jacqueline M. Newman .  Chinese-Japanese Cook Book.  (1914; reprinted, Bedford, MA: Applewood Books,  2006).   ISBN   1-55709-371-7 .  ISBN   978-1-55709-371-4 . 
 Hom, Ken (1997).  Easy Family Recipes from a Chinese American Childhood . New York: Knopf.  ISBN   0-394-58758-8 . 
 Eileen Yin-Fei Lo and Alexandra Grablewski.  The Chinese Kitchen: Recipes, Techniques and Ingredients, History, and Memories from America's Leading Authority on Chinese Cooking.  (New York: William Morrow, 1999).   ISBN   0-688-15826-9 . 
 External links [ edit ] 
 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons has media related to  American Chinese cuisine . 
 
 "Chinese food in America History" ( The Food Timeline )  The Food Timeline: history notes--restaurants, chefs & foodservice 
 Imogen Lim Restaurant Menu Collection: American menus . Vancouver Island University Library. 
 Harley J. Spiller Collection of Chinese Restaurant Menus   University of Toronto , Scarborough Library 
 v t e Chinese American topics Related groups 
 Chinese Americans 
 American-born Chinese 
 Asian American 
 Fuzhou Americans 
 Hakka Americans 
 Hoklo Americans 
 Hong Kong Americans 
 Hyphenated American 
 History 
 Chinese American history 
 U.S. immigration policy toward the People's Republic of China 
 One Hundred Years: History of the Chinese in America 
 by location 
 California
 Los Angeles 
 San Francisco 
 Colorado 
 Hawaii 
 Illinois ( Chicago ) 
 Massachusetts ( Boston ) 
 Michigan ( Detroit ) 
 Mississippi ( Mississippi Delta ) 
 Missouri ( St. Louis ) 
 New York ( New York City ) 
 Puerto Rico 
 Texas 
 Dallas-Fort Worth 
 Houston 
 Washington State ( Seattle ) 
 
 Anti-Chinese  discrimination Legislation 
 Anti-Chinese legislation 
 Anti-Coolie Act 
 Chinese Exclusion Act 
 Geary Act 
 Immigration Act of 1924 
 Cable Act 
 Magnuson Act 
 Immigration and Nationality Act of 1965 
 China Initiative 
 Events 
 Chinese Labor Strike of 1867 
 Chinese massacre of 1871 
 San Francisco riot of 1877 
 Tape v. Hurley  (1884) 
 Attack on Squak Valley Chinese laborers, 1885 
 Rock Springs massacre  (1885) 
 Tacoma riot of 1885 
 Seattle riot of 1886 
 Yick Wo v. Hopkins  (1886) 
 Hells Canyon massacre  (1887) 
 United States v. Wong Kim Ark  (1898) 
 Pacific Coast race riots of 1907 
 Bellingham riots  (1907) 
 Killing of Vincent Chin  (1982) 
 Killing of Akai Gurley  (2016) 
 Chinatowns 
 Atlanta 
 Austin 
 Baltimore 
 Boston 
 Quincy 
 Chicago 
 West Argyle Street 
 Cleveland 
 Asiatown 
 Dallas-Fort Worth 
 Richardson 
 Denver 
 Detroit 
 Honolulu 
 Houston 
 East Downtown 
 Las Vegas 
 Locke, California 
 Los Angeles 
 San Gabriel Valley 
 Florida 
 North Miami Beach 
 Montville, Connecticut 
 New Jersey 
 Edison 
 Newark 
 New Orleans 
 New York City 
 Manhattan 
 Brooklyn 
 Queens 
 Oklahoma City 
 Philadelphia 
 Phoenix 
 Pittsburgh 
 Squirrel Hill 
 Portland, Maine 
 Portland, Oregon 
 Providence, Rhode Island 
 Salem, Oregon 
 St. Louis 
 Salt Lake City 
 San Diego 
 San Francisco Bay 
 San Francisco Chinatown 
 Oakland 
 Richmond District 
 Sunset District 
 San Jose 
 Seattle-Tacoma 
 Seattle 
 Tacoma 
 Spokane, Washington 
 Washington, D.C. 
 Rockville, Maryland 
 Winnemucca, Nevada 
 Culture 
 Food 
 American Chinese cuisine 
 Film 
 American Chinese films 
 Terminology 
 Chinaman's chance 
 Jook-sing 
 Events 
 Love boat 
 Education 
 Chinese school 
 Confucius Institute 
 Transportation 
 Chinatown bus lines 
 Museums 
 Museum of Chinese in America 
 Chinese American Museum 
 Chinese Historical Society of America 
 Kam Wah Chung & Co. Museum 
 Wing Luke Museum 
 Wo Hing Museum 
 Organizations 
 List of Chinese American associations 
 Chinese American Citizens Alliance 
 Chinese American church 
 Chinese Community Centre 
 Chinese Consolidated Benevolent Association 
 Chinese Historical Society of Southern California 
 Chinese Society Halls on Maui 
 Ying On Association 
 Chinese Staff and Workers' Association 
 Chinese for Affirmative Action 
 Committee of 100 
 Organization of Chinese Americans 
 Bing Kong Tong 
 Hip Sing Association 
 Banks 
 Cathay Bank 
 United International Bank 
 Global Commerce Bank 
 East West Bank 
 Others 
 Lists 
 List of Chinese Americans 
 List of U.S. cities with significant Chinese-American populations 
 
 v t e Cuisine of the United States Historical 
 Cuisine of the Thirteen Colonies 
 Thanksgiving dinner 
 Regional General 
 List of regional dishes of the United States 
 List of regional beverages of the United States 
 Northeast 
 Mid-Atlantic 
 New Jersey 
 New York
 New York City 
 Pennsylvania
 Allentown 
 Philadelphia 
 New England 
 South 
 Appalachia 
 Floribbean 
 Kentucky 
 Louisiana
 Creole 
 New Orleans 
 Lowcountry 
 Texas 
 Barbecue in Texas 
 Tex-Mex 
 Midwest 
 Chicago 
 Cincinnati 
 Kansas City-style barbecue 
 Omaha 
 St. Louis 
 Wisconsin 
 West 
 California 
 Southwestern 
 New Mexican 
 Pacific Northwestern 
 Hawaii 
 Territories 
 Puerto Rico 
 Ethnic 
 Cajun 
 American Cambodian 
 American Chinese 
 Greek American 
 Soul food 
 Mexican 
 Native American 
 New Mexican (Neomexicano and Pueblo) 
 Pennsylvania Dutch 
 Italian American 
 Tejano 
 Tlingit 
 Filipino-American 
 American Jewish 
 List articles 
 American foods 
 American breads 
 American cheeses 
 American desserts 
 American regional and fusion cuisines 
 American sandwiches 
 American breakfast foods 
 Foods of the Southern United States 
 Soul foods and dishes 
 Miscellaneous 
 Barbecue 
 Christmas food 
 Fast food 
 Drinks 
 Sweet tea 
 Root beer 
 Coca-Cola 
 Egg cream 
 Milkshake 
 Shirley Temple 
 Italian soda 
 Pepsi 
 American tea culture 
   Category: American cuisine 
 v t e Cuisines Continental 
 African 
 North 
 West 
 list 
 Americas 
 Caribbean 
 North 
 South 
 list 
 Asian 
 Caucasian 
 Central 
 Indian subcontinent 
 Levantine 
 list 
 European 
 Balkan 
 Central 
 Eastern 
 list 
 Oceanic 
 Intercontinental
 Global 
 Latin American 
 Mediterranean 
 Middle Eastern 
 National  and regional 
 Afghan 
 Albanian 
 Algerian 
 American 
 Californian 
 Floribbean 
 Hawaiian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Lowcountry (South Carolina) 
 New England 
 New Mexico 
 Pacific Northwest 
 Pennsylvania Dutch 
 Puerto Rican 
 Southern US 
 Southwest US 
 Texas 
 Angolan 
 Argentine 
 Armenian 
 Australian 
 Austrian 
 Azerbaijani 
 Bahraini 
 Bangladeshi 
 Barbadian 
 Belarusian 
 Belgian 
 Belizean 
 Beninese 
 Bhutanese 
 Bolivian 
 Bosnian-Herzegovinian 
 Botswana 
 Brazilian 
 British 
 Channel Islands 
 English 
 Gibraltarian 
 Northern Irish 
 Saint Helena 
 Scottish 
 Welsh 
 Bruneian 
 Bulgarian 
 Burkinabé 
 Burmese 
 Burundian 
 Cambodian 
 Cameroonian 
 Canadian 
 Acadian 
 Québécois 
 Central African Republic 
 Chadian 
 Chilean 
 Chinese 
 Cantonese 
 Hong Kong 
 Macanese 
 Tibetan 
 Xinjiang 
 Colombian 
 Congolese 
 Corsican 
 Croatian 
 Cuban 
 Cypriot 
 Czech 
 Danish 
 Faroese 
 Greenlandic 
 Djiboutian 
 Dominican 
 Dominican Republic 
 Dutch 
 East Timorese 
 Ecuadorian 
 Egyptian 
 Emirati 
 Equatorial Guinean 
 Eritrean 
 Estonian 
 Ethiopian 
 Fijian 
 Filipino 
 Finnish 
 French 
 Occitan 
 French Guianan 
 Gabonese 
 Gambian 
 Georgian 
 German 
 Ghanaian 
 Greek 
 Cretan 
 Epirotic 
 Greek Macedonian 
 Heptanesean 
 Guatemalan 
 Guinea-Bissauan 
 Guinean 
 Haitian 
 Honduran 
 Hungarian 
 Icelandic 
 Indian 
 Arunachalese 
 Assamese 
 Bengali 
 Bihari 
 Goan 
 Gujarati 
 Himachal Pradesh 
 Kashmiri 
 Jharkhandi 
 Karnataka 
 Kerala 
 Maharashtrian 
 Manipuri 
 Meghalayan 
 Mizo 
 Naga 
 Odia 
 Punjabi 
 Rajasthani 
 Sikkimese 
 Sindhi 
 Tamil 
 Telangana 
 Telugu 
 Indonesian 
 Acehnese 
 Balinese 
 Banjar 
 Batak 
 Betawi 
 Indo 
 Javanese 
 Madurese 
 Makassar 
 Minahasan 
 Minangkabau 
 Palembangese 
 Sundanese 
 Iranian 
 Iraqi 
 Irish 
 Israeli 
 Italian 
 Abruzzese 
 Ligurian 
 Lombard 
 Lucanian 
 Neapolitan 
 Roman 
 Sardinian 
 Sicilian 
 Venetian 
 Ivorian 
 Jamaican 
 Japanese 
 Okinawan 
 Jordanian 
 Kazakh 
 Kenyan 
 Korean 
 North Korean 
 South Korean 
 Kosovan 
 Kuwaiti 
 Kyrgyz 
 Lao 
 Latvian 
 Lebanese 
 Lesotho 
 Liberian 
 Libyan 
 Liechtensteiner 
 Lithuanian 
 Luxembourg 
 Macedonian 
 Malagasy 
 Malawian 
 Malaysian 
 Sabahan 
 Sarawakian 
 Maldivian 
 Malian 
 Maltese 
 Mauritanian 
 Mauritian 
 Mexican 
 Moldovan 
 Monégasque 
 Mongolian 
 Montenegrin 
 Moroccan 
 Mozambican 
 Namibian 
 Nauruan 
 Nepalese 
 New Zealand 
 Nicaraguan 
 Niger 
 Nigerian 
 Niuean 
 Norwegian 
 Omani 
 Pakistani 
 Palestinian 
 Panamanian 
 Peruvian 
 Polish 
 Portuguese 
 Qatari 
 Romanian  (incl.  Transylvanian Saxon ) 
 Russian 
 Bashkir 
 Chechen 
 Circassian 
 Komi 
 Mordovian 
 Sakha 
 Tatar 
 Udmurt 
 Yamal 
 Rwandan 
 Saint Lucian 
 Salvadoran 
 Sammarinese 
 São Tomé and Príncipe 
 Saudi Arabian 
 Senegalese 
 Serbian 
 Seychellois 
 Sierra Leonean 
 Singaporean 
 Slovak 
 Slovenian 
 Somali 
 South African 
 Spanish 
 Andalusian 
 Asturian 
 Balearic 
 Basque 
 Canarian 
 Cantabrian 
 Catalan 
 Extremaduran 
 Galician 
 Manchegan 
 Valencian 
 Sri Lankan 
 Sudanese 
 Swazi 
 Swedish 
 Swiss 
 Syrian 
 Taiwanese 
 Tajik 
 Tanzanian 
 Zanzibari 
 Thai 
 Togolese 
 Tunisian 
 Turkish 
 Turkmen 
 Trinidadian and Tobagonian 
 Ugandan 
 Ukrainian 
 Uruguayan 
 Uzbek 
 Venezuelan 
 Vietnamese 
 Western Saharan 
 Yemeni 
 Zambian 
 Zimbabwean 
 Ethnic 
 Ainu 
 Arab 
 Indonesian 
 Aromanian 
 Assyrian 
 Balochi 
 Berber 
 Cajun 
 Chinese 
 American 
 Canadian 
 Chifa 
 Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Crimean Tatar 
 Greek American 
 Hazaragi 
 Indian 
 Anglo-Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Indigenous American 
 Inuit 
 Italian American 
 Kurdish 
 Livonian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Malay 
 Ossetian 
 Parsi 
 Pashtun 
 Peranakan 
 Romani 
 Sámi 
 Soul food 
 Sylheti 
 Transylvanian Saxon 
 Yup'ik 
 Religious 
 Buddhist 
 Christian 
 Goan Catholic 
 Mangalorean Catholic 
 Mennonite 
 Hindu 
 Islamic 
 Chinese 
 Ital 
 Jain 
 Jewish 
 American 
 Ashkenazi 
 Bukharan 
 Ethiopian 
 Mizrahi 
 Sephardic 
 Syrian 
 Ritual slaughter 
 Sikh 
 Historical 
 Ancient Egyptian 
 Ancient Greek 
 Ancient Israelite 
 Ancient Roman 
 Antebellum America 
 Aztec 
 Byzantine 
 Early modern European 
 Historical Chinese 
 Historical Indian subcontinent 
 Historical North Indian and Pakistani 
 History of agriculture 
 History of alcoholic drinks 
 History of bread 
 History of seafood 
 History of vegetarianism 
 Historical Argentine 
 Historical Japanese 
 Inca 
 Mayan 
 Muisca 
 Mughal 
 Medieval 
 Ottoman 
 Peasant 
 Soviet 
 Thirteen Colonies 
 Styles 
 Classique 
 Fast food 
 Fusion 
 New American 
 Eurasian 
 Haute 
 Molecular gastronomy 
 Note by Note 
 Nouvelle 
 Lists 
 List of cuisines 
 List of historical cuisines 
 Lists of prepared foods 
 Related 
 Cookbook 
 Cooking 
 Culinary arts 
 Drink 
 Food 
 history 
 Diet 
 Meal preparation 
 
   Food portal 
   Drink portal 
   Category 
   Commons 
   Cookbook 
   WikiProject 
   Outline 
 
  
NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw2305
Cached time: 20230311123016
Cache expiry: 1814400
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc, no‐toc‐conversion]
CPU time usage: 1.214 seconds
Real time usage: 1.464 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 5967/1000000
Post‐expand include size: 294587/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 5140/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 16/100
Expensive parser function count: 14/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 216687/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.704/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 26026146/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/400
 
 
Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1117.578      1 -total
 30.04%  335.739      1 Template:Reflist
 12.71%  142.048      1 Template:Lang
 10.21%  114.156     14 Template:Cite_book
  9.99%  111.612      2 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  9.06%  101.248      1 Template:Cuisine_of_China
  8.50%   94.995     26 Template:Cite_web
  8.17%   91.262      8 Template:Navbox
  6.74%   75.322      4 Template:Sfnb
  6.48%   72.438     16 Template:Cite_news
 
  Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:idhash:1558-0!canonical and timestamp 20230311123014 and revision id 1142016094. Rendering was triggered because: page-view
  
 esi <esi:include src="/esitest-fa8a495983347898/content" />  
 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=American_Chinese_cuisine&oldid=1142016094 " 
 Categories :  American Chinese cuisine Chinese-American history Chinese-American culture Chinese cuisine Hawaiian cuisine Hidden categories:  Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use mdy dates from September 2021 Use American English from February 2019 All Wikipedia articles written in American English All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2021 Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2015 All articles containing potentially dated statements Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from December 2021 Articles containing traditional Chinese-language text Articles containing Yue Chinese-language text Commons category link is on Wikidata 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  This page was last edited on 28 February 2023, at 02:15  (UTC) . 
 Text is available under the  Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0 ;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the  Terms of Use  and  Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the  Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. 
 
 
 Privacy policy 
 About Wikipedia 
 Disclaimers 
 Contact Wikipedia 
 Mobile view 
 Developers 
 Statistics 
 Cookie statement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
