
 
 
 Jump to content 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle sidebar 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Create account Log in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Personal tools 
 
 
 
 
   Create account   Log in 
 
 
 
 
		Pages for logged out editors  learn more 
 
 
 Contributions Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Navigation 
 
 
 Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate 
 
 
 
 
 Contribute 
 
 
 Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file 
 
 
 
 
 Tools 
 
 
 What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item 
 
 
 
 
 Print/export 
 
 
 Download as PDF Printable version 
 
 
 
 
 In other projects 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons Wikibooks Wikivoyage 
 
 
 
 
 Languages 
 
 On this Wikipedia the language links are at the top of the page across from the article title.  Go to top . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CentralNotice  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Contents 
 move to sidebar 
 hide 
 
 
 
 
 (Top) 
 
 
 
 
 
 1 History 
 
 
				Toggle History subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 1.1 Native Americans origins: American cuisine before 1600 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.1.1 Fish and crustaceans 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.1.2 Cooking methods 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.2 Colonial period 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.2.1 Common ingredients 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.2.2 Livestock and game 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.2.2.1 Fats and oils 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.2.2.2 Alcoholic drinks 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.2.2.3 Southern variations 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.3 Post-colonial cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.4 19th century American farmhouse 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.5 20th century 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.6 Ethnic influences 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.7 New American 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.8 21st century 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 Regional cuisines 
 
 
				Toggle Regional cuisines subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 2.1 Northeast 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.1.1 New England 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.1.2 Delaware Valley and Mid-Atlantic 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.2 Midwest 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.3 Southern United States 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.3.1 Early history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.3.2 Common features 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.3.3 Desserts 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.3.4 Cajun and Creole Cuisine of Louisiana 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.3.5 African American influences 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.3.6 Florida cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.3.7 Other small game 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.4 Cuisine in the West 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.4.1 Northwest 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.4.2 Southwest and Southern California 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.5 Pacific and Hawaiian cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.6 Common dishes found on a regional level 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 Ethnicity-specific and immigrant influence 
 
 
				Toggle Ethnicity-specific and immigrant influence subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 3.1 Early ethnic influences 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.2 Later ethnic and immigrant influence 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4 Other popular foods 
 
 
				Toggle Other popular foods subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 4.1 Fast food 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.2 Desserts 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5 Influential figures and American cuisine on television 
 
 
				Toggle Influential figures and American cuisine on television subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 5.1 Influential figures 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5.2 Regional cuisine chefs 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6 See also 
 
 
				Toggle See also subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 6.1 Types 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6.2 Regional 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6.3 Ethnic 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6.4 Other 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 7 References 
 
 
				Toggle References subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 7.1 Works cited 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8 Further reading 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 9 External links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
						Toggle the table of contents
					 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle the table of contents 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 American cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 34 languages 
 
 
 
 العربية Azərbaycanca Čeština Dansk Deutsch Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Jawa ქართული Қазақша Latina Lietuvių Македонски Bahasa Melayu 日本語 Polski Português Русский Simple English Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 
 Edit links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Article Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 English 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 More 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
 
 
 
 
 Culinary traditions of the United States 
 For other uses, see  American cuisine (disambiguation) . 
 
 
 Part of a series on American cuisine 
 Regional cuisines 
 Northeastern 
 
 New England 
 New Jersey 
 New York City 
 Philadelphia 
 Midwestern 
 
 Chicago 
 Michigan 
 North Dakota 
 Omaha 
 St. Louis 
 Wisconsin 
 Mid-Atlantic 
 
 Baltimore 
 Pittsburgh 
 Southern  ( list ) 
 
 Atlanta 
 Cajun 
 Floribbean 
 Kentucky 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Lowcountry 
 Houston 
 New Orleans 
 Texas 
 Tex-Mex 
 Western 
 
 California 
 California fusion 
 Los Angeles 
 Pacific Northwest 
 Rocky Mountain 
 Southwestern 
 
 New Mexican 
 Other 
 
 Hawaiian 
 Military rations 
 Puerto Rican 
 Roadkill 
 Tailgate party 
 
 History 
 Thirteen Colonies 
 Antebellum America 
 Chuckwagon 
 Culinary Revolution 
 
 Ingredients and foods 
 List of American foods 
 Apple 
 Beef 
 Blueberry 
 Chocolate 
 Collard greens 
 Corn 
 Okra 
 Pecan 
 Potato 
 Pumpkin 
 Sunflower seed 
 Tomato 
 Turkey 
 Vanilla 
 
 Styles 
 Barbecue in the United States 
 Kansas City 
 Memphis 
 North Carolina 
 Santa Maria 
 St. Louis 
 Texas 
 Fast food 
 Fusion 
 New American 
 Pizza in the United States 
 
 Ethnic and cultural 
 American Chinese 
 Filipino-American cuisine 
 Greek-American 
 Indian 
 Italian-American 
 Japanese 
 Jewish 
 Mexican-American 
 Native American 
 Pennsylvania Dutch 
 Soul food 
 Tlingit 
 
 Holidays and festivals 
 Fourth of July 
 Christmas 
 Thanksgiving 
 
   United States portal 
   Food portal v t e 
 This article is part of a series on the Culture of the  United States 
Society 
 History 
 Language 
 People 
 race and ethnicity 
 Religion 
 
Arts and literature 
 Architecture 
 Art 
 Dance 
 Fashion 
 Literature 
 comics 
 poetry 
 Music 
 Sculpture 
 Theater 
 
Other 
 Cuisine 
 Festivals 
 Folklore 
 Media 
 newspapers 
 radio 
 cinema 
 TV 
 Internet 
 Americana 
 Mythology 
 Sports 
 
 Symbols 
 Flag 
 Great Seal 
 Monuments 
 Motto 
 Anthem 
 Bird 
 World Heritage Sites 
 
 United States portal v t e 
 American cuisine  consists of the cooking style and traditional dishes prepared in the  United States . It has been significantly influenced by Europeans, indigenous Native Americans, Africans, Asians, Pacific Islanders, and many other cultures and traditions. Principal influences on American cuisine are  Native American , and immigrant heritages such as  American Chinese ,  Greek American ,  Italian American ,  Cajun ,  New Mexican ,  Louisiana Creole ,  Pennsylvania Dutch ,  soul food ,  Tex-Mex , and  Tlingit .
 American cuisine saw significant expansion during the 19th and 20th centuries, primarily due to the influx of immigrants from different nations. This has allowed for the current rich diversity in food dishes throughout the country. [1] [2] [3] [4] [5]  This was driven in part by the many chefs and television personalities who contributed to the rise of the culinary arts in America.
 
 
 History [ edit ] 
 Native Americans origins: American cuisine before 1600 [ edit ] 
 See also:  Native American cuisine 
   Diorama of  Iroquois  planting the " Three Sister " crops; squash, maize and climbing beans 
 Early Native Americans utilized a number of cooking methods in early American cuisine that have been blended with the methods of early Europeans to form the basis of what is now American cuisine.
 Nearly all regions and subregions of the present-day cuisine have roots in the foodways of Native Americans, who lived in tribes numbering in the thousands. Prior to 1600, native peoples lived off the land in very diverse bioregions and had done so for thousands of years, often living a nomadic life where their diet changed with the season.
 Many practiced a form of agriculture revolving around the  Three Sisters , the rotation of  beans ,  maize , and  squash  as staples of their diet. In the East, this was documented as early as the 1620s in  Of Plimoth Plantation,  evidenced by the pages  William Bradford  wrote regarding  Squanto , who showed them the traditional regional method of burying a fish or eel in a mound with seeds for maize to improve the soil; this itself is also part of the widely practiced phenomenon of  companion planting . [6] [7] 
 Other tribes were practicing an iteration of using the same three staples, evidenced by 100 years of archaeological investigations in every region.
 Wild game  was equally a staple of nearly every tribe: generally, deer, elk, and bison were staples as were rabbits and hare.  The  Cherokee  of the Southern Appalachians used blowguns made of an indigenous type of bamboo to hunt squirrels. [8] 
 Northern tribes like the  Ojibwe  of what is now the state of Michigan and the peoples of the  Wabanaki  of what is now the state of Maine would stalk and hunt moose, whereas their Southern counterparts, like the  Choctaw  or  Catawba , hunted  snapping turtles  and other testudines, [9] [10]   possums , [11] [12]  and young alligators [13]  in the subtropical swamps of Louisiana and South Carolina.
 Many tribes would preserve their meat in the form of  pemmican , needed on long journeys or to survive harsh winters.
 
 Fish and crustaceans [ edit ] 
   Blue crab  was used on the eastern and southern coast of what is now the U.S. mainland. 
 As with  hunted game , the  biome  in which one lived often dictated what was available to catch. For example, the  Apache  and  Navajo  peoples of the Southwest, whose territories each would have included swathes of  New Mexico  and  Arizona , generally do not eat fish because in both cultures it is taboo, as well as often inconvenient.
 The Navajo believe that fish have a part in the story of creation, [14]  the Apache were in general afraid of water since they associated it with thunder, [15]  and the arid desert climate made fish a rarity. [16] 
 However, in the culture of the  Lenape , the tribe that originally lived in  New Jersey , on the  Delaware River , and the area that now comprises  New York City ,  fish  and  shellfish  were a staple in their diet and it was such a revered part of the culture that there is a documented and still-practiced harvest dance called the Fish Dance. [17] 
 Originally it would have been done to celebrate bringing in fish from places like the  Delaware  or  Raritan River  or the estuary around Manhattan Island and the completion of smoking them as a source of food for the winter ahead. [18] 
 Eastern tribes would have eaten  cod , [19] [20]  particularly groups that spoke the  Algonquian  languages of  New England  as far south as present day  Connecticut ,  winter flounder [21]  and other  flatfish , [22]  species of herring like the  alewife , [23]   shad , [24]   Atlantic herring , and  Atlantic menhaden , [25] [26]    They also would have consumed the  Atlantic sturgeon [27]  and  drum. 
 In the West, Pacific several species of sturgeon, like the  white sturgeon [28]  and  green sturgeon , [29]   olachen [30]  and several autochthonal fish of the  Oncorhynchus  family  including the  rainbow trout , [31]   cutthroat trout , [32]   coho salmon , [33] [34] [35]   kokanee salmon , [36]  and  chinook salmon . The last makes an appearance in the accounts of  Lewis and Clark  as being fished for in the  Columbia River Basin , and this species is named for a family of tribes of the Pacific Northwest, indicating its important role in that food culture.
 Pacific gray whales  and  humpbacks  were hunted by American Indians off the Northwest coast, especially by the  Makah , and used for their meat and oil. [37]   Catfish  was also popular among native people throughout the land, over many types of terrain.
 Crustaceans included  shrimp ,  lobster ,  crayfish , and  dungeness crabs  in the Northwest and  shrimp ,  lobster  and  blue crabs  in the East. Other shellfish include  abalone  and  geoduck  on the West Coast, while on the East Coast the  surf clam ,  quahog , and the  soft-shell clam .  Oysters  were eaten on both shores, as were  mussels  and  periwinkles . [38] 
 
 Cooking methods [ edit ] 
 Early American natives used a number of cooking methods that have been blended with early European cooking methods to form the basis of American cuisine.  Grilling  meats was common.  Spit roasting  over a pit fire was common as well. Vegetables, especially  root vegetables , were often cooked directly in the ashes of the fire.
 As early Native Americans lacked pottery that could be used directly over a fire, they developed a technique many  anthropologists  call " stone boiling ". They heated rocks in a fire, then added the rocks to a pot filled with water until it came to a boil to cook the meat or vegetables.
 In what is now the Southwestern United States, they also created  adobe  ovens, dubbed  hornos  by the  Spanish , to bake products such as  cornmeal  bread. Other parts of America dug  pit ovens , which were also used to steam foods by adding heated rocks or embers.
 One technique performed extensively by New England tribes was adding seaweed or corn husks on top of the layers of stones to steam fish and shellfish as well as vegetables.
 A later addition was potatoes, a garden plant that came to New England by the 18th century, added while still in skin with  corn  in husk, later to be referred to as a  clambake  by colonists. [39] 
 
 Colonial period [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Cuisine of the Thirteen Colonies 
   Tender, juicy roast turkey—the main attraction—with old-fashioned  gravy , cranberry sauce, mashed potatoes, green beans, sweet and sour cod, steamed rice,  achara  (pickled green papaya relish),  leche flan , pig in a blanket, apple crisp 
   Map of the  13 American Colonies  in 1775 
 The  European settlement of the Americas  introduced a number of ingredients, spices, herbs, and cooking styles to the continent.
 When European colonists came to  Virginia ,  Pennsylvania ,  Massachusetts , and any of the other English colonies on the eastern seaboard of North America, their initial attempts at survival included planting crops familiar to them from back home in England. In the same way, they farmed animals for clothing and meat.
 Through hardships and eventual establishment of trade with England, the  West Indies  and other regions, the colonists were able to derive a cuisine similar to what they had previously  consumed in Britain  and  Ireland , while also introducing local animals and plants to their diet.
 American colonists followed along the line of British cookery up until the Revolution, when a desire to distinguish themselves from Britain led Americans to create "American" styles of cookery. [40] 
 In 1796, the first American cookbook was published, and others followed. [41]  There was a general disdain for  French cuisine/French cookery , even with French  Huguenot  settlers in  South Carolina  and French-Canadian emigrants in America. One of the cookbooks that proliferated in the colonies was  The Art of Cookery Made Plain and Easy  (1747) by  Hannah Glasse , who referred to "the blind folly of this age that would rather be imposed on by a French booby, than give encouragement to a good English cook!" Of the French recipes given in the text, she speaks out flagrantly against the dishes as she "... think[s] it an odd jumble of trash." [42] 
 With the introduction of slavery, Africans were brought into the colonies. With them, came foods and ingredients such as  bananas ,  peanuts ,  Sweet potato/yams , and  coffee . During this era, cooking and the preparation of food was primarily done by enslaved peoples and because of this, cooking styles reminiscent of West African cuisines are still found in many dishes, especially in  Southern cuisine .
 The  expulsion of the Acadians  from Acadia led many of them to Louisiana, where they left a French influence  in the diet  of those settled in Louisiana, and among the Acadian Francophones who settled eastern Maine and parts of what is now northern Vermont at the same time they colonized New Brunswick. [43] 
 Some of the Jews who fled from the  Inquisition  with other  Sephardic Jews  in the 15th century had previously settled in  Recife, Brazil  and the  West Indies , where their cuisine was influenced by new local ingredients like  molasses ,  rum ,  sugar ,  vanilla ,  chocolate ,  peppers ,  corn ,  tomatoes ,  kidney beans ,  string beans  and  turkey .
 In 1654, twenty three Sephardic Jews arrived in  New Amsterdam   bringing this cuisine with them to the early colonial United States. Early American Jewish cuisine was heavily influenced by this branch of Sephardic cuisine. Many of the recipes were bound up in observance of traditional holidays and remained true to their origins. These included dishes such as stew and fish fried in  olive oil , beef and bean stews,  almond puddings , and  egg custards .
 The first  kosher  cookbook in America was the  Jewish Cookery Book  by Esther Levy, published in 1871 in  Philadelphia  and includes many of the traditional recipes. [44] 
 
 Common ingredients [ edit ] 
   A New England  clam bake  consists of various steamed  shellfish . 
 The American colonial diet varied depending on the settled region in which someone lived. Local cuisine patterns had established by the mid-18th century. The  New England  colonies were extremely similar in their dietary habits to those that many of them had brought  from England .
 A striking difference for the colonists in New England compared to other regions was seasonality. [45]  While in the southern colonies, they could farm almost year-round, in the northern colonies, the growing seasons were very restricted. In addition, northern colonists' close proximity to the ocean gave them a bounty of fresh fish to add to their diet.
 Wheat , the grain used to bake bread back in England, was almost impossible to grow, and imports of wheat were far from cost productive. [46] [ dubious    –  discuss ]  Substitutes in cases such as this included cornmeal. The  Johnnycake  was a poor substitute to some for wheaten bread, but acceptance by both the northern and southern colonies seems evident. [47] 
 As many of the New Englanders were originally from England, game hunting was useful when they immigrated to the  New World . Many of the northern colonists depended upon their ability to hunt, or upon others from whom they could purchase game. Hunting was the preferred method of protein acquisition, as opposed to animal husbandry, which required much more work to defend the kept animals against raids. [ citation needed ] 
 
 Livestock and game [ edit ] 
 Commonly hunted game included deer, bear,  buffalo , and wild turkey. The larger muscles of the animals were roasted and served with currant sauce, while the other smaller portions went into  soups ,  stews ,  sausages ,  pies , and pastries. [48]  In addition to game, colonists' protein intake was supplemented by  mutton .
 The  Spanish  in  Florida  originally introduced  sheep  to the New World, but this development never quite reached the North, and there they were introduced by the  Dutch  and English. The keeping of sheep was a result of the English non-practice of  animal husbandry . [49]  The animals provided wool when young and mutton upon maturity after wool production was no longer desirable. [50]  The forage-based diet for sheep that prevailed in the Colonies produced a characteristically strong, gamy flavor and a tougher consistency, which required aging and slow cooking to tenderize. [51] 
 
 Fats and oils [ edit ] 
   A plate of  scrapple , a traditional dish of the  Delaware Valley  region made of  pork  and  cornmeal , still eaten today 
 Fats  and  oils  made from animals served to cook many colonial foods. Many homes had a sack made of deerskin filled with bear oil for cooking, while solidified bear fat resembled  shortening .
 Rendered  pork  fat made the most popular cooking medium, especially from the cooking of  bacon . Pork fat was used more often in the southern colonies than the northern colonies as the Spanish introduced pigs earlier to the South. The colonists enjoyed  butter  in cooking as well, but it was rare prior to the  American Revolution , as  cattle  were not yet plentiful. [52] 
 
 Alcoholic drinks [ edit ] 
 Prior to the  Revolution , New Englanders consumed large quantities of  rum  and  beer , as maritime trade provided them relatively easy access to the goods needed to produce these items. Rum was the distilled spirit of choice, as the main ingredient,  molasses , was readily available from trade with the West Indies.
 Further into the interior, however, one would often find colonists consuming  whiskey , as they did not have similar access to  sugar cane . They did have ready access to corn and rye, which they used to produce their whiskey. [53] 
 Until the Revolution, many considered whiskey to be a coarse alcohol unfit for human consumption, as many believed that it caused the poor to become raucous and unkempt drunkards. [54]  In addition to these alcohol-based products produced in America, imports were seen on merchant shelves, including  wine  and  brandy . [55] 
 
 Southern variations [ edit ] 
 In comparison to the northern colonies, the  southern colonies  were quite diverse in their agricultural diet. The uplands of the  Piedmont  and the  coastal lowlands  made up the two main parts of the southern colonies.
 The diet of the uplands often included wild game,  cabbage ,  string beans ,  corn ,  squashes  and white  potatoes . People had biscuits as part of their  breakfast , along with healthy portions of pork. [56]  The lowlands of Louisiana included a varied diet heavily influenced by the French, Spanish, Acadians, Germans, Native Americans, Africans and Caribbeans. Rice played a large part of the diet in Louisiana. In addition, unlike the uplands, the lowlands subsistence of protein came mostly from coastal seafood. Much of the diet involved the use of peppers, as it still does to this day. [57] [58] 
 
 Post-colonial cuisine [ edit ] 
 During the 18th and 19th centuries, Americans developed many new foods. Some, such as  Rocky Mountain oysters , stayed regional; some spread throughout the nation but with little international appeal, such as  peanut butter  (a core ingredient of the  peanut butter and jelly sandwich ); and some spread throughout the world, such as  popcorn ,  cola ,  fried chicken ,  cornbread , unleavened  muffins  such as the  poppyseed muffin , and  brownies .
 
 19th century American farmhouse [ edit ] 
 During the 1800s,  American farms  were mostly self-sufficient, but certain staples like  salt ,  coffee ,  sugar , and  baking soda  would be purchased at the town general store. If the family didn't grow  wheat , then  flour  would also be purchased.
 Another luxury was canned  salmon , which was sometimes eaten for Sunday dinner. Items purchased at the general store would be paid for with eggs,  butter  or some other food from the farm.
 Women were responsible for much of the processing of food like straining fresh milk, churning butter, making  molasses  from  sorghum , grinding  corn  into cornmeal or cleaning whole  chickens .
 Fresh picked  apples  were pressed into  cider , which could be  fermented  to make  apple cider vinegar .  Fruits  and  vegetables  were  preserved  by various means like canning, drying or  pickling .
 One contemporary writer from  Michigan  described October as cider season, when  apple butter  would be made. Her writings mention  johnnycakes , and, as winter fare,  buckwheat  cakes. [59] 
 Typical farmhouse fare included fried chicken, simmered  green beans , boiled corn,  chicken and dumplings , fried  ham , boiled  beans  and  beets ,  stewed tomatoes , potatoes, and  coleslaw  made of shredded  cabbage .  Pon haus , similar to the  scrapple  of the  Pennsylvania Dutch , was a typical breakfast dish among the Germans who had settled  Indiana  in the 19th century.
 Pork scraps and  corn meal  were cooked into a thick  porridge  and molded in loaf pans. Once solidified, the mixture would be cut and fried. During the fall months, pork might be replaced with fried apples or potatoes. It was served with buttered  biscuits , jam, jelly, milk gravy or sorghum syrup. Fruit butter might be made from apples, plums or peaches to accompany the meal. [59] 
 
 
 
 "A whole new class of city dwellers, harried, worried, furtive, hungry-looking people, have come into being in the wake of the  kitchenette , and no modern influence has had so great a part in affecting the morals, health and spiritual well-being of a generation as has this ill-shapen, ill-planned adjunct of modern living"
 
 
 Jane Pride,  New York Herald 
 
 
 20th century [ edit ] 
 Pork  was a staple of the rural diet through the Southern and Midwestern United States.  Lard  was used for baking, frying and even as a seasoning.
 The cookware of the period was made of  cast iron  and these were thoroughly seasoned with pork fat. Fried  salt pork  with gravy was an indulgent fat-laden dish often served with a side of boiled potatoes. In the  Appalachian region  a dish called "killed lettuce" was made with  pokeweed ,  dandelion  and assorted wild greens that were drizzled with hot bacon grease until wilted or "killed". [59] 
 Pie  could be served up to three times a day and many varieties were prepared depending on the season. During the spring months, pies would be made of  rhubarb  and  strawberry ; in summer  peach ,  cherry ,  blackberry ,  blueberry ,  elderberry  and  grape ; and in fall  apple . [59] 
 The staples of the urban diet were bread,  dairy  and canned goods. Dinner might be  tomato bisque  from a can topped with  cream  or a salad made of canned  string beans  and  mayonnaise . Many preferred to purchase food at  delicatessens , rather than attempt to prepare meals in the cramped kitchenettes.
 German  delicatessens  in cities like New York and  Milwaukee  sold imported cold cuts,  potato salads ,  schmierkase ,  wienerwurst , North Sea  herring , assorted  pickles  (pickled  cucumber ) and other prepared foods.
 Jewish immigrants  from Germany soon followed suit, replacing pork dishes with  corned beef  (salt-cured beef) and  pastrami .  Ice cream soda  was served at soda fountains, along with various other early "soda water" recipes like the Garden Sass Sundae (rhubarb) or the Oh-Oh-Cindy Sundae (strawberry ice cream topped with chocolate syrup, chopped nuts, whipped cream and candied cherries). [59] 
 During that same time frame, grain-feeding of cattle during low pasture months made milk increasingly available year-round. The invention of  milking machines  lowered production costs.  Pasteurization ,  homogenization ,  evaporation ,  condensation , and  refrigeration  along with glass milk bottles, wax-paper cartons, and then plastic bottles made milk increasingly available and safe for urban consumers. [60] 
 Milk became a  staple food  item and an increasingly important ingredient in American cuisine.  Examples include the  root beer float  and the  milkshake .
 
   A strawberry and a chocolate shake, each topped with  whipped cream ,  sprinkles , and a  maraschino cherry 
 Major railroads featured upscale cuisine in their dining cars. [61]  Restaurant chains emerged with standardized decor and menus, including the  Fred Harvey  restaurants along the route of the  Santa Fe Railroad  in the Southwest. [62] 
 Fast-food  restaurants with standardized product and franchised service models began to appear and spread with the development of the  highway system .  White Castle  (1916) [63]  was one of the first examples. Franchising was introduced in 1921 by  A&W Root Beer . The  McDonald brothers  created their "Speedee Service System" in 1948. Other examples include  Burger King ,  KFC ,  Wendy's ,  Pizza Hut ,  Little Caesars ,  Domino's Pizza  and  Papa John's Pizza .
 At the universities, nutritionists and home economists taught a new scientific approach to food. In the early 1900s  muckraking  journalists raised public concern about the wholesomeness of industrialized food products that contained various preservatives and adulterants of unknown safety.
 From 1902 to 1912  Harvey Washington Wiley , a chemist at the  U.S. Department of Agriculture , supervised "hygienic table trials" to test the safety of food additives and preservatives. His work contributed to the enactment of the  Pure Food and Drug Act  of 1906.  He became the first commissioner of the  FDA  and later led the  laboratories of  Good Housekeeping  Magazine . [64] 
 During World War I the  Progressives ' moral advice about food conservation was emphasized in large-scale state and federal programs designed to educate housewives. Large-scale foreign aid during and after the war brought American standards to Europe. [65] 
 From 1912 to the end of the 1930s researchers discovered and popularized the role of various  vitamins and minerals  in human health. Starting with  iodized salt  in 1924, commercially distributed food began to be  fortified  with vitamins and minerals.  In 1932, milk began to be fortified with  viosterol , a purified vitamin D2 product.  Synthetic  thiamin (vitamin B1)  first became available after 1936 and bakers began voluntarily enriching bread with high-vitamin yeast or synthetic vitamins in the late 1930s.
 The Food and Nutrition Board of the National Academy of Science established the first set of " Recommended Dietary Allowances " in 1941. In 1943, the US War Foods Administration issued the War Food Order No. 1, which made enriched bread the temporary law of the land. [66] 
 In 1945 George Stigler published an article on "The cost of subsistence" which described the so-called  Stigler diet , his solution to the problem of providing a diet that met the RDA at a minimum cost.
 The logistical requirements of the US military during  WW2  and the  Korean War  spurred the development and growth of the  processed foods  industry in the US. [67]  These wars encouraged production of shelf-stable ingredients processed on a vast industrial scale. Examples include  powdered milk ,  powdered eggs ,  potato flakes , and  frozen concentrated orange juice .
 After the war, low-cost, highly processed foods became one of the foundational elements of an era of mass prosperity. [68]   Many companies in the American  food industry  developed new products requiring minimal preparation, such as frozen entrees. [69]  One such example is the  TV dinner  in which a multi-course meal was assembled in aluminum packaging in a food factory and flash frozen, then reheated at home in a thermal oven to be served while watching TV. [70]   Convenience foods  of the era were designed to simplify home preparation.
 One example is  macaroni & cheese  created using a powdered artificial cheese product that is reconstituted at home with fresh milk. Newspapers and magazines ran recipe columns, aided by research from corporate kitchens, which were major food manufacturers like  General Mills ,  Campbell's , and  Kraft Foods . For example, the General Mills  Betty Crocker's Cookbook , first published in 1950, was a popular book in American homes. [71] [72] 
 Highly processed foods of the mid-20th century included novelty elements like multi-colored  Jell-O  using various chemical  food colorings , prepared  breakfast cereals  marketed to children with large amounts of sugar and artificial colors (e.g.  Froot Loops ). [73]  Fruit-flavored punches made with artificial fruit flavorings (e.g.  Tang ,  Hi-C ).  Mid-20th-century foods also added novelty packaging elements like  spray cheese in an aerosol can ,  pimento -stuffed olives, and  drink pouches .
 The development of the  microwave oven  resulted in the creation of industrial food products and packaging intended to take advantage of the opportunities and overcome the unique challenges of that technology. [74]   Microwave popcorn  is an example of such a product.
 Throughout the second half of the 20th century the US commercial  food system  has become increasingly dependent on  subsidized   maize  (corn) production to provide feed for livestock and ingredients for human foods such as  high-fructose corn syrup . [75]  It is estimated that the typical American gets 70 percent of their  carbon  intake from  maize  (corn) sources. [76] 
 The last half of the 20th century saw the development of controversial technological innovations intended to lower the cost of, improve the quality of, or increase the safety of commercial food including:  food irradiation , [77]   genetically modified organisms , livestock treated with  antibiotics / hormones , and  concentrated animal feeding operations . Activists have raised concerns about the wholesomeness, safety, or humaneness of these innovations and recommend alternatives such as  organic produce ,  veganism / vegetarianism , and  locavore  diets.
 
 Ethnic influences [ edit ] 
   A  cheeseburger  served with  fries  and  coleslaw 
 One signature characteristic of American cooking is the  fusion  of multiple ethnic or regional approaches into completely new cooking styles. For example,  spaghetti  is  Italian , while  hot dogs  are  German ; a popular meal, especially among young children, is spaghetti containing slices of hot dogs. [78] [79]  Since the 1960s, Asian cooking has played a particularly large role in American fusion cuisine. [80] 
 
   Eggs Benedict , an American breakfast dish made with  poached eggs  and  hollandaise sauce , served in this variation with  smoked salmon 
 Some dishes that are typically considered American have their origins in other countries. American cooks and chefs have substantially altered these dishes over the years, to the degree that the dishes now enjoyed around the world are considered to be American.  Hot dogs  and  hamburgers  are both based on traditional  German  dishes, but in their modern popular form they can be reasonably considered American dishes. [81] 
 Pizza  is based on the traditional  Italian  dish, brought by Italian immigrants to the United States, but varies highly in style based on the region of development since its arrival. For example,  Chicago style  has focus on a thicker, taller crust, whereas a " New York Slice " is known to have a much thinner crust which can be folded. These different types of pizza can be advertised throughout the country and are generally recognizable and well-known, with some restaurants going so far as to import New York tap water from a thousand or more miles away to recreate the signature style in other regions. [82] 
 Some dishes that Americans think of as being of "foreign" in origin and/or associated with a particular immigrant group were in fact invented in America and customized to American tastes.  For example  General Tso's chicken  was invented by Chinese or Taiwanese chefs working in New York in the early 1970s. [83]   The dish is unknown in China, except for a distant resemblance to a much spicier dish from Hong Kong said to have influenced the American version.  The  fortune cookie  was likewise invented in California in the early 1900s and is known in Asia only as an American style food. [84] 
 
   A modern dish consisting of traditional roasted turkey,  sweet potatoes , and grilled vegetables prepared with modern fusion ingredients 
 A wave of  celebrity chefs  began with  Julia Child  and  Graham Kerr  in the 1970s, with many more following after the rise of cable channels like  Food Network . By the beginning of the 21st century, regional variations in consumption of meat began to reduce, as more meat was consumed overall. [85]  Saying they eat too much protein, the  2015–2020 Dietary Guidelines for Americans  asked men and teenage boys to increase their consumption of underconsumed foods such as vegetables. [86] 
 
 New American [ edit ] 
 Main article:  New American cuisine 
 During the 1980s, upscale restaurants introduced a mixing of cuisines that contain Americanized styles of cooking with foreign elements commonly referred as  New American cuisine , [87]  a type of  fusion cuisine  combining flavors from the  melting pot  of traditional American cooking techniques with those from other cultures, sometimes adding  molecular gastronomy  components. [88] [89] 
 
 21st century [ edit ] 
 In the 21st century, more people in America were eating  vegan  and  vegetarian  meals and more restaurants were serving them. [90] [91] [92] 
 
 Regional cuisines [ edit ] 
 See also:  List of American regional and fusion cuisines  and  List of regional dishes of the United States 
 In the present day, the modern cuisine of the United States is very regional in nature. Excluding  Alaska  and  Hawaii , the terrain spans 3,000 miles (4,800 km) from east to west and more than 1,000 miles (1,600 km) from north to south.
 
 Northeast [ edit ] 
 New England [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Cuisine of New England 
   New England  clam chowder 
 New England  cuisine traces its roots to  English cuisine  and the  Native American cuisine  of the  Abenaki ,  Narragansett ,  Niantic ,  Wabanaki ,  Wampanoag , and other native peoples. It also includes influences from  French ,  Italian , and  Portuguese  cuisine, among others. It is characterized by extensive use of  potatoes ,  beans ,  dairy products  and  seafood .  Corn , historically the main crop grown by  Native American  tribes in New England, continues to be grown in all New England states. [93] [94]  It is traditionally used in  hasty pudding ,  cornbread  and  corn chowder . Three prominent foodstuffs native to New England are  maple syrup ,  cranberries  and  blueberries.   Maine  is the only state with a commercial wild blueberry industry, with 105 million pounds harvested in 2021. [95] 
 Initial European colonists came from  East Anglia  in  England . East Anglian cookery included dishes like suet puddings, soda breads, and a few shellfish delicacies, and would have been quite simple in contrast to the dishes prepared in contemporary  London . Most of this cuisine was one-pot cookery, which developed into such dishes as  succotash ,  chowder ,  baked beans , and others. [96] 
 The most popular starches in New England cuisine include  potatoes  and  cornmeal , and a few native breads like  Anadama bread ,  johnnycakes ,  bulkie rolls ,  Parker House rolls ,  popovers ,  ployes , and  New England brown bread . Because of the influence of New Englander health reformers, the most well known of whom is  Sylvester Graham , this region is fairly conservative with its spices, but typical spices include  nutmeg ,  ginger ,  cinnamon ,  cloves , and  allspice , especially in desserts, and for savory foods,  thyme ,  black pepper ,  sea salt , and  sage . Typical condiments include  maple syrup , grown from the native  sugar maple ,  molasses , and  cranberry sauce .
 The fruits of the region include the  Vitis labrusca  grapes used in  grape juice  made by companies such as  Welch's , along with  jelly ,  Kosher wine  by companies like  Mogen David  and  Manischewitz  along with other wineries that make higher quality wines. Though not anywhere near as productive a region as the top three apple-producing regions, apples have been a staple of New England foodways since at least the 1640s, and it is here that a very high amount of heirloom varieties are found, many of them gaining renewed interest as part of locavore movements and the re-emergence of cider as a beverage of choice.  Apples  from New England would include varieties imported from their earliest in Europe and a few natives, like  Baldwin , Lady, Mother, Pomme Grise, Porter,  Roxbury Russet ,  Rhode Island Greening ,  Sops of Wine , Hightop Sweet, Peck's Pleasant, Titus Pippin, Westfield-Seek-No-Further, and  Duchess of Oldenburg .  Beach plums  a small native species with fruits the size of a pinball, are sought after in summer to make into a jam.  Cranberries  are another fruit indigenous to the region, often collected in autumn in huge flooded bogs. Thereafter they are juiced so they can be drunk fresh for breakfast, or dried and incorporated into salads and quickbreads. [97] 
 Winter squashes like pumpkin and butternut squashes have been a staple for generations owing to their ability to keep for long periods over icy New England winters and being an excellent source of beta carotene; in summer, they are replaced with pattypan and zucchini, the latter brought to the region by immigrants from Southern Italy a century ago. Blueberries are a very common summertime treat owing to them being an important crop, and find their way into  muffins ,  pies  and  pancakes .
 Historically New England and the other original 13 colonies were major producers of hard cider and the only reason why this changed were that immigrants from Western and Central Europe preferred beer, especially lagers, to apple based alcohol. In more recent years cider has made a roaring comeback nationwide, with New England being the first to break out of the box and with many pomologists scouring the woods for abandoned apple trees and heirloom varieties to add to the cider press.  Angry Orchard  is a local commercial brand that began in New Hampshire but has since skyrocketed in sales, with other large marques following suit around the land. [98] 
 Typical favorite desserts are quite diverse, and encompass  hasty pudding ,  blueberry pie ,  whoopie pies ,  Boston cream pie ,  pumpkin pie ,  Joe Frogger  cookies, hand-crafted  ice cream ,  Hermit  cookies, and the  chocolate chip cookie , invented in  Massachusetts  in the 1930s.
 New England is noted for having a heavy emphasis on seafood, a legacy inherited from coastal tribes like the  Wampanoag  and  Narragansett , who equally used the rich fishing banks offshore for sustenance. Favorite fish include  cod ,  salmon ,  winter flounder ,  haddock ,  striped bass ,  pollock ,  hake ,  bluefish , and, in southern New England,  tautog . All of these are prepared numerous ways, such as frying cod for  fish fingers , grilling bluefish over hot coals for summertime,  smoking salmon  or serving a whole poached one chilled for feasts with a dill sauce, or, on cold winter nights, serving haddock baked in casserole dish with a creamy sauce and crumbled breadcrumbs as a top so it forms a crust. [99]   Clam cakes , a savory fritter based on chopped clams, are a specialty of Rhode Island. Also, a hard shell clam is unique to Rhode Island called the Quahoag which is used in clear chowders.  Farther inland,  brook trout ,  largemouth bass , and  herring  are sought after, especially in the rivers and icy finger lakes in upper New England where New Englanders will  fly fish  for them in summertime.
 Meat is present though not as prominent, and typically is either stewed in dishes like  Yankee pot roast  and  New England boiled dinner  or braised, as in a  picnic ham ; these dishes suit the weather better as summers are humid and hot but winters are raw and cold, getting below 0 °C for most of the winter and only just above it by March. [100]  The roasting of whole turkeys began here as a centerpiece for large American banquets, and like all other East Coast tribes, the Native American tribes of New England prized wild turkeys as a source of sustenance and later Anglophone settlers were enamored of cooking them using methods they knew from Europe: often that meant trussing the bird and spinning it on a string or spit roasting. Today turkey meat is a key ingredient in soups, and also a favorite in several sandwiches like the  Pilgrim . For lunch, hot roast beef is sometimes chopped finely into small pieces and put on a roll with salami and American or provolone cheese to make a  steak bomb . [101]  Bacon is often maple cured, and often bacon or salt pork drippings are an ingredient in  corn chowder , a cousin of the clam chowder. [102]   Veal  consumption was prevalent in the North Atlantic States prior to  World War II . [85] 
 A variety of  linguiça  is favored as a breakfast food, introduced by Portuguese fishermen and Brazilian immigrants. [103]  Dairy farming and its resultant products figure strongly on the ingredient list, and homemade ice cream is a summertime staple of the region: it was a small seasonal roadside stand in Vermont that eventually became the internationally famous  Ben and Jerry's  ice cream. Vermont is known for producing farmhouse style cheeses,  especially a type of cheddar. [104]  The recipe goes all the way back to colonial times when English settlers brought the recipe with them from England and found the rocky landscape eminently suitable to making the cheese. [105]  Today Vermont has more artisanal cheese makers per capita than any other state, and diversity is such that interest in goat's milk cheeses has become prominent. [106] 
 Crustaceans and mollusks are also an essential ingredient in the regional cookery. Maine and Massachusetts, in more recent years, have taken to harvesting  peekytoe crab  and  Jonah crab  and making crab bisques, based on cream with 35% milkfat, and crabcakes out of them: often these were overlooked as bycatch of lobster pots by fishermen of the region, but in the past 30 years their popularity has firmly established them as a staple. They even appear on the menu as far south as to be out of region in  New York , where they are sold to four star restaurants in the form of cocktail claws. Whelks are eaten in salad, and  lobster , which is indigenous to the coastal waters of the region and are a feature of many dishes, baked, boiled, roasted, and steamed, or simply eaten as a  sandwich , chilled with mayonnaise and chopped celery in Maine and Massachusetts, or slathered with melted butter on Long Island and in Connecticut. Shellfish of all sorts are part of the diet, and  shellfish  of the coastal regions include  little neck clams ,  sea scallops ,  blue mussels ,  oysters ,  soft shell clams , and  razor shell clams . Much of this shellfish contributes to New England tradition, the  clambake . The clambake as known today is a colonial interpretation of an American Indian tradition. [107] 
 In summer, oysters and clams are dipped in batter and fried, often served in a basket with french fries, or commonly on a wheaten bun as a clam roll. Oysters are otherwise eaten chilled on a bed of crushed ice on the half shell with  mignonette sauce , and are often branded on where they were harvested. Large quahogs are stuffed with breadcrumbs and seasoning and baked in their shells, and smaller ones often find their way into  clam chowder . Other preparations include  clams casino , clams on the half shell served stuffed with herbs like  oregano  and streaky bacon.
 Southern New England, particularly along the coast, shares many specialties with the Mid-Atlantic, including especially dishes from Jewish and Italian-American cuisine. Coastal Connecticut is known for distinctive kinds of  pizza , locally called apizza (pronounced locally as  abeetz ), differing in texture (thin and slightly blackened) and toppings (such as clams) from pizza further south in the so-called pizza belt, which stretches from  New Haven, Connecticut  southward through  New York ,  New Jersey , and into  Maryland .
 
 Delaware Valley and Mid-Atlantic [ edit ] 
 Main articles:  Cuisine of Philadelphia ,  Cuisine of New York City , and  Cuisine of the Mid-Atlantic United States 
   New York strip steak  topped with mushrooms and onions 
 The mid-Atlantic states comprise the states of  New York ,  New Jersey ,  Delaware ,  Pennsylvania , and Northern  Maryland . The oldest major settlement in this area of the country is found in the most populous city in the nation,  New York , founded in 1625 by the Dutch. Today, it is a major cultural capital of the United States. [108] 
 The influences on cuisine in this region are extremely eclectic owing to the fact that it has been and continues to be a gateway for international culture as well as a gateway for new immigrants. [109]  Going back to colonial times, each new group has left their mark on homegrown cuisine and in turn the cities in this region disperse trends to the wider United States. In addition, cities like New York and Philadelphia have had the past influence of Dutch, [110]  Italian, German, [111]  Irish, [112] [113]  British, [114]  and Jewish cuisines, [115]  and that continues to this day. Baltimore has become the crossroads between North and South, a distinction it has held since the end of the Civil War.
 A  global power city , [116]  New York is well known for its diverse and cosmopolitan dining scene. [117]  Its restaurants compete fiercely for good reviews in the Food and Dining section of  The New York Times , online guides, and  Zagat's , the last of which is widely considered the premier American dining guide, published yearly and headquartered in New York.
 
   New York–style cheesecake with strawberries. Other variations include blueberry or raspberry sauce. 
 Many of the more complicated dishes with rich ingredients like  Lobster Newberg ,  waldorf salad ,  vichyssoise ,  eggs benedict , and the  New York strip steak  were born out of a need to entertain and impress the well-to-do in expensive bygone restaurants like  Delmonico's  and still standing establishments like the  Waldorf-Astoria Hotel . [118] [119]  Modern commercial American  cream cheese  was developed in 1872. [120] 
 Since the first reference to an alcoholic mixed drink called a cocktail comes from  New York State  in 1803, it is not a surprise that there have been many cocktails invented in New York and the surrounding environs. Even today New York bars are noted for being highly influential in making national trends.  Cosmopolitans ,  Long Island iced teas ,  Manhattans ,  Rob Roys ,  Tom Collins ,  Aviations , and  Greyhounds  were all invented in New York bars, and the  gin martini  was popularized in New York in speakeasies during the 1920s, as evidenced by its appearance in the works of New Yorker and American writer F. Scott Fitzgerald. Like its neighbor  Philadelphia , many rare and unusual liquors and liqueurs often find their way into a mixologist's cupboard or restaurant wine list.
 New York State is the third most productive area in the country for wine grapes, just behind  California  and  Washington . It has  AVA 's near the Finger Lakes, the Catskills, and Long Island, [121]  and in the  Hudson Valley  has the second-most productive area in the country for growing apples, making it a center for hard cider production, just like  New England . [122] [123]  Pennsylvania has been growing rye since Germans began to emigrate to the area at the end of the 17th century and required a grain they knew from Germany. [124]  Therefore, overall it is not unusual to find New York grown  Gewürtztraminer  and  Riesling , Pennsylvania rye whiskey, or marques of locally produced ciders like Original Sin on the same menu.
 
   Philadelphia cheesesteak  with  Cheez Whiz 
 Since their formative years,  New York ,  Philadelphia , and  Baltimore  have welcomed immigrants of every kind to their shores, and all three have been an important gateway through which new citizens to the general United States arrive. [125]  Traditionally natives have eaten cheek to jowl with newcomers for centuries as the newcomers would open new restaurants and small businesses and all the different groups would interact.
 Even in colonial days this region was a very diverse mosaic of peoples, as settlers from Switzerland, Wales, England, Ulster, Wallonia, Holland, Gelderland, the British Channel Islands, and Sweden sought their fortune in this region. [126] [127]  This is very evident in many signature dishes and local foods, all of which have evolved to become American dishes in their own right.
 The original Dutch settlers of New York brought recipes they knew and understood from the Netherlands and their mark on local cuisine is still apparent today: in many quarters of New York their version of apple pie with a streusel top is still baked. In the colony of New Amsterdam, their predilection for waffles in time evolved into the American national recipe and forms part of a New York brunch. They also made  coleslaw , originally a Dutch salad, but today accented with the later 18th-century introduction of  mayonnaise . [110] [128] [129] 
 The  doughnut  began its life originally as a New York pastry that arrived in the 18th century as the Dutch  olykoek , with later additions from other nations of Europe like the Italian  zeppole , the Jewish/Polish  pączki , and the German  Berliner  arriving in the 19th century to complete the variety found in modern doughnuts today. [130] 
 
   Crab cake , popular in  Maryland ,  Delaware  and  New Jersey , is often served on a roll. 
 Crab cakes  were once a kind of English  croquette , but over time as spices have been added they and the  Maryland crab feast  became two of Baltimore's signature dishes. Fishing for  blue crab  is a favorite summer pastime in the waters off  Maryland ,  New Jersey , and  Delaware  where they may grace the table at summer picnics.
 Other mainstays of the region have been present since the early years of American history, like oysters from  Cape May , the  Chesapeake Bay , and  Long Island , and lobster and tuna from the coastal waters found in New York and New Jersey. [131] [132]   Philadelphia Pepper Pot , a tripe stew, was originally a British dish but today is a classic of home cooking in Pennsylvania alongside bookbinder soup, a type of  turtle soup .
 In the winter, New York pushcarts sell  roasted chestnuts , a delicacy dating back to English  Christmas traditions , [133]  and it was in New York and Pennsylvania that the earliest  Christmas cookies  were introduced: Germans introduced crunchy molasses-based  gingerbread  and  sugar cookies  in Pennsylvania, and the Dutch introduced cinnamon-based cookies, all of which have become part of the traditional  Christmas meal . [134] [135] 
 Scrapple  was originally a type of savory pudding that early Pennsylvania Germans made to preserve the  offal  of a pig slaughter. [136]  The Philadelphia soft pretzel was originally brought to Eastern Pennsylvania in the early 18th century, and later, 19th-century immigrants sold them to the masses from pushcarts to make them the city's best-known bread product, having evolved into its own unique recipe. [137] 
 
   New York–style pizza  is the pizza eaten in  New York ,  New Jersey , and  Connecticut . 
 After the 1820s, new groups began to arrive and the character of the region began to change. There had been some Irish from Ulster prior to 1820, however largely they had been Protestants with somewhat different culture and (often) a different  language  than the explosion of emigrants that came to  Castle Garden  and Locust Point in Baltimore in their masses starting in the 1840s.
 The Irish arrived in America in a rather woeful state, as Ireland at the time was often plagued by some of the worst poverty in Europe and often heavy disenfranchisement among the masses. Many of them arrived barely alive having ridden  coffin ships  to the New World, very sick with  typhus  and gaunt from prolonged starvation.
 In addition, they were the first to face challenges other groups did not have: they were the first large wave of Catholics. They faced prejudice for their faith and the cities of Philadelphia, New York, and Baltimore were not always set up for their needs.
 For example, Catholic bishops in the U.S. mandated until the 1960s that all Catholics were forbidden from eating red meat on Fridays and during Lent, [138]  and attending Mass sometimes conflicted with work as produce and meat markets would be open on high holy days; this was difficult for Irishmen supporting families since many worked as laborers.
 Unsurprisingly, many Irishmen also found their fortunes working as longshoremen, which would have given their families access to fish and shellfish whenever a fisherman made berth, which was frequent on the busy docks of Baltimore and New York. [139] [140] 
 Though there had been some activity in Baltimore in founding a  see  earlier by the  Carrolls , the Irish were the first major wave of Catholic worship in this region, and that meant bishops and cardinals sending away to Europe for wine. Wine, with water, is consecrated as part of the  Catholic Mass .
 Taverns had existed prior to their emigration to America in the region, though the Irish brought their particular brand of pub culture and founded some of the first saloons and bars that served Dublin style  stout  and  red ale ; they brought with them the knowledge of single-malt style whiskey and sold it.
 The Irish were the first immigrant group to arrive in this region in massive millions, and these immigrants also founded some of the earliest saloons and bars in this region, of which  McSorley's  is a still operating example.
 
   Philadelphia-style soft pretzel 
 It was also in this region that the Irish introduced something that today is a very important festival in American culture that involves a large amount of food, drink, and merry making:  Halloween . In England and Wales, where prior immigrants had come from, the feast of All Hallows Eve had died out in the  Reformation , dismissed as superstition and excess having nothing to do with the Bible and often replaced with the festival of  Guy Fawkes Night . Other immigrant groups like the Germans preferred to celebrate October 31 as  Reformation Day , and after the American Revolution all of the above were less and less eager to celebrate the legacy of an English festival given they had fought against  Great Britain  for their independence.
 The Catholicism of the Irish demanded attendance at church on November 1 and charity and deeds, not just faith, as a cornerstone of dogma, and many of their older traditions survived the Reformation and traveled with them. Naturally, they went door-to-door to collect victuals for masked parties as well as gave them out, like nuts to roast on the fire, whiskey, beer, or cider, and  barmbracks ; they also  bobbed for apples  and made dumb cakes. Later in the century they were joined by Scots going  guising , children going door-to-door to ask for sweets and treats in costume.
 From the Mid-Atlantic this trend spread to be nationwide and evolved into American children  trick-or-treating  on October 31 wearing costumes and their older counterparts having wild costume parties with various foods and drinks such as  caramel apples ,  candy apples ,  dirt cakes ,  punch ,  cocktails ,  cider  (both alcoholic and  non ,)  pumpkin pie ,  candy corn ,  chocolate turtles ,  peanut brittle ,  taffy ,  tipsy cake , and copious buckets full of candy; children carving  jack-o-lanterns  and eating squash derived foods derive from Halloween's heritage as a harvest festival and from Irish and Scottish traditions of carving turnips and eating root vegetables at this time of year.
 Bobbing for apples has survived to the present day as a Halloween party classic game, as has a variation on the parlor game of trying to grab an apple hanging from the ceiling blindfolded: [141]  it has evolved into trying to catch a donut in one's teeth. [142] 
 Immigrants from Southern Europe, namely  Sicily ,  Campania ,  Lazio , and  Calabria , appeared between 1880 and 1960 in New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, and Eastern Maryland hoping to escape the extreme poverty and corruption endemic to Italy.
 Typically none of them spoke English, but rather dialects of Italian and had a culture that was more closely tied to the village they were born in than the high culture only accessible to those who could afford it at this time; many could not read or write in any language.
 They were employed in manual labor or factory work but it is because of them that dishes like  spaghetti with meatballs ,  New York-style pizza ,  calzones , and  baked ziti  exist, and Americans of today are very familiar with semolina based pasta noodles.
 Their native cuisine had less of an emphasis on meat, as evidenced by dishes they introduced like  pasta e fagioli  and  minestrone , but the dishes they created in America often piled it on as a sign of wealth and newfound prosperity since for the first time even cheap cuts of it were affordable. The American recipe for  lasagna  is proof of this, as mostly it is derived from the Neapolitan version of the dish with large amounts of meat and cheese. [ citation needed ] 
 
   Carts selling frankfurters, the predecessor to  hotdogs , in New York circa 1906. The price is listed as "3 cents each or 2 for 5 cents". 
 New York-style  hot dogs  came about with German-speaking emigrants from Austria and Germany, particularly with the  frankfurter sausage  and the smaller  wiener sausage ; Jews would also contribute here by introducing the kosher version of these sausages, made of beef rather than pork. [143]  Today, the New York-style hot dog with  sauerkraut , mustard, and the optional cucumber pickle relish is such a part of the local fabric, that it is one of the favorite comestibles of New York and both the pork and the beef versions are beloved. Hot dogs are a typical street food sold year round in all but the most inclement weather from thousands of pushcarts.
 As with all other stadiums in Major League Baseball they are an essential for  New York Yankees  and the  New York Mets  games though it is the local style of preparation that predominates without exception.
 Hot dogs are also the focus of a televised eating contest on the Fourth of July in  Coney Island , [144]  at  Nathan's Famous , one of the earliest hot dog stands opened in the United States in 1916 by  Nathan Handwerker . Handwerker was a Jewish man who emigrated from what is now Ukraine in 1912 and whose influence is felt today around the world.
 Coney Island is most famous for being a traditional boardwalk amusement park and the site of the world's first rollercoaster, a precursor of modern theme parks. Hot dogs are a staple of amusement parks 100 years later. [145] 
 A summertime treat,  Italian ice , began its life as a sweeter adaptation of the Sicilian  granita  that was strictly lemon-flavored and brought to New York and Philadelphia. Its Hispanic counterpart,  piragua , is a common shaved-ice treat brought to New York by Puerto Ricans in the 1930s. Unlike the original dish which included flavors like tamarind, mango, coconut,  piragua  is evolving to include flavors like grape and cherry, fruits which are impossible to grow in the tropical Puerto Rican climate and get exported back to the island from New York. [146] 
 Taylor Ham , a meat delicacy of  New Jersey , first appeared around the time of the Civil War and today is often served for breakfast with eggs and cheese on a  kaiser roll , a variant of a  roll brought to the area by Austrians  in the second half of the 19th century, now commonly used for sandwiches at lunchtime, often topped with poppyseeds. This breakfast meat is generally known as  pork roll  in southern New Jersey and Philadelphia, and Taylor Ham in northern New Jersey.
 
   Nighthawks , a painting of a  diner , one type of eatery still common in the Mid-Atlantic. Each state of the region has its own signatures, and the range extends from the Canadian border in the North to Delaware Bay in the South. 
 Other dishes came about during the early 20th century and have much to do with  delicatessen  fare, set up largely by Jewish immigrants from Eastern Europe who came to America incredibly poor, often illiterate in any other language but  Yiddish , and often banished from mainstream society in their place of origin for centuries. Most often they were completely unable to partake in the outdoor food markets that the general population utilized as most of the food for sale was not  kosher .
 The influence of European Jewry before their destruction in the  Holocaust  on modern mid-Atlantic cooking remains strong and reinforced by their many descendants in the region. [147]  These currently form the largest concentration of Jews outside Tel Aviv and very integrated into the local mainstream of New York in particular.
 American-style  pickles , now a common addition to hamburgers and sandwiches, were brought by Polish Jews, [148]  and Austro-Hungarian Jews brought a recipe for almond horns that now is a common regional cookie, diverting from the original recipe in dipping the ends in dark chocolate. [149] [150] 
 New York-style  cheesecake  has copious amounts of cream and eggs because animal  rennet  is not kosher and so could not be sold to a large number of the deli's clientele.
 New York inherited its  bagels  and  bialys  from Jews, as well as  Challah bread .  Pastrami  first entered the country via Romanian Jews, and is a feature of many sandwiches, often eaten on marble rye, a bread that was born in [ clarification needed ]  the mid-Atlantic.
 Whitefish salad ,  lox , and  matzoh ball soup  are now standard fare made to order at local diners and delicatessens, but started their life as foods that made up a strict dietary code.  Rugelach  cookies and  hamentashen  are sweet staples still sold to the general public, but came to New York over a century ago with  Ashkenazi  Jews along with  Jewish rye . [151] [152] 
 
   Buffalo wings  with  blue cheese dressing , served with lager beer 
 Many of their dishes passed into the mainstream enough that they became standard fare in diners by the end of the 20th century, a type of restaurant that is now the most common in the region, and the subject matter of the artist  Edward Hopper .
 In the past this sort of establishment was the haven of the short-order cook grilling or frying simple foods for the working man. Today typical service includes staples from this large region like  beef on weck ,  Manhattan clam chowder , the  club sandwich ,  Buffalo wings ,  Philadelphia cheesesteak , the  black and white cookie ,  shoofly pie ,  snapper soup ,  Smith Island cake ,  blackout cake ,  grape pie ,  milkshakes , and the  egg cream , a vanilla or chocolate fountain drink with a frothy top and fizzy taste.
 As in Hopper's painting from 1942, many of these businesses are open 24 hours a day.
 
 Midwest [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Cuisine of the Midwestern United States 
 Midwestern cuisine today is a very eclectic and odd mix and match of foodways, covering everything from  Kansas City-style barbecue  to the  Chicago-style hot dog , though many of its classics are very simple, hearty fare.
 This region was mostly untouched by European and American settlers until after the  American Civil War , and excepting  Missouri  and the heavily forested states near the Great Lakes, was mainly populated by nomadic tribes like the  Sioux ,  Osage ,  Arapaho , and  Cheyenne .
 As with most other American Indians tribes, these tribes consumed the  Three Sisters  of beans, maize, and squash, but also for thousands of years followed the herds of  bison , hunting them on foot and later on horseback, typically using bow and arrow.
 There are  buffalo jumps  dating back nearly 10,000 years and several photographs and written accounts of trappers and homesteaders attesting to their dependence on the buffalo and to a lesser degree  elk .
 After nearly wiping out elk and bison, this region has taken to raising bison alongside cattle for their meat and at an enormous profit, making them into burgers and steaks.
 This region today comprises the states near the  Great Lakes  and also the  Great Plains ; much of it is prairie with a very flat terrain. Winters are bitterly cold, windy, and wet.
 Often that means harsh blizzards especially near the Great Lakes where Arctic winds blow off of Canada, where ice on rivers and lakes freezes thick enough for  ice hockey , and for ice fishing for  pike ,  walleye  and  panfish  to be ubiquitous. In  Minnesota ,  Wisconsin , and  Michigan , they often become part of the local  fish fry .
 Population density is extremely low away from the Great Lakes and small towns dominated by enormous farms are the rule, larger cities being the exception.  Detroit ,  Cleveland ,  St. Louis ,  Cincinnati ,  Indianapolis ,  Milwaukee ,  Minneapolis , and  St. Paul  dominate the landscape in wealth and size, owing to their ties with manufacturing, finance, transportation, and meatpacking.
 Smaller places like  Omaha  and  Kansas City  are the local capitals, but the king is  Chicago , third-largest city in the country, on the shores of  Lake Michigan .
 
   Persimmon pudding 
 Non-American Indian settlement began in  Illinois ,  Minnesota ,  Wisconsin ,  Ohio ,  Indiana , and  Michigan  earlier than anywhere else in the region, and thus the food available here ranges from the sublime to the bizarre.
 As with all of the Midwest, the primary meats here are beef and poultry, since the Midwest has been raising  turkeys ,  chickens , and  geese  for over 150 years. Chickens have been common for so long that the Midwest has several native breeds that are prized for both backyard farming and for farmer's markets, such as the  Buckeye  and  Wyandotte . One, Billina, appears as a character in the second book of the Oz series by  L. Frank Baum .
 Favorite fruits of the region include some native plants inherited from Native American tribes like the  pawpaw , and  American persimmons  are also highly favored.
 As in the American South, pawpaws are the region's largest native fruit, about the size of a mango, often found growing wild come September; they are made into preserves and cakes and command quite a price at farmer's markets in Chicago. [153] 
 The  American persimmon  is often smaller than its Japanese cousin, about the size of a small plum, but in the Midwest and parts of the East it is the main ingredient in the steamed  persimmon pudding , topped with  crème anglaise .
 Other crops inherited from the Native Americans include  wild rice , which grows on the banks of lakes and is a local favorite for fancy meals and today often used in stuffing for Thanksgiving.
 Typical fruits of the region are cold-weather crops. Once it was thought that its winters were too harsh for apples, but a breeder in  Minnesota  produced the  Wealthy apple  and it became the third-most productive region for apple growing in the country, with local varieties comprising  Wolf River , Enterprise,  Melrose ,  Paula Red ,  Rome Beauty ,  Honeycrisp , and the  Red Delicious .
 Cherries are important to  Michigan  and  Wisconsin  grows many  cranberries , a legacy of early-19th-century emigration of New England farmers.  Crabapple  jelly is a favorite condiment of the region.
 The influence of German, Scandinavian, and Slavic peoples on the northern portion of the region is very strong; many emigrated to Wisconsin, Minnesota, Michigan, Ohio, and Illinois in the 19th century to take advantage of jobs in the meatpacking business as well as being homesteaders and tradesmen.
 Bratwurst  is a very common sausage eaten at  tailgate parties  for the  Green Bay Packers ,  Chicago Bears , or  Detroit Lions , often served boiled in lager beer with  sauerkraut , different than many of the recipes currently found in Germany.
 Polish sausage, in particular a locally invented type of  kielbasa , is essential for sporting events in Chicago: Chicago today has approximately 200,000 Polish speakers and has had a similar population for over 100 years. [154] 
 When Poles came to Chicago and surrounding cities from Europe, they brought with them long ropes of kielbasa, cabbage rolls, and  pierogi . Poles that left Poland after the fall of the Berlin Wall and descendants of earlier immigrants still make them, and they remain common in local diners and delis. [155] 
 Today alongside the pierogi, the sausage is served on a long roll with mustard like a hot dog or as a  Maxwell Street Polish , a sandwich with caramelized onions. In Cleveland, the same sausage is served in the form of the  Polish boy , a sandwich made of french fries, spicy barbecue sauce, and coleslaw.
 Unlike cities in the East where the hot dog alone is traditional, fans of the  Cleveland Indians ,  Detroit Tigers ,  Chicago Cubs , and  Milwaukee Brewers  favor two or three different kinds of sausage sold in the pushcarts outside the stadium.
 The hot dogs themselves tend to follow the  Chicago style , with mustard and pickled vegetables.
 In Cincinnati, where the  Cincinnati Reds  play, there is a competitor in  Cincinnati chili . Invented by Macedonian immigrants, it includes spaghetti as its base, chili with a Mediterranean-inspired spice mix, and cheddar cheese; the chili itself is often a topping for local hot dogs at games.
 In the Midwest and especially Minnesota, [156]  the tradition of the church  potluck  is a gathering where local foods reign, and has been since the era of the frontier; pioneers often needed to pool resources to have a celebration in the 19th century and that simply never changed. [157] 
 Nowhere is this more clear than with the  hotdish , a type of casserole believed to have derived from a Norwegian recipe,  it is usually topped with potatoes or  tater tots . [158]  Next to the hotdish at potlucks usually  glorified rice  is found, a kind of rice pudding mixed with crushed pineapple and maraschino cherries. Next to that is the  booyah , a thick soup made of meat, vegetables, and seasonings that is meant to simmer on the stove for up to two days.
 Lefse , traditionally a Scandinavian flatbread, has been handed down to descendants for over a hundred years and is common on the table. Behind that is  venison , a popular meat around the Great Lakes and often eaten as steaks, sandwiches, and crown roasts for special events. [159] [160]  Within Wisconsin, Minnesota and the Dakotas,  tiger meat , a dish similar to  steak tartare , is common.
 Last on the table are the  dessert bars  and  brownies , created originally in 1898 in Chicago, now a global food and international favorite. [161] 
 
   Booyah , a popular chunky stew of the Midwest that is often served to large numbers of people 
 Further south,  barbecue  has its own style in places in Kansas City and St. Louis different from the South and American West. Kansas City and St. Louis were and are important hubs for the railroad that connected the plains with the Great Lakes and cities farther east, like Philadelphia. [162] 
 At the turn of the 19th century, the St. Louis area, Omaha, and Kansas City had huge stockyards, waystations for cattle and pigs on their way east to the cities of the coast and north to the Great Lakes. [163] [164]  They all had large growing immigrant and migrant populations from Europe and the South respectively, so the region has developed unique styles of barbecue.
 St. Louis-style barbecue  favors a heavy emphasis on a sticky sweet barbecue sauce. Its standbys include the  pork steak , a cut taken from the shoulder of the pig, grilled then slowly stewed in a pan over charcoal; crispy snoots, a cut from the cheek and nose of the pig that is fried up like  cracklins  and eaten dipped in sauce; pork  spare ribs ; and a mix of either beer-boiled  bratwurst  or grilled Italian sausage, flavored with fennel.
 Dessert is usually something like  gooey butter cake , invented in the city in the 1930s.
 Kansas City-style barbecue  uses several different kinds of meat, more than most styles of American barbecue—turkey, mutton, pork, and beef to name a few—but is distinct from St. Louis in that the barbecue sauce adds molasses in with the tomato-based recipe and typically has a more tart taste.
 Traditionally, Kansas City uses a low-and-slow method of smoking the meat in addition to just stewing it in the sauce. It also favors using hickory wood for smoking and continual watering or layering of the sauce while cooking to form a glaze; with  burnt ends  this step is necessary to create the "bark" or charred outer layer of the brisket.
 
 Southern United States [ edit ] 
   Chicken and waffles 
   Nashville hot chicken  with potato salad 
   Sweet tea 
 Main article:  Cuisine of the Southern United States 
 When referring to the  American South  as a region, typically it should indicate Southern Maryland and the states that were once part of the  Old Confederacy , with the dividing line between the East and West jackknifing about 100 miles west of  Dallas, Texas , and mostly south of the old  Mason–Dixon line . Cities found in this area include  New Orleans ,  Atlanta ,  Washington, D.C. ,  Memphis ,  Charleston , and  Charlotte  with  Houston, Texas  being the largest. The  Florida Panhandle  is usually considered part of the South, but the Florida peninsula (especially its lower half) is not.
 These states are much more closely tied to each other and have been part of U.S. territory for much longer than states much farther west than East Texas, and in the case of food, the influences and cooking styles are strictly separated as the terrain begins to change to prairie and desert from bayou and hardwood forest.
 
   Peach cobbler  is a popular Southern dessert. 
 This section of the country has some of the oldest known U.S. foodways, with some recipes almost 400 years old.
 Native American influences are still quite visible in the use of  cornmeal  as an essential staple [165]  and found in the Southern predilection for hunting wild game, in particular  wild turkey ,  deer ,  woodcock , and various kinds of  waterfowl ; for example, coastal North Carolina is a place where hunters will seek  tundra swan  as a part of Christmas dinner; the original English and Scottish settlers would have rejoiced at this revelation owing to the fact that such was banned among the commoner class in what is now the United Kingdom, and naturally, their descendants have not forgotten. [166] [167] 
 Native Americans also consumed  turtles  and catfish, specifically the  snapping turtle , the  alligator snapping turtle , and  blue catfish . Catfish are often  caught with one's bare hands , gutted, breaded, and fried to make a Southern variation on English  fish and chips  and turtles are turned into stews and soups. [168] [169] 
 Native American tribes of the region such as the  Cherokee  or  Choctaw  often cultivated or gathered local plants like  pawpaw ,  maypop  and several sorts of  squashes  and  corn  as food. [170]  They also used  spicebush [171]   and  sassafras  as spices, [172]  and the aforementioned fruits are still cultivated as food in the South. [173] 
 Maize is to this day found in dishes for breakfast, lunch and dinner in the form of  grits ,  hoecakes , baked  cornbread , and  spoonbread , and nuts like the  hickory ,  black walnut  and  pecan  are commonly included in desserts and pastries as varied as  mince pies ,  pecan pie , pecan rolls and  honey buns  (both are types of  sticky bun ), and  quick breads , which were themselves invented in the South during the American Civil War.
 Peaches have been grown in this region since the 17th century and are a staple crop as well as a favorite fruit, with  peach cobbler  being a signature dessert.
 
 Early history [ edit ] 
 European influence began soon after the settlement of Jamestown in 1607 and the earliest recipes emerged by the end of the 17th century. Specific influences from Europe were quite varied, and they remain traditional and essential to the modern cookery overall.
 German speakers often settled in the  Piedmont  on small farms from the coast, and invented an American delicacy that is now nationally beloved,  apple butter , based on their recipe for  apfelkraut , and later they introduced  red cabbage  and  rye .
 From the British Isles, an enormous amount of influence was bestowed upon the South, specifically foodways from 17th- and 18th-century  Ulster , the borderlands between England and Scotland, the  Scottish Highlands , portions of  Wales , the  West Midlands , the  West Country ,  Black Country  and Southern England. Settlers bound for America fled the tumult of the  Civil War ,  Ulster  and the  Highland Clearances .
 Often ships' manifests show their belongings nearly always included cookpots or  bakestones  and seed stock for plants like  peaches ,  plums , and  apples  to grow orchards which they planted in their hundreds. Each group brought foods and ideas from their respective regions.
 Settlers from Ireland and Scotland were well known for creating  peatreak  and  poitín , strong hard liquor based on fermenting potatoes or barley. In time they came up with a method for distilling a corn mash with  added sugar  and aging in charred barrels made of select hardwoods, which created a whiskey with a high proof. This gave birth to  American whiskey  and  Kentucky bourbon , and its cousins  moonshine  and  Everclear .
 Closer to the coast, 18th-century recipes for English  trifle  turned into  tipsy cakes , replacing the sherry with whiskey and their recipe for  pound cake , brought to the South around the same time, still works with American baking units: 1 pound sugar, one pound eggs, one pound butter, one pound flour.
 
 Common features [ edit ] 
   Biscuits and gravy 
 Pork  is the popular choice in 80% of Southern style barbecue and features in other preparations like sausages and sandwiches. For most Southerners in the  antebellum period , corn and pork were staples of the diet. [85]   Country sausage  is an ingredient in the Southern breakfast dish of  biscuits and gravy .  Country ham  is often served for breakfast and cured with salt or sugar and hickory-smoked. [174] 
 Accompanying many meals is the southern style fluffy  biscuit , where the leavening agent is  baking soda  and often includes  buttermilk , and for breakfast they often accompany  country ham ,  grits , and  scrambled eggs .
 
 Desserts [ edit ] 
   Sweet potato pie 
 Desserts  in the South tend to be quite rich and very much a legacy of entertaining to impress guests, since a Southern housewife was (and to a degree still is) expected to show her hospitality by laying out as impressive a banquet as she is able to manage. [175] 
 Desserts are vast and encompass  Lane cake ,  sweet potato pie ,  peach cobbler ,  pecan pie ,  hummingbird cake ,  Jefferson Davis pie ,  peanut brittle ,  coconut cake ,  apple fritters , peanut cookies,  Moravian spice cookies ,  chess pie ,  doberge cake ,  Lady Baltimore cake ,  bourbon balls , and caramel cake.
 
   Red velvet cake 
 American-style  sponge cakes  tend to be the rule rather than the exception as is American  buttercream , a place where Southern baking intersects with the rest of the United States. Nuts like pecan and hickory tend to be revered as garnishes for these desserts, and they make their way into local bakeries as fillings for chocolates.
 
 Cajun and Creole Cuisine of Louisiana [ edit ] 
   Shrimp  gumbo  is a popular  Cajun  and  Creole  dish. 
 In Louisiana, cooking methods have more in common with rustic French cuisines of the 17th and 18th century than anything ever found at the French court in Versailles or the bistros of 19th- and 20th-century Paris; this is especially true of  Cajun cuisine .
 Cajun French  is more closely related to dialects spoken in Northern  Maine ,  New Brunswick , and to a lesser degree  Haiti  than anything spoken in modern France, and likewise their terminology, methodology, and culture concerning food is much more closely related to the styles of these former French colonies even today.
 Unlike other areas of the South, Cajuns were and still are largely Catholics and thus much of what they eat is seasonal; for example pork is an important component of the Cajun  boucherie  (a large community event where the hog is butchered, prepared with a fiery spice mix, and eaten snout to tail) but it is never consumed in the five weeks of Lent, when such would be forbidden.
 Cajun cuisine tends to focus on what is locally available, historically because Cajuns were often poor, illiterate, independent farmers and not plantation owners but today it is because such is deeply imbedded in local culture.
 Boudin  is a type of sausage found only in this area of the country, and it is often by far more spicy than anything found in France or Belgium.  Chaudin  is unique to the area, and the method of cooking is comparable to the Scottish dish haggis: the stuffing includes onions, rice, bell peppers, spices, and pork sewn up in the stomach of a pig, and served in slices piping hot.
 Crawfish  are a staple of the Cajun grandmother's cookpot, as they are abundant in the bayous of Southern Louisiana and a main source of livelihood, as are  blue crabs ,  shrimp ,  corn on the cob , and red potatoes, since these are the basic ingredients of the Louisiana crawfish boil.
 
   Dishes typical of  Louisiana Creole cuisine 
 New Orleans  has been the capital of Creole culture since before Louisiana was a state. This culture is that of the colonial French and Spanish that evolved in the city of New Orleans, which was and still is quite distinct from the rural culture of Cajuns and dovetails with what would have been eaten in antebellum Louisiana plantation culture long ago.
 Cooking to impress and show one's wealth was a staple of Creole culture, which often mixed French, Spanish, Italian, German, African, Caribbean and Native American cooking methods, producing rich dishes like  oysters bienville ,  pompano en papillote , and even the  muffaletta  sandwich.
 However,  Louisiana Creole cuisine  tends to diverge from the original ideas brought to the region in ingredients:  profiteroles , for example, use a near identical  choux pastry  to that which is found in modern Paris but often use vanilla or chocolate ice cream rather than custard as the filling,  pralines  nearly always use  pecan  and not almonds, and  bananas foster  came about when New Orleans was a key port for the import of bananas from the Caribbean Sea. [176] 
 Gumbos  tend to be thickened with  okra , or the leaves of the  sassafrass tree .  Andouille  is often used, but not the  andouille  currently known in France, since French  andouille  uses tripe whereas Louisiana  andouille  is made from a  Boston butt , usually inflected with pepper flakes, and smoked for hours over pecan wood.
 Other ingredients that are native to Louisiana and not found in the cuisine of modern France would include rice, which has been a staple of both Creole and Cajun cooking for generations, and  sugarcane , which has been grown in Louisiana since the early 1800s. [177] 
 
   The maypop plant 
 Ground  cayenne pepper  is a key spice of the region, as is the meat of the  American alligator , something settlers learned from the Choctaws and Houma. The maypop plant has been a favorite of Southerners for 350 years; it gives its name to the Ocoee River in Tennessee, a legacy of the Cherokees, and in Southern Louisiana it is known as  liane de grenade , indicating its consumption by Cajuns. It is a close relative of the commercial  passionfruit , similar in size, and is a common plant growing in gardens all over the South as a source of fresh summertime fruit.
 
 African American influences [ edit ] 
 West African influences came with enslaved peoples from  Ghana ,  Benin ,  Mali ,  Congo ,  Angola ,  Sierra Leone ,  Nigeria , and other portions of the  Gold Coast , and the mark Africans and their descendants, the  African Americans , have made on Southern food is strong today and an essential addition to the Southern table.
 Crops like  okra ,  sorghum ,  sesame seeds ,  eggplant , and many different kinds of  melons  were brought with them from West Africa along with the incredibly important introduction of rice to the  Carolinas  and later to  Texas  and  Louisiana , whence it became a staple grain of that region and still remains a staple in those areas today, found in dishes like  Hoppin John , purloo, and  Charleston red rice .
 Like the poorer  indentured servants  that came to the South, slaves often got the leftovers of what was slaughtered for the consumption of the master of the plantation and so many recipes had to be adapted for offal, like  pig's ears  and  fatback [178]  though other methods encouraged low and slow methods of cooking to tenderize the tougher cuts of meat, like braising, smoking, and pit roasting, the last of which was a method known to West Africans in the preparation of roasting goat. [179] 
 Peanut soup  is one of the oldest known recipes brought to Virginia by Africans and over time, through their descendants, it has become creamier and milder tasting than the original. [180] 
 
 Florida cuisine [ edit ] 
 This section  needs additional citations for  verification .  Please help  improve this article  by  adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources:   "American cuisine"  –  news   ·   newspapers   ·   books   ·   scholar   ·   JSTOR   ( March 2023 )  ( Learn how and when to remove this template message ) 
 Certain portions of the South often have their own distinct subtypes of cuisine owing to local history and landscape. Floridian cuisine, for example, has a distinct way of cooking that includes different ingredients, especially south of Tampa and Orlando.
 Spain had control of the state until the early 19th century and used the southern tip as an outpost to guard the  Spanish Main  beginning in the 1500s, but Florida kept and still maintains ties with the  Caribbean Sea , including the  Bahamas ,  Haiti ,  Cuba ,  Puerto Rico , the  Dominican Republic , and  Jamaica .
 South of Tampa, there are and have been for a long time many speakers of  Caribbean Spanish ,  Haitian French ,  Jamaican Patois , and  Haitian Creole  and each Caribbean culture has a strong hold on cooking methods and spices in Florida. In turn, each mixes and matches with the  foodways  of the Seminole tribe and Anglophone settlers. Thus, for almost 200 years, Floridian cooking has had a more tropical flavor than any other Southern state.
 Allspice , a spice originally from  Jamaica , is an ingredient found in spice mixes in summer barbecues along with  ginger ,  garlic ,  scotch bonnet peppers , sea salt, and nutmeg; in Floridian cooking this is often a variant of  Jamaican jerk  spice. Coconuts are grown in the areas surrounding Miami and are shipped in daily through its port for consumption of the milk, meat, and water of the coconut.
 Bananas are not just the yellow Cavendish variety found in supermarkets across America: in Florida they are available as  bananitos ,  colorados ,  plátanos , and  maduros . The first of these is a tiny miniature banana only about 4-5 inches (10–13 cm) in length and it is sweet. The second has a red peel and an apple-like aftertaste, and the third and fourth are used as a starch on nearly every Caribbean island as a side dish, baked or fried: all of the above are a staple of Florida outdoor markets when in season and all have been grown in the Caribbean for almost 400 years.
 Mangoes  are grown as a backyard plant in Southern Florida and otherwise are a favorite treat coming in many different shapes in sizes from  Nam Doc Mai , brought to Florida after the Vietnam War, to  Madame Francis , a mango from Haiti.  Sweetsop  and  soursop  are popular around Miami, but nearly unheard of in other areas of the South.
 Citrus is a major crop of Florida, and features at many breakfast tables and many markets, with the height of the season near the first week of January.  Hamlin oranges  are the main cultivar planted, and from this crop the rest of the United States and to a lesser extent Europe gets orange juice. Other plantings would include  grapefruits ,  tangerines ,  clementine oranges ,  limes , and even a few more rare ones, like  cara cara navels ,  tangelos , and the Jamaican  Ugli fruit .  Tomatoes ,  bell peppers ,  habanero peppers , and figs, especially taken from the  Florida strangler fig , complete the produce menu.
 Blue crab ,  conch ,  Florida stone crab ,  red drum ,  dorado , and  marlins  tend to be local favorite ingredients. Dairy is available in this region, but it is less emphasized due to the year round warmth.
 Traditional  key lime pie , a dessert from the islands off the coast of Miami, is made with  condensed milk  to form the custard with the eye wateringly tart limes native to the  Florida Keys  in part because milk would spoil in an age before refrigeration.
 Pork in this region tends to be roasted in methods similar to those found in Puerto Rico and Cuba, owing to mass emigration from those countries in the 20th century, especially in the counties surrounding Miami. [181] 
 Orange blossom honey is a specialty of the state, and is widely available in farmer's markets. [182]   Caribbean lobster  is a favorite special meal eagerly sought after by Floridians as it is found as far north as  Fort Myers : spear diving and collecting them from reefs in the  Florida Keys  and near rocky shoals is a common practice of local scuba divers. [183] 
 
 Other small game [ edit ] 
 Ptarmigan ,  grouse ,  crow , blackbirds, dove, duck and other game fowl are consumed in the United States. In the American state of  Arkansas ,  beaver  tail stew is consumed in Cotton town. [184]   Squirrel ,  raccoon ,  possum ,  bear ,  muskrat ,  chipmunk ,  skunk ,  groundhog ,  pheasant ,  armadillo  and  rabbit  are also consumed in the United States.
 
 Cuisine in the West [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Cuisine of the Western United States 
 Cooking in the American West gets its influence from Native American and Hispanophone cultures, as well as later settlers that came in the 19th century: Texas, for example, has some influence from Germany in its choice of barbecue by using sausages.
 Another instance can be found in the Northwestern region, which encompasses  Oregon ,  Washington , and Northern California. All of the aforementioned rely on local seafood and a few classics of their own.
 In  New Mexico ,  Colorado ,  Nevada ,  Arizona ,  Utah ,  West Texas , and  Southern California , Mexican flavors and influences are extremely common, especially from the Mexican states of  Chihuahua ,  Baja California , and  Sonora . [185] [186] 
 
 Northwest [ edit ] 
   Cioppino 
 The Pacific Northwest as a region includes  Alaska  and the state of Washington near the Canada-US border and terminates near  Sacramento, California . Here, the terrain is mostly temperate rainforest on the coast mixed with pine forest as one approaches the Canada-US border inland.
 One of the core favorite foodstuffs is  Pacific salmon , native to many of the larger rivers of the area and often smoked or grilled on cedar planks. In  Alaska , wild game like  ptarmigan  and  moose  meat feature extensively since much of the state is wilderness.
 Fresh fish like  steelhead trout ,  Pacific cod ,  Pacific halibut , and  pollock  are fished for extensively and feature on the menu of many restaurants, as do a plethora of fresh berries and vegetables, like Cameo apples from  Washington  state, the headquarters of the U.S.  apple  industry,  cherries  from  Oregon ,  blackberries , and  marionberries , a feature of many pies.  Hazelnuts  are grown extensively in this region and are a feature of baking, such as in chocolate hazelnut pie, an Oregon favorite, [187]  and  Almond Roca  is a local candy.
 This region is also heavily dominated by some notable wineries producing a high-quality product.
 Like its counterpart on the opposite coast to the East, there is a grand variety of shellfish in this region.  Geoducks  are a native species of giant clam that have incredibly long necks;  they are eaten by the bucketful and shipped to Asia for millions of dollars as they are believed to be an  aphrodisiac .  Gaper clams  are a favorite food, often grilled or steamed in a sauce.
 Native California  abalone  is protected as a food source, and a traditional foodway predating settlement by whites, today featuring heavily in the cooking of fine restaurants as well as in home cooking, in mirin-flavored soups (the influence of Japanese cooking is strong in the region) noodle dishes and on the barbecue.
 Native  Olympia oysters  are served on the half shell as well as the  Kumamoto oyster , introduced by Japanese immigrants and a staple at dinner as an appetizer.
 California mussels  are a delicacy of the region, and have been a feature of the cooking for generations. There is evidence that Native American tribes consumed them up and down the California coast for centuries. [188] 
 Crabs are a delicacy, and included in this are  Alaskan king crab ,  red crab ,  yellow crab , and  Dungeness crab . Californian and Oregonian sportsmen pursue the last three extensively using hoop nets, and prepare them in a multitude of ways.
 Alaskan king crab, able to grow as large as 10 kg, is often served steamed for a whole table with lemon-butter sauce or put in chunks of salad with avocado, and native crabs are the base of dishes like the  California roll ,  cioppino , a tomato-based fisherman's stew, and  Crab Louie , another kind of salad native to San Francisco.
 Favorite grains are mainly wheat, and the region is known for  sourdough bread . Cheeses of the region include  Humboldt Fog ,  Cougar Gold  and  Teleme . [189] 
 
 Southwest and Southern California [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Cuisine of the Southwestern United States 
   Mixed beef and chicken  fajita  ingredients, served on a hot iron skillet 
 The states of the  Four Corners  ( Arizona ,  New Mexico ,  Colorado , and  Utah ) plus  Nevada ,  Southern California , and  West Texas  make up a large chunk of the United States.
 There is a distinct Hispanic accent to the cookery here, with each having cultural capitals in  Albuquerque ,  Denver ,  Las Vegas ,  Los Angeles ,  Phoenix ,  Santa Fe ,  San Diego , and  Tucson .
 For centuries, prior to California's statehood in the 1850s, it was part of the  Spanish Empire , namely  Alta California  (modern  California ),  Santa Fe de Nuevo México  (modern  New Mexico ), and  Tejas  (modern  Texas ). Today it is home of a large population of  Native Americans ,  Hispanos , descendants of the  American frontier ,  Asian Americans , and immigrants from  Mexico  and  Latin America .
 California, New Mexico, and Texas continue to hold their unique identities which is reflected in their distinct regional cuisines, the multiple  cuisines of California ,  New Mexican cuisine ,  Texan cuisine , and  Tex-Mex .  Spanish  is a commonly spoken secondary language here; the state of  New Mexico  has its own distinct  dialect . [190] 
 With the exception of Southern California, the signature meat is  beef , since this is one of the two regions in which  cowboys  lived and modern  cattle ranchers  still eke out their living today. [191] [192]  High-quality beefstock is a feature that has been present in the region for more than 200 years and the many cuts of beef are unique to the United States. These cuts of meat are different from the related Mexican cuisine over the border in that certain kind of offal, like  lengua  (tongue)  cabeza  (head) and  tripas  (tripe) are considered less desirable and are thus less emphasized. Typical cuts would include the ribs, brisket, sirloin, flank steak, skirt steak, and t-bone.
 
   Chili con carne , a typical Tex-Mex dish with garnishes and tortilla chips 
 Historically, Spanish settlers that came to the region found it completely unsuitable to the mining operations that much older settlements in  Mexico  had to offer as their technology was not advanced enough to extract the silver that would later be found. They had no knowledge of the gold in California, which wouldn't be found until 1848, and knew even less about the silver in Nevada, undiscovered until after the  Civil War .
 Instead, in order to make the pueblos prosper, they adapted the old rancho system of places like  Andalusia  in  Spain  and brought the earliest beefstock, among these were breeds that would go feral and become the  Texas longhorn , and  Navajo-Churro sheep , still used as breeding stock because they are easy to keep and well adapted to the extremely arid and hot climate, where temperatures easily exceed 38 °C. [193] 
 Later, cowboys learned from their management practices, many of which still stand today, like the practical management of stock on horseback using the  Western saddle . [194] 
 
   Biscochitos , the  state cookie  of  New Mexico 
 Likewise, settlers learned the cooking methods of those who came before and local tribes as well, for example, portions of  Arizona  and  New Mexico  still use the aforementioned beehive shaped clay contraption called an  horno , an outdoor wood-fired oven both Native American tribes like the  Navajo  and Spaniards used for roasting meat,  maize , and baking bread. [195] 
 Meats that see frequent use are  elk  meat, a favorite in crown roasts and burgers, and nearer the Mexican border  rattlesnake , often skinned and stewed. [196] [197] 
 The taste for alcohol tends toward light and clean flavors found in  tequila , a staple of this region since the days of the  Wild West  and a staple in the bartender's arsenal for cocktails, especially in Las Vegas. In Utah, a state heavily populated by  Mormons , alcohol is frowned upon by  the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints  but still available in area bars in  Salt Lake City , mainly consumed by the populations of Catholics and other Protestant denominations living there.
 Introduction of agriculture was limited prior to the 20th century and the development of better irrigation techniques, but included the addition of  peaches , a crop still celebrated by Native American tribes like the  Havasupai , [198]  and oranges. Today in  Arizona ,  Texas , and  New Mexico  the favored orange today is the Moro  blood orange , which often finds its way into the local cuisine, like cakes and marmalade. [199] [200] 
 Pine nuts  are a particular regional specialty and feature often in fine dining and cookies; in Nevada the Native American tribes that live there are by treaty given rights to exclusive harvest, and in New Mexico they reserve usage of the term  piñon  for certain species of indigenous pine nuts. [201] 
 From Native Americans, Westerners learned the practice of eating cactus fruit from the myriad species of  opuntia  that occupy the  Chihuahuan ,  Sonoran , and  Mojave  desert lands. In California, Spanish missionaries brought with them the  mission fig , and today this fruit is a delicacy.
 
   New Mexico green chile  is a staple of  New Mexican cuisine . 
 Cuisine in this region tends to have certain key ingredients:  tomatoes ,  onions ,  black beans ,  pinto beans ,  rice ,  bell peppers ,  chile peppers , and  cheese , in particular  Monterey Jack , invented in Southern California in the 19th century and itself often further altered into pepper Jack where spicy  jalapeño  peppers are incorporated into the cheese to create a smoky taste.
 Chili peppers play an important role in the cuisine, with a few native to the region. This is especially true with the region's distinct  New Mexico chile  pepper, still grown by  Hispanos of New Mexico  and  Puebloans  the most sought after of which come from the  Hatch  valley,  Albuquerque 's  Central Rio Grande ,  Chimayo , and  Pueblos .
 In New Mexico, chile is eaten on a variety of foods, such as the green chile cheeseburger, made popular by fast food chains such as  Blake's Lotaburger . Indeed, even national fast food chains operating in the state, such as  McDonald's , offer locally grown chile on many of their menu items.
 In the 20th century a few more recent additions have arrived like the  poblano pepper ,  rocoto pepper ,  ghost pepper ,  thai chili pepper , and  Korean pepper , the last three especially when discussing Southern California and its large population from East and South Asia. [202] [203] 
 Cornbread  is consumed, however the recipe differs from ones in the East in that the batter is cooked in a cast-iron skillet.
 Outdoor cooking is popular and still utilizes an old method settlers brought from the East with them, in which a cast-iron  Dutch oven  is covered with the coals of the fire and stacked or hung from a tripod: this is different from the earthenware pots of Mexico.
 Tortillas  are still made the traditional way here and form an important component of the spicy  breakfast burrito , which contains ham, eggs, and salsa or  pico de gallo . They are also used for regular  burritos , which contains any combination of marinated meats, vegetables, and piquant chilis; smothered burritos, often both containing and topped with New Mexico chile sauces;  quesadillas , a much loved grilled dish where cheese and other ingredients are stuffed between two tortillas and served by the slice; and steak  fajitas , where sliced skirt steak sizzles in a skillet with caramelized onions.
 
   Nachos  with cheese 
 Unlike Mexico, tortillas of this region also may incorporate vegetables like spinach into the flatbread dough to make  wraps , which were invented in Southern California. Food here tends to use pungent spices and condiments, typically  chili verde  sauce, various kinds of  hot sauce ,  sriracha sauce ,  chili powder ,  cayenne pepper ,  white pepper ,  cumin ,  paprika ,  onion powder ,  thyme  and  black pepper . Nowhere is this fiery mix of spice more evident than in the dishes  chili con carne , a meaty stew, and  cowboy beans , both of which are a feature of regional cookoffs.
 Southern California has several additions like  five spice powder ,  rosemary ,  curry powder ,  kimchi , and  lemongrass , with many of these brought by recent immigration to the region and often a feature of Southern California's fusion cuisine, popular in fine dining. [ citation needed ] 
 In Texas, the local barbecue is often entirely made up of beef  brisket  or large rib racks, where the meat is seasoned with a  spice rub  and cooked over coals of  mesquite . In other portions of the state they smoke the meat and peppery sausages over high heat using  pecan ,  apple , and  oak  wood and serve it with a side of pickled vegetables, a legacy of German and Czech settlers of the late 1800s.
 California is home to  Santa Maria-style barbecue , where the spices involved generally are  black pepper ,  paprika , and  garlic salt , and grill over the coals of  coast live oak . [204] 
 
   A  chimichanga 
 Native American additions may include  Navajo frybread  and  corn on the cob , often roasted on the grill in its husk. A typical accompaniment or appetizer of all these states is the  tortilla chip , which sometimes includes cornmeal from cultivars of corn that are blue or red in addition to the standard yellow of sweetcorn, and is served with  salsa  of varying hotness.
 Tortilla chips also are an ingredient in the Tex Mex dish  nachos , where these chips are loaded with any combination of ground beef, melted Monterey Jack, cheddar, or Colby cheese,  guacamole ,  sour cream , and salsa, and Texas usually prefers a version of  potato salad  as a side dish.
 For alcohol, a key ingredient is  tequila : this spirit has been made on both sides of the US-Mexican border for generations, [205]  and in modern cuisine it is a must-have in a bartender's arsenal as well as an addition to dishes for sauteeing. [206] 
 Southern California is focused more towards the coast and has had more contact with immigration from the  West Pacific  and  Baja California , in addition to having the international city of  Los Angeles  as its capital. Here, the prime mode of transportation is by car.
 Drive through fast food was invented in this area, but so was the concept of the gourmet burger movement, giving birth to chains like  In-N-Out Burger , with many variations of burgers including chili, multiple patties, avocado, special sauces, and  Angus  or  wagyu beef . Common accompaniments include thick  milkshakes  in various flavors like mint, chocolate, peanut butter, vanilla, strawberry, and mango.
 Smoothies  are a common breakfast item made with fresh fruit juice, yogurt, and crushed ice.  Agua fresca , a drink originated by Mexican immigrants, is a common hot-weather beverage sold in many supermarkets and at mom and pop stands, available in citrus, watermelon, and strawberry flavors; the California version usually served chilled without grain in it.
 
   Machaca  with pork, eggs, and potatoes wrapped in a tortilla, served with salsa 
 The weather in Southern California is such that the temperature rarely drops below 54 °F (12 °C) in winter, thus, sun-loving crops like  pistachios ,  kiwifruit ,  avocadoes ,  strawberries , and  tomatoes  are staple crops of the region, the last often dried in the sun and a feature of salads and sandwiches.
 Olive oil  is a staple cooking oil of the region and has been since the days of  Junípero Serra ; today the  mission olive  is a common tree growing in a Southern Californian's back garden. As a crop olives are increasingly a signature of the region along with  Valencia oranges  and  Meyer lemons .
 Soybeans ,  bok choy ,  Japanese persimmon ,  thai basil ,  Napa cabbage ,  nori ,  mandarin oranges ,  water chestnuts , and  mung beans  are other crops brought to the region from East Asia and are common additions to salads as the emphasis on fresh produce in both Southern and Northern California is strong.
 Other vegetables and herbs have a distinct Mediterranean flavor which would include  oregano ,  basil ,  summer squash ,  eggplant , and  broccoli , with all of the above extensively available at farmers' markets all around Southern California.
 Naturally, salads native to Southern California tend to be hearty affairs, like  Cobb salad  and  Chinese chicken salad , and dressings like  green goddess  and  ranch  are a staple.
 California-style pizza  tends to have disparate ingredients with an emphasis on vegetables, with any combination of chili oil, prawns, eggs, chicken, shiitake mushrooms, olives, bell pepper, goat cheese, and feta cheese. Peanut noodles tend to include a sweet dressing with lo mein noodles and chopped peanuts.
 Fresh fish and shellfish in Southern California tends to be expensive in restaurants, but every year since the end of WWII, the Pismo clam festival has taken place where the local population takes a  large species of clam  and bakes, stuffs, and roasts it as it is a regional delicacy. [207] [208] 
 Fishing for pacific species of octopus and the  Humboldt squid  are common, and both are a feature of East Asian and other L.A. fish markets. [209] [210] [211]   Lingcod  is a coveted regional fish that is often caught in the autumn off the coast of  San Diego  and in the  Channel Islands  and often served baked.  California sheephead  are often grilled and are much sought after by spear fishermen and the immigrant Chinese population, in which case it is basket steamed.
 Most revered of all in recent years is the  California spiny lobster , a beast that can grow to 44 lb, and is a delicacy that now rivals the fishery for  Dungeness crab  in its importance. [212] 
 
 Pacific and Hawaiian cuisine [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Cuisine of Hawaii 
   Lomi-lomi  salmon 
 Hawaii is often considered to be one of the most culturally diverse U.S. states, as well as being the only state with an Asian-majority population and one of the few places where United States territory extends into the tropics. As a result,  Hawaiian cuisine  borrows elements of a variety of cuisines, particularly those of Asian and  Pacific-rim  cultures, as well as traditional native Hawaiian and a few additions from the American mainland.
 American influence in the last 150 years has brought cattle, goats, and sheep to the islands, introducing cheese, butter, and yogurt products, as well as crops like  red cabbage .
 Major Asian and Polynesian influences on modern Hawaiian cuisine are from Japan, Korea, Vietnam, China (especially near the Pearl River delta,) Samoa, and the Philippines. From Japan, the concept of serving raw fish as a meal with rice was introduced, as was soft  tofu , setting the stage for the popular dish called  poke. 
 From Korea, immigrants to Hawaii brought a love of spicy garlic marinades for meat and  kimchi . From China, their version of  char siu baau  became modern  manapua , a type of steamed pork bun with a spicy filling. [213] 
 Filipinos brought vinegar,  bagoong , and  lumpia , and during the 20th century immigrants from  American Samoa  brought the open pit fire  umu [214]  and the Vietnamese introduced  lemongrass  and  fish sauce .
 Each East Asian culture brought several different kinds of noodles, including  udon ,  ramen ,  mei fun , and  pho , and today these are common lunchtime meals. [215] 
 Much of this cuisine mixes and melts into traditions like the  lu'au , whose traditional elaborate fare was once the prerogative of kings and queens but is today the subject of parties for both tourists and also private parties for the  ‘ohana  (meaning family and close friends.)
 Traditionally, women and men ate separately under the Hawaiian  kapu  system, a system of religious beliefs that honored the Hawaiian gods similar to the  Maori   tapu  system, though in this case had some specific prohibitions towards females eating things like coconut, pork, turtle meat, and bananas as these were considered parts of the male gods. Punishment for violation could be severe, as a woman might endanger a man's  mana , or soul, by eating with him or otherwise by eating the forbidden food because doing so dishonored the male gods.
 As the system broke down after 1810, introductions of foods from laborers on plantations began to be included at feasts and much cross pollination occurred, where Asian foodstuffs mixed with Polynesian foodstuffs like  breadfruit ,  kukui nuts , and purple  sweet potatoes .
 Some notable Hawaiian fare includes seared ahi tuna,  opakapaka  (snapper) with passionfruit, Hawaiian island-raised lamb, beef and meat products, Hawaiian  plate lunch , and Molokai shrimp. Seafood traditionally is caught fresh in Hawaiian waters, and particular delicacies are  ula poni ,  papaikualoa ,  ‘opihi , and  ‘opihi malihini , better known as Hawaiian spiny lobster, Kona crab, Hawaiian limpet, and abalone, the last brought over with Japanese immigrants. [216] 
 Some cuisine also incorporates a broad variety of produce and locally grown agricultural products, including  tomatoes , sweet Maui onions, taro, and macadamia nuts. Tropical fruits also play an important role in the cuisine as a flavoring in cocktails and in desserts, including local cultivars of  bananas ,  sweetsop ,  mangoes ,  lychee ,  coconuts ,  papayas , and  lilikoi  ( passionfruit ).  Pineapples  have been an island staple since the 19th century and figure into many marinades and drinks.
 
 Common dishes found on a regional level [ edit ] 
 See also:  List of American regional and fusion cuisines 
 
 
 
 
 Chicken, pork and corn cooking in a  barbecue   smoker 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 New York–style pizza  served at a pizzeria in New York
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Chicago-style deep-dish pizza  from the original  Giordano's  location
 
 
 
 
 
 
 A  Philly cheesesteak  from Pat's King of Steaks in Philadelphia
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Key lime pie is from  Key West, Florida .
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Memphis-style barbecue 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 California-style pizza 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 New York-style cheesecake
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Chicago-style hot dog
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Boston cream pie
 
 
 
 
 Ethnicity-specific and immigrant influence [ edit ] 
 This section  possibly contains  original research .  Please  improve it  by  verifying  the claims made and adding  inline citations . Statements consisting only of original research should be removed.   ( February 2008 )  ( Learn how and when to remove this template message ) 
   Fried fish  and  french fries  in  San Diego , California 
 The influence of ethnicity-specific cuisines like  Italian cuisine  and  Mexican cuisine  was present in the United States by  World War I . There are recipes for Chilean meat pies, chicken  chop suey ,  chow mein , Mexican pork pastries and Italian meatballs going back to at least the 1930s, but many of the recipes were Anglicized and they appeared relatively infrequently compared to Northern European recipes. [217] 
 19th-century cookbooks bear evidence of diverse influences with some including recipes like Indian pickle, Italian pork and various curries. 19th-century literature shows knowledge of  Jewish ,  Russian ,  Italian ,  Chinese  and  Greek-American cuisines , and foreign cookbooks continued to grow more detailed through World War I including recipes like Peruvian chicken, Mexican  enchiladas , Chilean  corn pudding  and Hindustan chicken curry. [218] 
 Louise Rice, author of  Dainty Dishes from Foreign Lands  describes the recipes in her book as "not wholly vegetarian"  though noting at the time of publication in 1911 that most of the recipes would likely be new to average American cooks and likely contain higher proportions of vegetables to meat. She includes Italian pasta recipes like macaroni in milk, soups and  polentas  and German recipes like liver  dumplings  called  Leberknödel  and a variation of  Sauerbraten . [219] 
 
The demand for ethnic foods in the United States reflects the nation's changing diversity as well as its development over time. According to the  National Restaurant Association , [220]   
 Restaurant industry sales are expected to reach a record high of $476 billion in 2005, an increase of 4.9 percent over 2004... Driven by consumer demand, the ethnic food market reached record sales in 2002, and has emerged as the fastest growing category in the food and beverage product sector, according to USBX Advisory Services. Minorities in the U.S. spend a combined $142 billion on food and by 2010, America's ethnic population is expected to grow by 40 percent.
 
 
   Korean tacos  from the "Seoul on Wheels" truck in San Francisco 
 A movement began during the 1980s among popular leading chefs to reclaim America's ethnic foods within its regional traditions, where these trends originated. One of the earliest was  Paul Prudhomme , who in 1984 began the introduction of his influential cookbook,  Paul Prodhomme's Louisiana Kitchen , by describing the over 200-year history of  Creole  and Cajun cooking; he aims to "preserve and expand the Louisiana tradition." [221]  Prodhomme's success quickly inspired other chefs. Norman Van Aken embraced a Floridian type cuisine fused with many ethnic and globalized elements in his  Feast of Sunlight  cookbook in 1988. California became swept up in the movement, then seemingly started to lead the trend itself, in, for example, the popular restaurant  Chez Panisse  in Berkeley.
 Examples of the Chez Panisse phenomenon, chefs who embraced a new globalized cuisine, were celebrity chefs like Jeremiah Tower and  Wolfgang Puck , both former colleagues at the restaurant. Puck went on to describe his belief in contemporary, new style American cuisine in the introduction to  The Wolfgang Puck Cookbook :
 
 
 Another major breakthrough, whose originators were once thought to be crazy, is the mixing of ethnic cuisines. It is not at all uncommon to find raw fish listed next to tortillas on the same menu. Ethnic crossovers also occur when distinct elements meet in a single recipe. This country is, after all, a huge melting pot. Why should its cooking not illustrate the American transformation of diversity into unity? [222] 
 
 
 Puck's former colleague, Jeremiah Tower became synonymous with  California Cuisine  and the overall American  culinary revolution . Meanwhile, the restaurant that inspired both Puck and Tower became a distinguished establishment, popularizing its so called "mantra" in its book by  Paul Bertolli  and owner  Alice Waters ,  Chez Panisse Cooking , in 1988. Published well after the restaurants' founding in 1971, this new cookbook from the restaurant seemed to perfect the idea and philosophy that had developed over the years. The book embraced America's natural bounty, specifically that of California, while containing recipes that reflected Bertoli and Waters' appreciation of both northern Italian and French style foods.
 
 Early ethnic influences [ edit ] 
   Adaptation of  Mexican food  tailored for the mainstream American market usually is different from  Mexican food  typically served in Mexico. 
 While the earliest cuisine of the United States was influenced by  Native Americans , the  thirteen colonies , or the  antebellum South , the overall culture of the nation, its  gastronomy  and the growing  culinary arts  became ever more influenced by its changing  ethnic  mix and  immigrant  patterns from the 18th and 19th centuries unto the present. Some of the ethnic groups that continued to influence the cuisine were here in prior years; others arrived more numerously during "The Great  Transatlantic Migration " (of 1870–1914) or other  mass migrations .
 Some of the ethnic influences could be found across the nation after the  American Civil War  and into the  continental expansion  for most of the 19th century. Ethnic influences already in the nation at that time would include the following groups and their respective cuisines:
 
 Select nationalities of Europe and the respective developments from  early modern European cuisine  of the colonial age:
 British-Americans  and on-going developments in  New England cuisine , the national traditions founded in the cuisine of the original thirteen colonies, The Cuisine of the Southern United States, and many aspects of other regional cuisine. 
 Spanish Americans  and early modern  Spanish cuisine , as well as  Basque-Americans  and  Basque cuisine . 
 Early  German-American  or  Pennsylvania Dutch  and  Pennsylvania Dutch cuisine 
 French Americans  and their  New World  regional identities such as:
 Acadian 
 Cajun  and  Cajun cuisine 
 Louisiana Creole  and  Louisiana Creole cuisine . Louisiana Creole (also called French Créole) refers to native-born people of the New Orleans area who are descended from the Colonial French and Spanish settlers of Colonial French Louisiana, before it became part of the United States in 1803 with the  Louisiana Purchase . 
 The various ethnicities originating from the early  gastronomy  and  cuisines  of the  New World ,  Latin American cuisine , and North American cuisine:
 Native Americans in the United States  and  Native American cuisine 
 African Americans  and  Soul food . 
 Puerto Rican cuisine 
 Mexican Americans  and  Mexican-American cuisine ; as well as related regional cuisines:
 Tex-Mex  (regional Texas and Mexican fusion) 
 Some aspects of " Southwestern cuisine ". 
 New Mexican cuisine  from  New Mexico  and the historical region of  Santa Fe de Nuevo México , and now ethnically tied to the  Pueblos  and  Hispanos of New Mexico . 
 Later ethnic and immigrant influence [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Immigration to the United States 
   Fortune cookies were invented in the United States and are of Japanese origin but are popular in American Chinese cuisine. 
   Chinese takeout 
 Mass migrations of immigrants to the United States came over time. Historians identify several waves of migration to the United States: one from 1815 to 1860, in which some five million  English ,  Irish ,  Germanic ,  Scandinavian , and others from  northwestern Europe  came to the United States; one from 1865 to 1890, in which some 10 million immigrants, also mainly from northwestern Europe, settled; and a third from 1890 to 1914, in which 15 million immigrants, mainly from  central ,  eastern , and  southern Europe  (many  Austrian ,  Hungarian ,  Turkish ,  Lithuanian ,  Russian ,  Jewish ,  Greek ,  Italian , and  Romanian ) settled in the United States. [223] 
 Together with earlier arrivals to the United States (including the indigenous Native Americans,  Hispanic and Latino Americans , particularly in the  West ,  Southwest , and  Texas ;  African Americans  who came to the United States in the  Atlantic slave trade ; and early colonial migrants from Europe), these new waves of immigrants had a profound impact on national or regional cuisine. Some of these more prominent groups include the following:
 
 
 Albanian Americans — Albanian cuisine 
 Arab Americans , particularly  Lebanese Americans  (the largest ethnic Arab group in the United States)— Arab cuisine ,  Lebanese cuisine 
 Argentine Americans — Argentine cuisine 
 Armenian Americans — Armenian cuisine 
 Brazilian Americans — Brazilian cuisine 
 Cambodian Americans — Cambodian cuisine 
 Chinese Americans — American Chinese cuisine ,  Chinese cuisine 
 Colombian Americans — Colombian cuisine 
 Cuban Americans — Cuban cuisine 
 Dominican Americans — Dominican Republic cuisine 
 Dutch Americans — Dutch cuisine 
 Ethiopian Americans — Eritrean Americans :  Ethiopian cuisine ,  Eritrean cuisine  in Los Angeles, Washington, D.C., Denver, New York. 
 Filipino Americans — Filipino cuisine ,  Filipino-American cuisine 
 French Americans — French cuisine 
 German Americans — German cuisine  (the  Pennsylvania Dutch , although descended from Germans, arrived earlier than the bulk of German migrants and have distinct culinary traditions) 
 Greek Americans — Greek-American cuisine ,  Greek cuisine ,  Mediterranean cuisine 
 Guatemalan Americans — Guatemalan cuisine 
 Haitian Americans — Haitian cuisine 
 Honduran Americans — Honduran cuisine 
 Hungarian Americans — Hungarian cuisine 
 Indian Americans — Indian cuisine 
 Irish Americans — Irish cuisine 
 Italian Americans — Italian-American cuisine ,  Italian cuisine 
 Japanese Americans — Japanese cuisine , with influences on the  Hawaiian cuisine 
 Jewish Americans — Jewish cuisine , with particular influence on  New York City cuisine 
 Korean Americans — Korean cuisine 
 Lithuanian Americans — Lithuanian cuisine ,  Midwest 
 Nicaraguan American — Nicaraguan cuisine 
 Nigerian Americans — Nigerian cuisine 
 Pakistani Americans — Pakistani cuisine 
 Peruvian Americans — Peruvian cuisine 
 Polish Americans — Polish cuisine , with particular impact on  Midwest 
 Polynesian Americans — Hawaiian cuisine 
 Portuguese Americans — Portuguese cuisine 
 Romanian Americans — Romanian cuisine 
 Russian Americans — Russian cuisine , with particular impact on  Midwest 
 Salvadoran Americans — Salvadoran cuisine 
 Scottish Americans — Scottish cuisine 
 Spanish Americans — Spanish cuisine 
 Thai Americans — Thai cuisine 
 Turkish Americans — Turkish cuisine ,  Balkan cuisine 
 Venezuelan Americans — Venezuelan cuisine 
 Vietnamese Americans — Vietnamese cuisine 
 West Indian Americans — Caribbean cuisine ,  Jamaican cuisine ,  Trinidad and Tobago cuisine ,  Barbadian cuisine ,  Bahamian cuisine 
 Italian, Mexican and Chinese (Cantonese) cuisines have indeed joined the mainstream. These three cuisines have become so ingrained in the American culture that they are no longer foreign to the American palate. According to the study, more than nine out of 10 consumers are familiar with and have tried these foods, and about half report eating them frequently. The research also indicates that Italian, Mexican and Chinese (Cantonese) have become so adapted to such an extent that "authenticity" is no longer a concern to customers. [224] 
 
 Contributions from these ethnic foods have become as common as traditional "American" fares such as hot dogs, hamburgers, beef  steak , which are derived from  German cuisine , ( chicken-fried steak , for example, is a variation on German  schnitzel ), cherry pie,  Coca-Cola ,  milkshakes , fried chicken (Fried chicken is of  English ,  Scottish , and  African  influence),  Pepsi ,  Dr Pepper  and so on. Nowadays, Americans also have a ubiquitous consumption of foods like  pizza  and  pasta ,  tacos  and  burritos  to " General Tso's chicken " and  fortune cookies . Fascination with these and other ethnic foods may also vary with region.
 
 
 Other popular foods [ edit ] 
 Fast food [ edit ] 
 See also:  Fast food § United States 
 The United States has a large fast food industry. Major American fast food chains include  McDonald's ,  Burger King ,  Domino's ,  Pizza Hut ,  KFC ,  Popeyes ,  Subway ,  Taco Bell ,  Arby's ,  Starbucks ,  Dunkin' Donuts ,  White Castle ,  In-N-Out Burger ,  Sonic Drive-In ,  Chick-fil-A ,  Church's Chicken , and  Raising Cane's , among numerous other multinational, national, regional, and local chains. Traditional American fast food items are hamburgers, french fries, breaded chicken, and pizza, though several chains also offer items from different cuisines modified for American palates, such as tacos, pasta, and stir-fry. Many American fast food chains have expanded abroad to other countries, typically offering standard American fare alongside items adapted to appeal to regional tastes within their markets. [225] 
 
 Desserts [ edit ] 
   Banana pudding 
 A classic American dessert is  apple pie . Some other famous American desserts are  banana split ,  Boston cream pie ,  key lime pie , and  bananas foster . [226]  Other famous American desserts are  chocolate chip cookies ,  pecan pie ,  carrot cake ,  banana pudding ,  S'more ,  black and white cookies ,  pumpkin pie ,  coconut cake ,  funnel cake ,  brownies  and  red velvet cake . [227] 
 
 Influential figures and American cuisine on television [ edit ] 
 See also:  List of chefs  and  List of Culinary Institute of America alumni 
 American  chefs  have been influential both in the food industry and in popular culture. Some important 19th-century American chefs include  Charles Ranhofer  of  Delmonico's Restaurant  in  New York , and Bob Payton, who is credited with bringing American-style pizza to the UK. Later, chefs Charles Scotto, Louis Pacquet, John Massironi were founded the American Culinary Federation in 1930, taking after similar organizations across Europe. In the 1940's, Chef James Beard hosted the first nationally televised cooking show  I Love to Eat.  His name is also carried by the foundation and prestigious cooking award recognizing excellence in the American cooking community. [228]  Since Beard, many chefs and cooking personalities have taken to television, and the success of the  Cooking Channel  and  Food Network  have contributed to the popularity of American cuisine. In 1946, the Culinary Institute of America was founded by Katharine Angel and Frances Roth. This would become the United States' most prestigious culinary school, where many of the most talented American chefs would study prior to successful careers. [229]  The American Culinary community has grown due to both restaurants and media, through the work of many talented chefs.
 
 Influential figures [ edit ] 
   Thomas Keller  at  The French Laundry [230] 
   Culinary Institute of America 
 Notable American restaurant chefs include  Samin Nosrat  ( Salt, Fat, Acid, Heat ),  Thomas Keller  ( The French Laundry ),  Charlie Trotter  (Trotter's),  Grant Achatz  (Alinea),  Alfred Portale  (Portale),  Paul Prudhomme  (K-Paul's),  Paul Bertolli  (Oliveto),  Jonathan Waxman  ( Barbuto ),  Mark Peel  (Campanile),  Frank Stitt  (Bottega),  Alice Waters  (Chez Panisse),  Wolfgang Puck  (Spago),  Patrick O'Connell  (The Inn), Eric Ripert (Le Bernardin),  Todd English  (Olives) and  Anthony Bourdain  (Les Halles). Many of these chefs have received much critical acclaim, as Keller, Achatz, Ripert and O'Connell have all received three  Michelin stars , the highest distinction which a restaurant can be given. Keller was given this award for  The French Laundry , Achatz for  Alinea , Ripert for  Le Bernardin  and O'Connell for  The Inn at Little Washington . [231] 
 Celebrity chefs have also helped to expand the culinary arts into popular culture, with chefs such as  David Chang  (Chef's Table),  Alton Brown  (Iron Chef America),  Emeril Lagasse  (Emeril Live),  Cat Cora  ( Iron Chef America ), Erik Davidson (Phat Erik's),  Michael Symon  (The Chew),  Bobby Flay  (Beat Bobby Flay),  Ina Garten  (Barefoot Contessa) and  Guy Fieri  ( Diners, Drive-ins and Dives ). [232]  Many of these celebrity chefs, such as  David Chang ,  Emeril Lagasse  and  Bobby Flay  began their careers in restaurants before branching out into television. The shows have a wide variety of formats, including cooking competitions, such as Iron Chef, documentaries, such as Anthony Bourdain's  Parts Unknown , shows that take a look into restaurants, as  Chef's Table  does, and shows that teach cooking. The success of food television specifically in the United States has helped American Cuisine grow around the world. [ citation needed ] 
 
 Regional cuisine chefs [ edit ] 
 Regional chefs are emerging as localized celebrity chefs with growing broader appeal, such as  Peter Merriman  (Hawaii Regional Cuisine),  Roy Choi  (Korean American Cuisine),  Jerry Traunfeld ,  Alan Wong  (Pacific Rim cuisine),  Rick Bayless  (traditional  Mexican cuisine  with modern interpretations), Norman Van Aken (New World Cuisine – fusion Latin, Caribbean, Asian, African and American), and Mark Miller (American Southwest cuisine).
 
 See also [ edit ] 
 
 United States portal Food portal 
 Cuisine of the Americas 
 Indigenous cuisine of the Americas 
 Native American cuisine 
 Soul food 
 Types [ edit ] 
 American wine 
 Regional [ edit ] 
 Cuisine of California 
 Cuisine of New York City 
 Cuisine of the Southern United States 
 Cuisine of Atlanta 
 Cuisine of Houston 
 Tex-Mex cuisine 
 Ethnic [ edit ] 
 American Chinese cuisine 
 Mexican-American cuisine 
 Italian-American cuisine 
 Greek-American cuisine 
 Puerto Rican cuisine 
 Other [ edit ] 
 High on the Hog: How African American Cuisine Transformed America 
 Cuisine of Antebellum America 
 List of American desserts 
 List of American breads 
 List of American foods 
 List of American regional and fusion cuisines 
 List of American breakfast foods 
 Tlingit cuisine 
 Cuisine of the Americas 
 Cuisine of the Pennsylvania Dutch 
 Cuisine of the Southern United States 
 Culture of Guam#Cuisine 
 American tea culture 
   Food portal 
 References [ edit ] 
 
 
 ^   "American food and the flavors of diversity" .  Stump & Associates . August 22, 2019. 
 
 ^   Freedman, Paul (2019).  "American Cuisine and How It Got That Way" .  Department of History | Yale University . 
 
 ^   "A Journey Through the History of American Food in 100 Bites" .  NPR . November 15, 2014. 
 
 ^   "Food in America" .  Digital History . 
 
 ^   McWilliams, Mark (2003).  "Distant Tables: Food and the Novel in Early America" .  Early American Literature .  38  (3): 365–393.  doi : 10.1353/eal.2003.0041 .  JSTOR   25055570 .  S2CID   161615724 . 
 
 ^   Vivian, John (February 2001).  "The Three Sisters: Corn, Beans and Squash" .  Mother Earth News . 
 
 ^   "The Three Sisters lesson plan"   (PDF) .  www.njagsociety.org .  Archived   (PDF)  from the original on October 9, 2022 . Retrieved  January 2,  2021 . 
 
 ^   "Cherokee Hunting" .  visitcherokeenation.com . 
 
 ^   "Request Rejected | UWSP"   (PDF) .  Archived   (PDF)  from the original on October 9, 2022. 
 
 ^   "Southeastern Indians, Precontact to the Present: Introductory Essay" .  www.socialstudies.org . 
 
 ^   "Request Rejected | UWSP"   (PDF) .  Archived   (PDF)  from the original on October 9, 2022. 
 
 ^   Park, Sunmin; Hongu, Nobuko; Daily, James W. (September 2016).  "Native American foods: History, culture, and influence on modern diets" .  Journal of Ethnic Foods .  3  (3): 171–177.  doi : 10.1016/j.jef.2016.08.001 . 
 
 ^   "Southeastern Indian Hunting | Native American Netroots" . 
 
 ^   Gladd, Joel (September 1, 2019).  Navajo Diné Bahaneʼ  – via openamlitcwi.pressbooks.com. 
 
 ^   "American Indian Film Gallery: Apache Cooking" .  American Indian Film Gallery: Cultures of Apache tribes and Hopi tribes . 
 
 ^   "Fish taboo may be good for health - Navajo Times" .  www.navajotimes.com . 
 
 ^   "LENAPE DANCES"   (PDF) .  delawaretribe.org .  Archived   (PDF)  from the original on October 9, 2022 . Retrieved  January 2,  2021 . 
 
 ^   Carney, Leo H. (November 22, 1981).  "How the Lenapes Celebrated" .  The New York Times . Retrieved  January 2,  2021 . 
 
 ^   M. S., Resource Administration and Management; B. S., Natural Resources.  "Atlantic Cod's Importance in American History" .  ThoughtCo . 
 
 ^   "Aboriginal New England Cuisine With Recipes | Native American Netroots" . 
 
 ^   "In Times of Hardship, Saved by the Sea" .  41ºN Magazine . December 22, 2020. 
 
 ^   "Narragansett Tribe: Facts, Clothes, Food and History ***" .  www.warpaths2peacepipes.com . 
 
 ^   Taft, Dave (March 16, 2017).  "The Stubborn Staying Power of the Alewife Herring (Published 2017)" .  The New York Times . Archived from  the original  on January 1, 2022. 
 
 ^   "American Shad - Arca del Gusto" . 
 
 ^   Olsen SL:  Animals in American Indian Life: An Overview . In:  Stars Above, Earth Below American Indians and Nature.  edn. Edited by Bol MC. Dublin: Roberts Rinehart Publishers; 1998: 95-118. 
 
 ^   Speck FG, Hassrick RB, Carpenter ES:  Rappahannock Taking Devices: Traps, Hunting and Fishing . Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania and the Philadelphia Anthropological Society; 1946. 
 
 ^   "Powhatan Tribe: Facts, Clothes, Food and History ***" .  www.warpaths2peacepipes.com . 
 
 ^   "White Sturgeon" .  Kaniksu Land Trust . July 1, 2019. Archived from  the original  on September 24, 2020 . Retrieved  January 2,  2021 . 
 
 ^   Gobalet, K.W., P.D. Schultz, T.A. Wake, and N. Siefkin. 2004. Archaeological perspectives on Native American fisheries of California, with emphasis on steelhead and salmon. Transactions of the American Fisheries Society 133:801–833. 
 
 ^   "Olachen Fishing | AMNH" . 
 
 ^   "California Tribes fish use"   (PDF) .  www.waterboards.ca.gov . 2014.  Archived   (PDF)  from the original on October 9, 2022 . Retrieved  January 2,  2021 . 
 
 ^   "Help native trout and win thousands of dollars in prizes" .  www.bpa.gov . 
 
 ^   "Western Oregon Klikatats (Klickitats)" .  www.oregonencyclopedia.org . 
 
 ^   "Homeward Hearts: A Story Of Pacific Salmon | Alicia Patterson Foundation" .  aliciapatterson.org . 
 
 ^   Kroeber, Alfred Louis  (1925).  Handbook of the Indians of California . Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office. 
 
 ^   "Salmon Culture | Pacific Northwest tribes, Columbia River salmon" .  CRITFC . 
 
 ^   Pritzker, Barry (August 8, 1998).  Native Americans: Southwest - California - Northwest Coast - Great Basin - Plateau . ABC-CLIO.  ISBN   9780874368369  – via Google Books. 
 
 ^   Root & De Rochemont 1981 :21, 22 
 
 ^   Root & De Rochemont 1981 :31, 32 
 
 ^   Smith 2004 :512. 
 
 ^   Stavely, Keith; Fitzgerald, Kathleen (2011).  "Culinarily Colonized: Cookbooks in Colonial New England" .  Northern Hospitality: Cooking by the Book in New England .  University of Massachusetts Press . pp. 7–33.  ISBN   978-1558498617 .  JSTOR   j.ctt5vk2dv . Retrieved  August 12,  2016 . 
 
 ^   Glasse 1750 . 
 
 ^   Smith 2004 :512, Vol. 1. 
 
 ^   Smith, Andrew (January 31, 2013).  The Oxford Encyclopedia of Food and Drink in America . Oxford University Press. p. 375.  ISBN   978-0-19-973496-2 . 
 
 ^   Oliver 2005 :16–19. 
 
 ^   Pillsbury 1998 :25. 
 
 ^   Oliver 2005 :22. 
 
 ^   Smith 2004 :546–547, Vol. 1. 
 
 ^   Smith 2004 :26, Vol. 2. 
 
 ^   Root & De Rochemont 1981 :176–182 
 
 ^   Apple, R.W. Jr. (March 29, 2006).  "Much Ado About Mutton, but Not in These Parts" .  The New York Times . Retrieved  January 23,  2008 .  Until it fell from favor after World War II, it was a favorite of most Britons, who prized  mutton  above lamb (from younger animals) for its texture and flavor. It has a bolder taste, a deeper color and a chewier consistency. 
 
 ^   Smith 2004 :458–459, Vol. 2. 
 
 ^   Pillsbury 1998 :17. 
 
 ^   Crowgey 1971 :18–19. 
 
 ^   Pillsbury 1998 :18. 
 
 ^   Pillsbury 1998 :47–48. 
 
 ^   Pillsbury 1998 :48–49. 
 
 ^   Smith 2004 :149, Vol. 2. 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   e   Ziegelman, Jane; Coe, Andrew (August 16, 2016).  A Square Meal: A Culinary History of the Great Depression . HarperCollins.  ISBN   978-0-06-221643-4 . 
 
 ^   Kurlansky, Mark (May 8, 2018).  Milk! : a 10,000-year food fracas  (First ed.). Bloomsbury Publishing.  ISBN   978-1632863829 . 
 
 ^   James D. Porterfield,  Dining by Rail: The History and Recipes of America's Golden Age of Railroad Cuisine  (1993) 
 
 ^   Stephen Fried,  Appetite for America: How Visionary Businessman Fred Harvey Built a Railroad Hospitality Empire That Civilized the Wild West  (Bantam; 2010) 
 
 ^   Castle, Jim Vickers | Photo courtesy of White.  "Famous Ohio Foods: White Castle" .  www.ohiomagazine.com . Retrieved  October 25,  2022 . 
 
 ^   "Harvey Washington Wiley" .  Science History Institute . June 1, 2016 . Retrieved  June 16,  2021 . 
 
 ^   Helen Zoe Veit,  Modern Food, Moral Food: Self-Control, Science, and the Rise of Modern American Eating in the Early Twentieth Century  (2013) 
 
 ^   Bishai, David; Nalubola, Ritu (October 2002).  "The History of Food Fortification in the United States"   (PDF) .  Economic Development and Cultural Change .  51  (1): 37–53.  doi : 10.1086/345361 .  S2CID   154018967 . Archived from  the original   (PDF)  on February 2, 2019 . Retrieved  February 23,  2019 . 
 
 ^   Twilley, Nicola (August 10, 2015).  "How Military R&D Created The Food We Eat" .  Popular Science . Retrieved  September 12,  2018 . 
 
 ^   Maurer, Elizabeth (May 11, 2017).  "How Highly Processed Foods Liberated 1950s Housewives" .  National Women's History Museum . Retrieved  September 12,  2018 . 
 
 ^   "ConAgra's Chief Is Moving to Revitalize Some Venerable Brands" .  The New York Times . Retrieved  January 16,  2015 . 
 
 ^   "1950s TV Turns on America" .  AdAge . March 28, 2005 . Retrieved  September 12,  2018 . 
 
 ^   Crocker 2005 . 
 
 ^   "Face value: Fictional Betty Crocker gives big business a human touch Deseret News (Salt Lake City)" . November 14, 2007. Archived from  the original  on November 14, 2007 . Retrieved  October 14,  2017 . 
 
 ^   Pinsker, Joe (May 8, 2017).  "Americans' Bizarre Relationship With the Color of Their Food" .  The Atlantic . Retrieved  September 12,  2018 . 
 
 ^   Cavolt, Jessie; Dean, Kelsey; White, Madison; Salita, Helen.  "Impact on American Society – The Microwave" .  historyoftech.mcclurken.org . Retrieved  September 12,  2018 . 
 
 ^   Foley, Jonathan (March 5, 2013).  "It's Time to Rethink America's Corn System" .  Scientific American . Retrieved  February 23,  2019 . 
 
 ^   Gupta, Sanjay.  "If we are what we eat, Americans are corn and soy" .  www.cnn.com . Retrieved  February 23,  2019 . 
 
 ^   K.F. Maurer, Zur Keimfreimachung von Gewürzen, Ernährungswirtschaft 5(1958) nr.1, 45-47 
 
 ^   "Threaded Spaghetti Hot Dogs Were the Best Decision I've Ever Made" .  Food52 . July 16, 2018 . Retrieved  January 21,  2019 . 
 
 ^   "Sauce your hot dogs and spaghetti, Midwest-style" .  Flavored Nation . Archived from  the original  on January 21, 2019 . Retrieved  January 21,  2019 . 
 
 ^   "Asian Cuisine & Foods : Asian-Nation :: Asian American History, Demographics, & Issues" . Asian-nation.org . Retrieved  January 16,  2015 . 
 
 ^   "Hamburgers & Hot Dogs - All-American Food!" . Bellaonline.com . Retrieved  January 16,  2015 . 
 
 ^   "Eddie & Sam's Pizza" . Eddieandsamspizza.com. Archived from  the original  on January 16, 2015 . Retrieved  January 16,  2015 . 
 
 ^   DeFore, John.  " 'The Search for General Tso': SIFF Review" .  The Hollywood Reporter . 
 
 ^   "Origin of Fortune Cookies" .  Snopes.com . June 9, 2008 . Retrieved  May 30,  2017 . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   Warren, Wilson J. (2007).  Tied to the Great Packing Machine: The Midwest and Meatpacking .  University of Iowa Press . pp. 143–144.  ISBN   978-1-58729-774-8 . 
 
 ^   "Some individuals, especially teen boys and adult men, also need to reduce overall intake of protein foods by decreasing intakes of meats, poultry, and eggs and increasing amounts of vegetables or other underconsumed food groups." in  "2015–2020 Dietary Guidelines for Americans: Shifts Needed To Align With Healthy Eating Patterns: A Closer Look at Current Intakes and Recommended Shifts: Protein Foods"  (8 ed.). U.S. Department of Health and Human Services and U.S. Department of Agriculture. December 2015. Archived from  the original  on January 9, 2016 . Retrieved  January 9,  2016 . 
 
 ^   "Foodies" . Studio 10. 2011. Archived from  the original  on March 22, 2014 . Retrieved  March 17,  2014 . 
 
 ^   "Characteristics of Contemporary Cuisine"   (PDF) . LTCC Online.  Archived   (PDF)  from the original on October 9, 2022. 
 
 ^   "Philip Marie Restaurant" . Pulsar Studio . Retrieved  March 14,  2014 . 
 
 ^   Brewczynski, Stasia (May 4, 2022).  "Destination-Worthy Vegan Dining Around New England" .  Eater Boston . Retrieved  May 24,  2022 . 
 
 ^   Creswell, Julie (September 8, 2021).  "Plant-Based Foods Expand, With Consumers Hungry for More" .  The New York Times .  ISSN   0362-4331 . Retrieved  May 24,  2022 . 
 
 ^   Vaughn 3, Daniel (August 17, 2021).  "Vegetarian Barbecue Isn't a Threat to Brisket" .  Texas Monthly . Retrieved  May 24,  2022 . 
 
 ^   USDA (2008).  "New England Agricultural Statistics - Sweet corn" . 
 
 ^   Wells, Pete (November 22, 2021).  "A Thanksgiving History Lesson in a Handful of Corn" .  The New York Times .  ISSN   0362-4331 . Retrieved  May 24,  2022 . 
 
 ^   "USDA says Maine blueberry growers had a big 2021" .  Bangor Daily News . Associated Press. May 10, 2022 . Retrieved  May 12,  2022 . 
 
 ^   Danforth, Feierabend & Chassman 1998 :13 
 
 ^   Danforth, Feierabend & Chassman 1998 :24–26 
 
 ^   "USA'S Hard Cider Revolution" .  Crafty Nectar . Retrieved  March 31,  2019 . 
 
 ^   "Recipes: 'The Summer Shack Cookbook' " .  NPR.org . Archived from  the original  on December 11, 2014. 
 
 ^   "New England Weather, Avg Temperatures - Discover New England" .  Discovernewengland.org . Archived from  the original  on November 22, 2016 . Retrieved  August 12,  2016 . 
 
 ^   "Ideas in Food vs. The Steak Bomb: Reinventing the Bread" .  Serious Eats . July 31, 2014 . Retrieved  August 12,  2016 . 
 
 ^   "New England Corn Chowder" . March 20, 2020. 
 
 ^   "Brunch in Boston: Top breakfasts and brunches in Boston" .  Time Out Boston . Retrieved  January 16,  2015 . 
 
 ^   "Which State Has The Best Cheddar Cheese - Vermont or Wisconsin? - Cheese and Yogurt Making" .  Cheeseandyogurtmaking.com . May 1, 2014. Archived from  the original  on June 10, 2016 . Retrieved  August 12,  2016 . 
 
 ^   "Distant Cheeses, Local Farmers: Cheddar Across Continents - culture: the word on cheese" .  Culturecheeesemag.com . February 7, 2013 . Retrieved  August 12,  2016 . 
 
 ^   "VIAC Vermont Institute for Artisan Cheese - cheesemaking at UVM, the University of Vermont" .  Nutrition.uvm.edu . Archived from  the original  on October 20, 2016 . Retrieved  August 12,  2016 . 
 
 ^   Danforth, Feierabend & Chassman 1998 :12–19 
 
 ^   "The Cultural Capital of Everywhere" .  The Huffington Post . May 15, 2012 . Retrieved  January 16,  2015 . 
 
 ^   "Destination America. When did they come? - PBS" . Pbs.org . Retrieved  January 16,  2015 . 
 
 ^  a   b   "Culinary Historians of New York: Dutch Food in Life and Art"   (PDF) . Culinaryhistoriansny.org. Archived from  the original   (PDF)  on December 21, 2013 . Retrieved  January 16,  2015 . 
 
 ^   "The Life of the German Settlers in Colonial Times" . Germanheritage.com. Archived from  the original  on November 13, 2014 . Retrieved  January 16,  2015 . 
 
 ^   "Irish fare in New York for St. Patrick's Day" .  NY Daily News . Retrieved  January 16,  2015 . 
 
 ^   "McSorley's Old Ale House" .  NYMag.com . Retrieved  January 16,  2015 . 
 
 ^   Olver, Lynne .  "The Food Timeline: school lunch history" .  The Food Timeline . Retrieved  January 16,  2015 . 
 
 ^   "Everything New Is Old Again : The New Golden Age of Jewish-American Deli Food" .  The New York Times . Retrieved  January 16,  2015 . 
 
 ^   "Global Power City Index 2009"   (PDF) . The Mori Memorial Foundation.  Archived   (PDF)  from the original on October 9, 2022 . Retrieved  June 1,  2012 . 
 
 ^   "The World's 50 Best Restaurants" . The World's 50 Best Restaurants. Archived from  the original  on June 7, 2013 . Retrieved  November 29,  2015 . 
 
 ^   Beyer, Gregory (April 8, 2007).  "Was He the Eggman?" .  The New York Times . Retrieved  November 29,  2015 . 
 
 ^   "The Waldorf - Astoria Hotel" . Historic Hotels of America . Retrieved  November 29,  2015 . 
 
 ^   "History of Cheesecake, History of New York Cheesecake, Cream Cheese History, Whats Cooking America" .  Whatscookingamerica.net . May 26, 2015 . Retrieved  August 12,  2016 . 
 
 ^   "Regions - New York Wine & Grape Foundation" . Newyorkwines.org. Archived from  the original  on January 6, 2015 . Retrieved  January 16,  2015 . 
 
 ^   "NY Apple Industry Facts - NY Apple Association" . Nyapplecountry.com . Retrieved  January 16,  2015 . 
 
 ^   Moon, Freda (September 24, 2014).  "Sips From a Cider Spree in New York State" .  The New York Times . Retrieved  January 16,  2015 . 
 
 ^   "Spirits Review: Dad's Hat Rye" .  Drink Philly . Retrieved  January 16,  2015 . 
 
 ^   "U.S. Immigration Before 1965" .  HISTORY.com . Retrieved  January 16,  2015 . 
 
 ^   "Lower East Side Tenement Museum" . Tenement.org. Archived from  the original  on February 28, 2015 . Retrieved  January 16,  2015 . 
 
 ^   "The Jewish Quarter of Philadelphia" .  PhillyHistory Blog . Retrieved  January 16,  2015 . 
 
 ^   "Dutch Apple Pie" . Myfoxny.com. Archived from  the original  on January 6, 2015 . Retrieved  January 16,  2015 . 
 
 ^   "Where Does Coleslaw Come From and What is the Origin of the Term? - CulinaryLore.com" . Culinarylore.com. May 20, 2012 . Retrieved  January 16,  2015 . 
 
 ^   See entries for  oliebol  and  oliekoek  in  Frederic Gomes Cassidy; Joan Houston Hall (1985).  Dictionary of American Regional English: I-O . Harvard UP. p.  874 .  ISBN   978-0-674-20519-2 . 
 
 ^   "Map of Oyster Regions of North America - The Oyster Guide" . Oysterguide.com . Retrieved  January 16,  2015 . 
 
 ^   "Our Farmers and Producers - GrowNYC" . Grownyc.org. August 14, 2007 . Retrieved  January 16,  2015 . 
 
 ^   "Some Street Cart Vendors Still Delivering On Seasonal Tradition Of Roasting Chestnuts" .  Gothamist . Archived from  the original  on March 27, 2015 . Retrieved  January 16,  2015 . 
 
 ^   "Day 20: Gingerbread" .  Why'd You Eat That? . December 20, 2011 . Retrieved  January 16,  2015 . 
 
 ^   "History of the Sugar Cookie" .  Cook County Farm Bureau . Archived from  the original  on January 10, 2015 . Retrieved  January 16,  2015 . 
 
 ^   "Scrapple: Pork Mush...The Pennsylvania Treat" . Globalgourmet.com. Archived from  the original  on May 3, 1999 . Retrieved  January 16,  2015 . 
 
 ^   Davis, Julie.  "The History Behind the Philadelphia Soft Pretzel" .  About.com Travel . Retrieved  January 16,  2015 . 
 
 ^   "Are Meatless Fridays Still a Thing? Does it Matter?" .  National Catholic Register . Retrieved  January 5,  2017 . 
 
 ^   " "Can't They Be Separated?" Italian Immigrants and Irish Workers in Gilded Age New York" .  THE GOTHAM CENTER FOR NEW YORK CITY HISTORY . Archived from  the original  on September 26, 2017 . Retrieved  March 31,  2019 . 
 
 ^   "The Irish Waterfront"   (PDF) .  Archived   (PDF)  from the original on October 9, 2022. 
 
 ^   Miller, Hugh (January 1, 1851).  Scenes and Legends of the North of Scotland . W. H. Moore & D. Anderson. 
 
 ^   "Doughnuts on a String" .  Marthastewart.com . May 17, 2011 . Retrieved  August 2,  2017 . 
 
 ^   Chowhound (July 1, 2019).  "What Makes a Hot Dog Kosher?" . Chowhound . Retrieved  September 14,  2019 . 
 
 ^   "Joey Chestnut devours record 74 hot dogs for 11th win at Nathan's Famous contest" .  www.cbsnews.com . Retrieved  January 21,  2019 . 
 
 ^   "Film Review: Famous Nathan | FilmJournal International" . July 23, 2015. Archived from  the original  on September 15, 2015 . Retrieved  September 14,  2019 . 
 
 ^   "How to Spend 5 Days in Puerto Rico — travelJewels" . Traveljewels.net. April 9, 2018 . Retrieved  September 14,  2019 . 
 
 ^   Koenig, Leah.  "Beyond the Bagel: Exploring the Many Flavors of New York City's Jewish Cuisine" . Serious Eats . Retrieved  September 14,  2019 . 
 
 ^   "How Did the Pickle Become a Jewish Food Staple? – the Forward" . Archived from  the original  on June 18, 2019 . Retrieved  September 11,  2019 . 
 
 ^   "Yid.Dish: Almond Horns – Forward.com" . Archived from  the original  on March 18, 2015 . Retrieved  September 11,  2019 . 
 
 ^   Koenig, Leah (March 17, 2015).  Modern Jewish Cooking: Recipes & Customs for Today's Kitchen - Leah Koenig - Google Books .  ISBN   9781452132327 . Retrieved  September 14,  2019 . 
 
 ^   Moskin, Julia (January 10, 2017).  "Rye, a Grain With Ancient Roots, Is Rising Again - The New York Times" .  The New York Times . Archived from  the original  on January 1, 2022 . Retrieved  September 14,  2019 . 
 
 ^   "Russ & Daughters official site" .  shop.russanddaughters.com . Retrieved  September 14,  2019 . 
 
 ^   "Let's eat: Pawpaw Bread with Toasted Walnuts - Chicago Tribune" .  Chicago Tribune . November 7, 2017. Archived from  the original  on November 7, 2017 . Retrieved  August 8,  2019 . 
 
 ^   "The Geography of Chicago's Second Languages" .  Chicagomag.com . Archived from  the original  on August 2, 2017 . Retrieved  August 2,  2017 . 
 
 ^   "Take the pierogi: The only guide to Polish delis you'll ever need" .  Chicagobusinesss.com . March 10, 2016 . Retrieved  August 2,  2017 . 
 
 ^   "Potluck Events: Safe Food is Good Business - EH: Minnesota Department of Health" .  Health.state.mn.us . Archived from  the original  on August 2, 2017 . Retrieved  August 2,  2017 . 
 
 ^   "Sense of Place: Food and Cuisine of the Midwest" .  The Kitchn . Retrieved  November 28,  2016 . 
 
 ^   "What is a Hotdish? (with pictures)" .  wiseGEEK . Retrieved  November 28,  2016 . 
 
 ^   "Arby's to offer venison sandwiches at 4 Michigan locations" .  Mlive.com . October 26, 2016 . Retrieved  August 2,  2017 . 
 
 ^   "Arby's venison sandwich sells out fast in Minnesota, Wisconsin" .  Twincities.com . November 4, 2016 . Retrieved  August 2,  2017 . 
 
 ^   "Sweetooth Design Company - Food & Design - Oakland, USA" .  Sweetoothdesign.com . Archived from  the original  on August 2, 2017 . Retrieved  August 2,  2017 . 
 
 ^   "Kansas train map" .  Trn.trains.com . Retrieved  August 2,  2017 . 
 
 ^   "Wild West Week: Kansas City and St. Louis Stockyards" .  Missourilife.com . September 9, 2011. Archived from  the original  on August 2, 2017 . Retrieved  August 2,  2017 . 
 
 ^   "Archived copy" . Archived from  the original  on May 10, 2017 . Retrieved  November 29,  2016 . {{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: archived copy as title ( link ) 
 
 ^   "Indian Head Yellow Corn Meal Recipes - Wilkins Rogers Mills" . Wrmills.com . Retrieved  January 16,  2015 . 
 
 ^   "West Virginia Breaking News, Sports, Weather: WDTV.COM" . Wdtv.com. Archived from  the original  on June 14, 2012 . Retrieved  January 16,  2015 . 
 
 ^   "Southern Deer Hunting" .  Deer & Deer Hunting - Whitetail Deer Hunting Tips . Archived from  the original  on February 6, 2015 . Retrieved  January 16,  2015 . 
 
 ^   "Snapping turtle makes for a delicious dinner" .  Arkansas Online . August 3, 2014 . Retrieved  January 16,  2015 . 
 
 ^   "Taste of the South: Fried Catfish" .  Southern Living . Retrieved  January 16,  2015 . 
 
 ^   "State Symbols" . Tn.gov. Archived from  the original  on June 25, 2014 . Retrieved  January 16,  2015 . 
 
 ^   "Lindera benzoin (spicebush)" . Monticello.org . Retrieved  January 16,  2015 . 
 
 ^   "History and development of Choctaw food - School of Choctaw Language" .  www.choctawschool.com . Retrieved  August 8,  2019 . 
 
 ^   "Native Edibles" . Southernmatters.com . Retrieved  January 16,  2015 . 
 
 ^   "Dry Curing Virginia-Style Ham - Publications and Educational Resources - Virginia Tech" . Oubs.ext.vt.edu. December 18, 2012 . Retrieved  January 16,  2015 . 
 
 ^   "Traits of a true Southern woman" .  Richmond.com . Retrieved  January 16,  2015 . 
 
 ^   "Bananas Foster" . Neworleansonline.com . Retrieved  January 16,  2015 . 
 
 ^   "Louisiana Rice"   (PDF) . Usarice.com. Archived from  the original   (PDF)  on December 22, 2014 . Retrieved  January 16,  2015 . 
 
 ^   Covey, Herbert C.; Eisnach, Dwight (2009).  What the Slaves Ate .  ISBN   9780313374975 . Retrieved  January 16,  2015 . 
 
 ^   Mansky, Jackie.  "Food Historian Reckons With the Black Roots of Southern Food" .  Smithsonian . Retrieved  January 21,  2019 . 
 
 ^   "Colonial Cream of Peanut Soup" . 
 
 ^   Rinaldi, Jay.  "Pernil Al Horno (Roasted Pork Shoulder)" .  South Florida Gay News . Retrieved  January 16,  2015 . 
 
 ^   "Honey - from Thomas Honey Company" .  Thomashoney.com . Archived from  the original  on December 31, 2014 . Retrieved  January 16,  2015 . 
 
 ^   "Bagging the Bug: How to Have A Successful Lobster-Hunting Season" .  Scuba Diving . Retrieved  January 21,  2019 . 
 
 ^   "What's Best, Worst, and Most Weird About American Food" .  National Geographic News . December 20, 2015. 
 
 ^   Martynuska, Małgorzata (November 27, 2017).  "Cultural Hybridity in the USA exemplified by Tex-Mex cuisine"   (PDF) .  International Review of Social Research .  7  (2): 90–98.  doi : 10.1515/irsr-2017-0011 .  ISSN   2069-8534 .  S2CID   54189154 .  Archived   (PDF)  from the original on October 9, 2022. 
 
 ^   Arellano, Gustavo (March 23, 2012).  "As American as Fajita Pie" .  The Wall Street Journal .  ISSN   0099-9660 . Retrieved  June 8,  2021 . 
 
 ^   "Chocolate Bourbon Hazelnut Pie" . Oregonlive.com . Retrieved  January 16,  2015 . 
 
 ^   Erlandson, Jon (2008).  "Human impacts on ancient shellfish: a 10,000 year record from San Miguel Island, California" .  Journal of Archaeological Science .  35  (8): 2144–2152.  doi : 10.1016/j.jas.2008.01.014 . Retrieved  November 16,  2022 . 
 
 ^   Davies, S. (2010). The Guide to West Coast Cheese: More than 300 Cheeses Handcrafted in California, Oregon, and Washington. Timber Press 
 
 ^   "History, language and culture in New Mexico" .  World Travel Guide . Retrieved  April 29,  2021 . 
 
 ^   "Nevada Cattle Rancher Wins 'Range War' With Federal Government" .  ABC News . Retrieved  January 16,  2015 . 
 
 ^   "Welcome to the Utah Cattlemen's Association" . Utahcattlemen.org. Archived from  the original  on December 18, 2014 . Retrieved  January 16,  2015 . 
 
 ^   Hillis, David.  "History of Texas Longhorns" . Doublehelixranch.com . Retrieved  January 16,  2015 . 
 
 ^   "Digital History" . Digitalhistory.uh.edu . Retrieved  January 16,  2015 . 
 
 ^   Green, Rayna (1999). The British Museum Encyclopedia of Native North America. London: British Museum Press. p. 4.  ISBN   0-253-33597-3 . 
 
 ^   "The Nutrition of Snake" . Fitday.com . Retrieved  January 16,  2015 . 
 
 ^   "How Does Rattlesnake Taste?" . Query.nytimes.com. October 2, 2011 . Retrieved  January 16,  2015 . 
 
 ^   "Havasupai Tribe" . Visitarizona.com. Archived from  the original  on February 19, 2015 . Retrieved  January 16,  2015 . 
 
 ^   "Blood Orange Marmalade" .  Texas Monthly . June 1, 2010 . Retrieved  January 16,  2015 . 
 
 ^   "Halloween Blood Orange Cake" .  Texas Monthly . October 31, 2013 . Retrieved  January 16,  2015 . 
 
 ^   "Pine Nuts" .  The New Yorker . November 21, 2011 . Retrieved  January 16,  2015 . 
 
 ^   "Chilis & Other Peppers" . Clovegarden.com . Retrieved  January 16,  2015 . 
 
 ^   "New Mexico's green chile, the real deal" .  Los Angeles Times . September 23, 2009 . Retrieved  January 16,  2015 . 
 
 ^   "Introduction to Santa Maria Style Barbecue" .  The Official Santa Maria Style Barbecue Site . February 18, 2009 . Retrieved  August 12,  2022 . 
 
 ^   "In Search of the Blue Agave: Tequila History - 18th-19th Centuries" . Ianchadwick.com . Retrieved  January 16,  2015 . 
 
 ^   "Closet Cooking: Tequila Lime Shrimp" .  Closet Cooking . June 12, 2008 . Retrieved  January 16,  2015 . 
 
 ^   Young, Christopher (April 12, 2013).  "Digging for Pismo clams at San Diego Beaches" .  San Diego Reader . 
 
 ^   "Dig Into the 66th Annual Pismo Beach Clam Festival" .  SeaCrest OceanFront Hotel . Archived from  the original  on June 12, 2014 . Retrieved  January 16,  2015 . 
 
 ^   "Jumbo squid invasion attracts eager anglers" .  Los Angeles Times . January 14, 2013 . Retrieved  January 16,  2015 . 
 
 ^   "Cooking the Monster Giant Squid Made Easy!" .  Wide Open Fishing Los Angeles Orange County Inshore Offshore Fishing . Archived from  the original  on December 21, 2014 . Retrieved  January 16,  2015 . 
 
 ^   Koslow, Jessica A. (May 15, 2013).  "10 Best Octopus Dishes in Los Angeles" .  LA Weekly . 
 
 ^   "California Lobster Battles" .  Boating Magazine . August 7, 2012 . Retrieved  January 16,  2015 . 
 
 ^   "Getting to the Roots of Hawaii Regional Cuisine" . Coffeetimes.com . Retrieved  January 16,  2015 . 
 
 ^   "Polynesian Cultural Center Shares The Flavors Of Samoa With Hands-On Umu Making Activity" . Polynesia.com . Retrieved  January 16,  2015 . 
 
 ^   "History of Hawaii's cuisine - The Go Lightly Gourmet" .  The Go Lightly Gourmet . March 8, 2011 . Retrieved  January 16,  2015 . 
 
 ^   "Food La La: Kona Abalone opens at Ala Moana - Honolulu Pulse - Hawaii Entertainment, Food and NightlifeHonolulu Pulse – Hawaii Entertainment, Food and Nightlife" .  Honolulu Pulse - Hawaii Entertainment, Food and Nightlife . Archived from  the original  on January 16, 2015 . Retrieved  January 16,  2015 . 
 
 ^   Sherrie A. Inness, Dinner roles: American women and culinary culture. p. 89 
 
 ^   Sherrie A. Inness, Dinner roles: American women and culinary culture. p. 92 
 
 ^   Louise Rice,  Dainty Dishes From Foreign Lands , p.7-34 
 
 ^   Oralia 2005  (par. 6). 
 
 ^   Prodhomme 1984  n.p. 
 
 ^   Puck 1986  n.p. 
 
 ^   "H102 Lecture 08: Foreign Immigrants in Industrial America" . March 13, 2012. Archived from  the original  on March 13, 2012 . Retrieved  August 8,  2019 . 
 
 ^   Hensley, Sue,  National Restaurant Association. Article/ News Release, "International Cuisine Reaches America's Main Street," 10 August 2000. 
 
 ^   How American Fast Food Franchises Expanded Abroad 
 
 ^   180 Years of America's Classic Desserts: From Baked Alaska to Marionberry Pie 
 
 ^   The Most Iconic Desserts in America 
 
 ^   "Home | James Beard Foundation" .  www.jamesbeard.org . Retrieved  October 11,  2022 . 
 
 ^   "Our Story: CIA History | Culinary Institute of America" .  www.ciachef.edu . Retrieved  October 11,  2022 . 
 
 ^   Severson, Kim (May 2, 2017).  "Thomas Keller, an Exacting Chef at a Crossroads" .  The New York Times .  ISSN   0362-4331 . Retrieved  October 11,  2022 . 
 
 ^   "Michelin restaurants" .  Michelin Guide . Retrieved  October 11,  2022 . 
 
 ^   "All Shows A-Z" .  Food Network . Retrieved  October 11,  2022 . 
 
 
 Works cited [ edit ] 
 Bertolli, Paul; Waters, Alice (1988).  Chez Panisse Cooking . New York: Random House. . 
 Betty Crocker Cookbook: Everything You Need to Know to Cook Today  (10, illustrated, revised ed.). John Wiley & Sons, Incorporated. 2005.  ISBN   978-0-7645-6877-0 . . 
 Crowgey, Henry G. (1971).  Kentucky Bourbon: The Early Years of Whiskeymaking . Kentucky: The  University Press of Kentucky . . 
 Danforth, Randi; Feierabend, Peter.; Chassman, Gary. (1998).  Culinaria The United States: A Culinary Discovery . New York: Konemann. . 
 Fried, Stephen.  Appetite for America: How Visionary Businessman Fred Harvey Built a Railroad Hospitality Empire That Civilized the Wild West  (Bantam; 2010) 
 Glasse, Hannah (1750).  Art of Cookery Made Easy . London. . 
 Oliver, Sandra L. (2005).  Food in Colonial and Federal America . London: Greenwood Press. . 
 Oralia, Michael (April 5, 2005).  "Demand for Ethnic & International Foods Reflects a Changing America" . National Restaurant Association. Archived from  the original  on April 3, 2013 . Retrieved  March 8,  2009 . . 
 Pillsbury, Richard (1998).  No Foreign Food: The American Diet in Time and Place . Westview.  ISBN   9780813327396 . . 
 Porterfield, James D. (1993).  Dining by Rail: The History and Recipes of America's Golden Age of Railroad Cuisine . New York: St. Martin's Press.  ISBN   0-312-18711-4 . 
 Prodhomme, Paul (1984).  Paul Prodhomme's Louisiana Kitchen . New York: William Morrow.  ISBN   0-688-02847-0 . . 
 Puck, Wolfgang (1986).  The Wolfgang Puck Cookbook . New York: Random House.  ISBN   9780394533667 . 
 Root, Waverly; De Rochemont, Richard (1981).  Eating in America: a History . New Jersey: The Ecco Press.  ISBN   9780912946887 . 
 Smith, Andrew F. (2004).  The Oxford Encyclopedia of Food and Drink in America . Oxford:  Oxford University Press . . 
 Tower, Jeremiah (2004).  California Dish, What I Saw (and cooked) at the American Culinary Revolution . New York: Free Press/Simon & Schuster.  ISBN   9780743228442 . . 
 Tower, Jeremiah (1986).  New American Classics . Harper & Row.  ISBN   9780061818783 . . 
 Van Aken, Norman (1988).  Feast of Sunlight . New York: Ballantine/Random House.  ISBN   0-345-34582-7 . 
 Veit, Helen Zoe.  Modern Food, Moral Food: Self-Control, Science, and the Rise of Modern American Eating in the Early Twentieth Century  (2013) 
 Further reading [ edit ] 
 Freedman, Paul (2019).  American Cuisine: And How It Got This Way .  Liveright .  ISBN   9781631494628 . 
 External links [ edit ] 
 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons has media related to  Cuisine of the United States . 
 
 
 
 
 Wikivoyage has a travel guide for  American cuisine . 
 
 v t e Cuisine of the United States Historical 
 Cuisine of the Thirteen Colonies 
 Thanksgiving dinner 
 Regional General 
 List of regional dishes of the United States 
 List of regional beverages of the United States 
 Northeast 
 Mid-Atlantic 
 New Jersey 
 New York
 New York City 
 Pennsylvania
 Allentown 
 Philadelphia 
 New England 
 South 
 Appalachia 
 Floribbean 
 Kentucky 
 Louisiana
 Creole 
 New Orleans 
 Lowcountry 
 Texas 
 Barbecue in Texas 
 Tex-Mex 
 Midwest 
 Chicago 
 Cincinnati 
 Kansas City-style barbecue 
 Omaha 
 St. Louis 
 Wisconsin 
 West 
 California 
 Southwestern 
 New Mexican 
 Pacific Northwestern 
 Hawaii 
 Territories 
 Puerto Rico 
 Ethnic 
 Cajun 
 American Cambodian 
 American Chinese 
 Greek American 
 Soul food 
 Mexican 
 Native American 
 New Mexican (Neomexicano and Pueblo) 
 Pennsylvania Dutch 
 Italian American 
 Tejano 
 Tlingit 
 Filipino-American 
 American Jewish 
 List articles 
 American foods 
 American breads 
 American cheeses 
 American desserts 
 American regional and fusion cuisines 
 American sandwiches 
 American breakfast foods 
 Foods of the Southern United States 
 Soul foods and dishes 
 Miscellaneous 
 Barbecue 
 Christmas food 
 Fast food 
 Drinks 
 Sweet tea 
 Root beer 
 Coca-Cola 
 Egg cream 
 Milkshake 
 Shirley Temple 
 Italian soda 
 Pepsi 
 American tea culture 
   Category: American cuisine 
 v t e North American cuisine Sovereign states 
 Antigua and Barbuda 
 Bahamas 
 Barbados 
 Belize 
 Canada 
 Costa Rica 
 Cuba 
 Dominica 
 Dominican Republic 
 El Salvador 
 Grenada 
 Guatemala 
 Haiti 
 Honduras 
 Jamaica 
 Mexico 
 Nicaragua 
 Panama 
 Saint Kitts and Nevis 
 Saint Lucia 
 Saint Vincent and the Grenadines 
 Trinidad and Tobago 
 United States 
 Dependencies and other territories 
 Anguilla 
 Aruba 
 Bermuda 
 Bonaire 
 British Virgin Islands 
 Cayman Islands 
 Curaçao 
 Greenland 
 Guadeloupe 
 Martinique 
 Montserrat 
 Puerto Rico 
 Saint Barthélemy 
 Saint Martin 
 Saint Pierre and Miquelon 
 Saba 
 Sint Eustatius 
 Sint Maarten 
 Turks and Caicos Islands 
 United States Virgin Islands 
 
   Food portal 
   Category: North American cuisine 
 
 v t e American cheeses Types 
 Baby Swiss 
 Bergenost 
 Brick 
 Cheese curd 
 Colby 
 Colby-Jack 
 Cream cheese 
 Creole cream cheese 
 D'Isigny 
 Farmer 
 Hoop 
 Humboldt Fog 
 Kunik 
 Liederkranz 
 Maytag Blue 
 Monterey Jack 
 Muenster 
 Pinconning 
 Red Hawk 
 String 
 Regions 
 Wisconsin cheese 
 
 v t e United States  articles History By period 
 1776–1789 
 1789–1849 
 1849–1865 
 1865–1918 
 1918–1945 
 1945–1964 
 1964–1980 
 1980–1991 
 1991–2008 
 2008–present 
 By event 
 Pre-colonial era 
 Colonial era 
 Stamp Act Congress 
 Thirteen Colonies 
 Continental Congress 
 Continental Association 
 United Colonies 
 military history 
 Founding Fathers 
 Halifax Resolves 
 Lee Resolution 
 Declaration of Independence 
 American Revolution 
 War 
 Treaty of Paris 
 Articles of Confederation 
 Perpetual Union 
 Confederation period 
 American frontier 
 Constitution 
 drafting and ratification 
 Bill of Rights 
 Federalist Era 
 War of 1812 
 Territorial evolution 
 Mexican–American War 
 Civil War 
 Reconstruction era 
 Indian Wars 
 Gilded Age 
 Progressive Era 
 Women's suffrage 
 Civil rights movement
 1865–1896 
 1896–1954 
 1954–1968 
 Spanish–American War 
 Imperialism 
 World War I 
 Roaring Twenties 
 Great Depression 
 World War II 
 home front 
 American Century 
 Cold War 
 Korean War 
 Space Race 
 Feminist Movement 
 LGBT Movement 
 Vietnam War 
 Post-Cold War (1991–2008) 
 September 11 attacks 
 War on Terror 
 War in Afghanistan 
 Iraq War 
 Great Recession 
 COVID-19 pandemic 
 By topic 
 Outline of U.S. history 
 Demographic 
 Discoveries 
 Economic 
 debt ceiling 
 Inventions 
 before 1890 
 1890–1945 
 1946–1991 
 after 1991 
 Military 
 Postal 
 Technological and industrial 
 Geography 
 Territory 
 Contiguous United States 
 counties 
 federal district 
 federal enclaves 
 Indian reservations 
 insular zones 
 minor outlying islands 
 populated places 
 states 
 Earthquakes 
 Extreme points 
 Islands 
 Mountains 
 peaks 
 ranges 
 Appalachian 
 Rocky 
 Sierra Nevada 
 National Park Service 
 National Parks 
 Regions 
 East Coast 
 West Coast 
 Great Plains 
 Gulf 
 Mid-Atlantic 
 Midwestern 
 New England 
 Pacific 
 Central 
 Eastern 
 Northern 
 Northeastern 
 Northwestern 
 Southern 
 Southeastern 
 Southwestern 
 Western 
 Longest  rivers 
 Arkansas 
 Colorado 
 Columbia 
 Mississippi 
 Missouri 
 Red (South) 
 Rio Grande 
 Yukon 
 Time 
 Water supply and sanitation 
 World Heritage Sites 
 Politics Federal Executive 
 Cabinet 
 Civil service 
 Executive departments 
 Executive Office 
 Independent agencies 
 Law enforcement 
 President of the United States 
 powers 
 Public policy 
 Legislative 
 House of Representatives 
 current members 
 Speaker 
 Senate 
 current members 
 President pro tempore 
 Vice President 
 Judicial 
 District courts 
 Courts of appeals 
 Supreme Court 
 Law 
 Bill of Rights 
 civil liberties 
 Code of Federal Regulations 
 Constitution 
 federalism 
 preemption 
 separation of powers 
 civil rights 
 Federal Reporter 
 United States Code 
 United States Reports 
 Intelligence 
 Central Intelligence Agency 
 Defense Intelligence Agency 
 Federal Bureau of Investigation 
 National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency 
 National Reconnaissance Office 
 National Security Agency 
 Office of the Director of National Intelligence 
 Uniformed 
 Armed Forces 
 Army 
 Marine Corps 
 Navy 
 Air Force 
 Space Force 
 Coast Guard 
 National Guard 
 NOAA Corps 
 Public Health Service Corps 
 
 51st state 
 Political status of Puerto Rico 
 Puerto Rico statehood movement 
 District of Columbia statehood movement 
 Elections 
 Electoral College 
 Foreign relations 
 foreign policy 
 Hawaiian sovereignty movement 
 Ideologies 
 Anti-Americanism 
 exceptionalism 
 nationalism 
 Local government 
 Parties 
 Democratic 
 Republican 
 Third parties 
 Red states and blue states 
 Scandals 
 State government 
 governor 
 state legislature 
 state court 
 Imperial presidency 
 Corruption 
 Economy 
 By sector 
 Agriculture 
 Banking 
 Communications 
 Companies 
 Energy 
 Insurance 
 Manufacturing 
 Mining 
 Science and technology 
 Tourism 
 Trade 
 Transportation 
 by state 
 Currency 
 Exports 
 Federal budget 
 Greenhouse gas emissions by the United States 
 Federal Reserve System 
 Financial position 
 Labor unions 
 Public debt 
 Social welfare programs 
 Taxation 
 Unemployment 
 Wall Street 
 Society Culture 
 Americana 
 Architecture 
 Cinema 
 Crime 
 Cuisine 
 wine 
 Dance 
 Death care 
 Cremation 
 Women 
 Demographics 
 Economic issues 
 affluence 
 eviction 
 home-ownership 
 household income 
 income inequality 
 labor unions 
 middle class 
 personal income 
 poverty 
 standard of living 
 wealth 
 Education 
 attainment 
 literacy 
 Family 
 Fashion 
 Flag 
 Folklore 
 Great American Novel 
 Health 
 healthcare 
 health insurance 
 Holidays 
 Homelessness 
 Housing 
 Human rights 
 Languages 
 American English 
 Indigenous languages 
 ASL 
 Black American Sign Language 
 HSL 
 Plains Sign Talk 
 Arabic 
 Chinese 
 French 
 German 
 Italian 
 Russian 
 Spanish 
 Literature 
 Media 
 journalism 
 internet 
 newspapers 
 radio 
 television 
 Music 
 Names 
 National symbols 
 Columbia 
 Mount Rushmore 
 Statue of Liberty 
 Uncle Sam 
 People 
 Philosophy 
 Political ideologies 
 Race 
 Religion 
 Sexuality 
 adolescent 
 Social class 
 Society 
 Sports 
 Theater 
 Transportation 
 Video games 
 Visual art 
 Social class 
 Affluence 
 American Dream 
 Educational attainment 
 Homelessness 
 Home-ownership 
 Household income 
 Income inequality 
 Middle class 
 Personal income 
 Poverty 
 Standard of living 
 Issues 
 Ages of consent 
 Capital punishment 
 Crime 
 incarceration 
 Criticism of government 
 Discrimination 
 affirmative action 
 antisemitism 
 hair texture 
 intersex rights 
 Islamophobia 
 LGBT rights 
 racism 
 same-sex marriage 
 Drug policy 
 Energy policy 
 Environmental issues 
 Environmental movement 
 Climate change 
 Environmental education 
 Gun politics 
 Healthcare 
 abortion 
 health insurance 
 hunger 
 obesity 
 smoking 
 Human rights 
 Immigration 
 illegal 
 International rankings 
 National security 
 Mass surveillance 
 Terrorism 
 Separation of church and state 
 Outline Index 
 Category 
 Portal 
 v t e Cuisines Continental 
 African 
 North 
 West 
 list 
 Americas 
 Caribbean 
 North 
 South 
 list 
 Asian 
 Caucasian 
 Central 
 Indian subcontinent 
 Levantine 
 list 
 European 
 Balkan 
 Central 
 Eastern 
 list 
 Oceanic 
 Intercontinental
 Global 
 Latin American 
 Mediterranean 
 Middle Eastern 
 National  and regional 
 Afghan 
 Albanian 
 Algerian 
 American 
 Californian 
 Floribbean 
 Hawaiian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Lowcountry (South Carolina) 
 New England 
 New Mexico 
 Pacific Northwest 
 Pennsylvania Dutch 
 Puerto Rican 
 Southern US 
 Southwest US 
 Texas 
 Angolan 
 Argentine 
 Armenian 
 Australian 
 Austrian 
 Azerbaijani 
 Bahraini 
 Bangladeshi 
 Barbadian 
 Belarusian 
 Belgian 
 Belizean 
 Beninese 
 Bhutanese 
 Bolivian 
 Bosnian-Herzegovinian 
 Botswana 
 Brazilian 
 British 
 Channel Islands 
 English 
 Gibraltarian 
 Northern Irish 
 Saint Helena 
 Scottish 
 Welsh 
 Bruneian 
 Bulgarian 
 Burkinabé 
 Burmese 
 Burundian 
 Cambodian 
 Cameroonian 
 Canadian 
 Acadian 
 Québécois 
 Central African Republic 
 Chadian 
 Chilean 
 Chinese 
 Cantonese 
 Hong Kong 
 Macanese 
 Tibetan 
 Xinjiang 
 Colombian 
 Congolese 
 Corsican 
 Croatian 
 Cuban 
 Cypriot 
 Czech 
 Danish 
 Faroese 
 Greenlandic 
 Djiboutian 
 Dominican 
 Dominican Republic 
 Dutch 
 East Timorese 
 Ecuadorian 
 Egyptian 
 Emirati 
 Equatorial Guinean 
 Eritrean 
 Estonian 
 Ethiopian 
 Fijian 
 Filipino 
 Finnish 
 French 
 Occitan 
 French Guianan 
 Gabonese 
 Gambian 
 Georgian 
 German 
 Ghanaian 
 Greek 
 Cretan 
 Epirotic 
 Greek Macedonian 
 Heptanesean 
 Guatemalan 
 Guinea-Bissauan 
 Guinean 
 Haitian 
 Honduran 
 Hungarian 
 Icelandic 
 Indian 
 Arunachalese 
 Assamese 
 Bengali 
 Bihari 
 Goan 
 Gujarati 
 Himachal Pradesh 
 Kashmiri 
 Jharkhandi 
 Karnataka 
 Kerala 
 Maharashtrian 
 Manipuri 
 Meghalayan 
 Mizo 
 Naga 
 Odia 
 Punjabi 
 Rajasthani 
 Sikkimese 
 Sindhi 
 Tamil 
 Telangana 
 Telugu 
 Indonesian 
 Acehnese 
 Balinese 
 Banjar 
 Batak 
 Betawi 
 Indo 
 Javanese 
 Madurese 
 Makassar 
 Minahasan 
 Minangkabau 
 Palembangese 
 Sundanese 
 Iranian 
 Iraqi 
 Irish 
 Israeli 
 Italian 
 Abruzzese 
 Ligurian 
 Lombard 
 Lucanian 
 Neapolitan 
 Roman 
 Sardinian 
 Sicilian 
 Venetian 
 Ivorian 
 Jamaican 
 Japanese 
 Okinawan 
 Jordanian 
 Kazakh 
 Kenyan 
 Korean 
 North Korean 
 South Korean 
 Kosovan 
 Kuwaiti 
 Kyrgyz 
 Lao 
 Latvian 
 Lebanese 
 Lesotho 
 Liberian 
 Libyan 
 Liechtensteiner 
 Lithuanian 
 Luxembourg 
 Macedonian 
 Malagasy 
 Malawian 
 Malaysian 
 Sabahan 
 Sarawakian 
 Maldivian 
 Malian 
 Maltese 
 Mauritanian 
 Mauritian 
 Mexican 
 Moldovan 
 Monégasque 
 Mongolian 
 Montenegrin 
 Moroccan 
 Mozambican 
 Namibian 
 Nauruan 
 Nepalese 
 New Zealand 
 Nicaraguan 
 Niger 
 Nigerian 
 Niuean 
 Norwegian 
 Omani 
 Pakistani 
 Palestinian 
 Panamanian 
 Peruvian 
 Polish 
 Portuguese 
 Qatari 
 Romanian  (incl.  Transylvanian Saxon ) 
 Russian 
 Bashkir 
 Chechen 
 Circassian 
 Komi 
 Mordovian 
 Sakha 
 Tatar 
 Udmurt 
 Yamal 
 Rwandan 
 Saint Lucian 
 Salvadoran 
 Sammarinese 
 São Tomé and Príncipe 
 Saudi Arabian 
 Senegalese 
 Serbian 
 Seychellois 
 Sierra Leonean 
 Singaporean 
 Slovak 
 Slovenian 
 Somali 
 South African 
 Spanish 
 Andalusian 
 Asturian 
 Balearic 
 Basque 
 Canarian 
 Cantabrian 
 Catalan 
 Extremaduran 
 Galician 
 Manchegan 
 Valencian 
 Sri Lankan 
 Sudanese 
 Swazi 
 Swedish 
 Swiss 
 Syrian 
 Taiwanese 
 Tajik 
 Tanzanian 
 Zanzibari 
 Thai 
 Togolese 
 Tunisian 
 Turkish 
 Turkmen 
 Trinidadian and Tobagonian 
 Ugandan 
 Ukrainian 
 Uruguayan 
 Uzbek 
 Venezuelan 
 Vietnamese 
 Western Saharan 
 Yemeni 
 Zambian 
 Zimbabwean 
 Ethnic 
 Ainu 
 Arab 
 Indonesian 
 Aromanian 
 Assyrian 
 Balochi 
 Berber 
 Cajun 
 Chinese 
 American 
 Canadian 
 Chifa 
 Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Crimean Tatar 
 Greek American 
 Hazaragi 
 Indian 
 Anglo-Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Indigenous American 
 Inuit 
 Italian American 
 Kurdish 
 Livonian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Malay 
 Ossetian 
 Parsi 
 Pashtun 
 Peranakan 
 Romani 
 Sámi 
 Soul food 
 Sylheti 
 Transylvanian Saxon 
 Yup'ik 
 Religious 
 Buddhist 
 Christian 
 Goan Catholic 
 Mangalorean Catholic 
 Mennonite 
 Hindu 
 Islamic 
 Chinese 
 Ital 
 Jain 
 Jewish 
 American 
 Ashkenazi 
 Bukharan 
 Ethiopian 
 Mizrahi 
 Sephardic 
 Syrian 
 Ritual slaughter 
 Sikh 
 Historical 
 Ancient Egyptian 
 Ancient Greek 
 Ancient Israelite 
 Ancient Roman 
 Antebellum America 
 Aztec 
 Byzantine 
 Early modern European 
 Historical Chinese 
 Historical Indian subcontinent 
 Historical North Indian and Pakistani 
 History of agriculture 
 History of alcoholic drinks 
 History of bread 
 History of seafood 
 History of vegetarianism 
 Historical Argentine 
 Historical Japanese 
 Inca 
 Mayan 
 Muisca 
 Mughal 
 Medieval 
 Ottoman 
 Peasant 
 Soviet 
 Thirteen Colonies 
 Styles 
 Classique 
 Fast food 
 Fusion 
 New American 
 Eurasian 
 Haute 
 Molecular gastronomy 
 Note by Note 
 Nouvelle 
 Lists 
 List of cuisines 
 List of historical cuisines 
 Lists of prepared foods 
 Related 
 Cookbook 
 Cooking 
 Culinary arts 
 Drink 
 Food 
 history 
 Diet 
 Meal preparation 
 
   Food portal 
   Drink portal 
   Category 
   Commons 
   Cookbook 
   WikiProject 
   Outline 
 
 Authority control : National libraries  
 France 
 BnF data 
 Israel 
 United States 
 Japan 
 Czech Republic 
 
  
NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw2409
Cached time: 20230311185112
Cache expiry: 1814400
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc, no‐toc‐conversion]
CPU time usage: 2.150 seconds
Real time usage: 2.633 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 13968/1000000
Post‐expand include size: 633749/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 60746/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 16/100
Expensive parser function count: 56/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 646268/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.196/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 15326464/52428800 bytes
Lua Profile:
    ?                                                                240 ms       21.4%
    MediaWiki\Extension\Scribunto\Engines\LuaSandbox\LuaSandboxCallback::callParserFunction      140 ms       12.5%
    <mw.lua:694>                                                      80 ms        7.1%
    MediaWiki\Extension\Scribunto\Engines\LuaSandbox\LuaSandboxCallback::gsub       80 ms        7.1%
    dataWrapper <mw.lua:672>                                          80 ms        7.1%
    recursiveClone <mwInit.lua:41>                                    60 ms        5.4%
    MediaWiki\Extension\Scribunto\Engines\LuaSandbox\LuaSandboxCallback::find       60 ms        5.4%
    tostring                                                          40 ms        3.6%
    MediaWiki\Extension\Scribunto\Engines\LuaSandbox\LuaSandboxCallback::len       40 ms        3.6%
    MediaWiki\Extension\Scribunto\Engines\LuaSandbox\LuaSandboxCallback::unstripNoWiki       40 ms        3.6%
    [others]                                                         260 ms       23.2%
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/400
 
 
Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1894.703      1 -total
 52.88% 1001.997      1 Template:Reflist
 30.64%  580.571    152 Template:Cite_web
  6.58%  124.658     25 Template:Harvcolnb
  6.54%  123.860     27 Template:Cite_book
  5.27%   99.773      1 Template:United_States_topics
  5.13%   97.288      1 Template:Country_topics
  4.35%   82.386      2 Template:Sister_project
  4.32%   81.920      2 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  4.28%   81.140      1 Template:American_cuisine
 
  Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:idhash:2175-0!canonical and timestamp 20230311185109 and revision id 1142976702. Rendering was triggered because: page-view
  
 esi <esi:include src="/esitest-fa8a495983347898/content" />  
 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=American_cuisine&oldid=1142976702 " 
 Categories :  American cuisine Cultural history of the United States North American cuisine Hidden categories:  CS1: Julian–Gregorian uncertainty CS1 maint: archived copy as title Use mdy dates from December 2022 Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use American English from January 2017 All Wikipedia articles written in American English All accuracy disputes Articles with disputed statements from July 2015 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2021 Articles with unsourced statements from June 2021 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from February 2021 Articles needing additional references from March 2023 All articles needing additional references Articles that may contain original research from February 2008 All articles that may contain original research Articles with unsourced statements from December 2022 Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with BNF identifiers Articles with J9U identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers Articles with NDL identifiers Articles with NKC identifiers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  This page was last edited on 5 March 2023, at 08:10  (UTC) . 
 Text is available under the  Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0 ;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the  Terms of Use  and  Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the  Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. 
 
 
 Privacy policy 
 About Wikipedia 
 Disclaimers 
 Contact Wikipedia 
 Mobile view 
 Developers 
 Statistics 
 Cookie statement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
