
 
 
 Jump to content 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle sidebar 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Create account Log in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Personal tools 
 
 
 
 
   Create account   Log in 
 
 
 
 
		Pages for logged out editors  learn more 
 
 
 Contributions Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Navigation 
 
 
 Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate 
 
 
 
 
 Contribute 
 
 
 Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file 
 
 
 
 
 Tools 
 
 
 What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item 
 
 
 
 
 Print/export 
 
 
 Download as PDF Printable version 
 
 
 
 
 In other projects 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons 
 
 
 
 
 Languages 
 
 On this Wikipedia the language links are at the top of the page across from the article title.  Go to top . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CentralNotice  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Contents 
 move to sidebar 
 hide 
 
 
 
 
 (Top) 
 
 
 
 
 
 1 Meals 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 Bread 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 Beer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4 Fruit and vegetables 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5 Meat, fowl and fish 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6 See also 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 7 Notes and references 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8 External links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
						Toggle the table of contents
					 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle the table of contents 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ancient Egyptian cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 17 languages 
 
 
 
 العربية Català Español Euskara Français Bahasa Indonesia مصرى Bahasa Melayu Nederlands Português Русский Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 
 Edit links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Article Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 English 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 More 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
 
 
 Diet as determined in surviving artifacts and remains 
   An early  Ramesside Period  mural painting from  Deir el-Medina  tomb depicts an Egyptian couple harvesting crops. 
 Ancient Egyptian culture 
 Architecture 
 Art 
 Clothing 
 Cuisine 
 Dance 
 Literature 
 v t e 
 The  cuisine of ancient Egypt  covers a span of over three thousand years, but still retained many consistent traits until well into  Greco-Roman  times. The staples of both poor and wealthy  Egyptians  were  bread  and  beer , often accompanied by green-shooted  onions , other  vegetables , and to a lesser extent  meat ,  game  and  fish . [1] [ self-published source? ] 
 
 
 Meals [ edit ] 
 Depictions of  banquets  can be found in paintings from both the  Old Kingdom  and  New Kingdom . They usually started sometime in the afternoon. Men and women were separated unless they were married. Seating varied according to  social status , with those of the highest status sitting on chairs, those slightly lower sat on stools and those lowest in rank sat on the raw floor. Before the food was served,  basins were provided along with aromatics, and flower scented fat was burned to spread pleasant smells or to repel insects, depending on the type. [2] 
 Lily flowers  and flower collars were handed out and professional dancers (primarily women) entertained, accompanied by musicians playing  harps ,  lutes ,  drums ,  tambourines , and  clappers . There were usually considerable amounts of alcohol and abundant quantities of foods; there were whole  roast   oxen ,  ducks ,  geese ,  pigeons , and at times fish. The dishes frequently consisted of  stews  served with great amounts of bread, fresh vegetables and fruit. For sweets there were cakes baked with  dates  and sweetened with  honey . The goddess  Hathor  was often invoked during feasts. [2] 
 Food could be prepared by  stewing ,  baking ,  boiling ,  grilling ,  frying , or  roasting .  Spices  and  herbs  were added for flavor, though the former were expensive imports and therefore confined to the tables of the wealthy. Food such as meats was mostly preserved by  salting , and dates and  raisins  could be  dried  for long-term storage. The staples bread and beer were usually prepared in the same locations, as the yeast used for bread was also used for brewing. The two were prepared either in special bakeries or, more often, at home, and any surplus would be sold. [3] 
 
 Honey was the primary sweetener, but was rather expensive. There was honey collected from the wild, and honey from domesticated bees kept in pottery hives. A cheaper alternative would have been dates or  carob . There was even a hieroglyph ( nedjem/bener ) depicting a  carob pod       , that bore the primary meaning of "sweet; pleasant." Oils would be made from  lettuce  or  radish  seed,  safflower ,  ben ,  balanites  and  sesame . Animal fat was employed for cooking and jars used for storing it have been found in many settlements. 
 Bread [ edit ] 
   A depiction of the royal bakery from an engraving in the tomb of  Ramesses III  in the  Valley of the Kings . There are many types of loaves, including ones that are shaped like animals.  20th dynasty . 
 Egyptian  bread  was made almost exclusively from  emmer   wheat , which was more difficult to turn into  flour  than most other varieties of wheat. The  chaff  does not come off through  threshing , but comes in spikelets that needed to be removed by moistening and pounding with a  pestle  to avoid crushing the grains inside. It was then dried in the sun, winnowed and sieved and finally milled on a  saddle quern , which functioned by moving the grindstone back and forth, rather than with a rotating motion. [4] 
 The baking techniques varied over time. In the Old Kingdom, heavy pottery molds were filled with dough and then set in the embers to bake. During the  Middle Kingdom  tall cones were used on square hearths. In the New Kingdom a new type of a large open-topped clay oven, cylindrical in shape, was used, which was encased in thick mud bricks and mortar. [4] 
 Dough was then slapped on the heated inner wall and peeled off when done, similar to how a  tandoor  oven is used for flatbreads. Tombs from the New Kingdom show images of bread in many different shapes and sizes. Loaves shaped like human figures, fish, various animals and fans, all of varying dough texture. Flavorings used for bread included  coriander  seeds and dates, but it is not known if this was ever used by the poor. [4] 
 Other than emmer,  barley  was grown to make bread and also used for making beer, and so were  lily  seeds and roots, and  tiger nut . The grit from the quern stones used to grind the flour mixed in with bread was a major source of tooth decay due to the wear it produced on the enamel. For those who could afford there was also fine dessert bread and cakes baked from high-grade flour. [3] 
 
 Beer [ edit ] 
 "Egyptian beer" redirects here. For modern Egyptian beer, see  Beer in Egypt . 
   Stela  depicting a Syrian mercenary drinking beer.  Egyptian New Kingdom ,  18th Dynasty ,  Amenhotep IV .  Neues Museum , Berlin. 
 In Egypt  beer  was a primary source of nutrition, and consumed daily. Beer was such an important part of the Egyptian diet that it was even used as currency. [5]  Like most modern African beers, but unlike European beer, it was very cloudy with plenty of solids and highly nutritious, quite reminiscent of  gruel . It was an important source of protein, minerals and vitamins and was so valuable that beer jars were often used as a measurement of value and were used in medicine. Little is known about specific types of beer, but there is mention of, for example,  sweet beer  but without any specific details mentioned.
 Globular-based vessels with a narrow neck that were used to store fermented beer [6]  from pre-dynastic times have been found at  Hierakonpolis  and  Abydos  with emmer wheat residue that shows signs of gentle heating from below. Though not conclusive evidence of early beer brewing it is an indication that this might have been what they were used for. Archeological evidence shows that beer was made by first baking "beer bread", a type of well- leavened , lightly baked bread that did not kill the yeasts, which was then crumbled over a sieve, washed with water in a vat and then left to ferment. [7]  This "beer bread" closely resembles the  bouza  that is still consumed in Egypt today. [8] [9]  There are claims of dates or malts having been used, but the evidence is not concrete.
 Microscopy  of beer residue points to a different method of brewing where bread was not used as an ingredient. One batch of grain was sprouted, which produced  enzymes . The next batch was cooked in water, dispersing the  starch  and then the two batches were mixed. The enzymes began to consume the starch to produce  sugar . The resulting mixture was then sieved to remove chaff, and yeast (and probably  lactic acid ) was then added to begin a fermentation process that produced  alcohol . This method of brewing is still used in parts of non-industrialized Africa. Most beers were made of barley and only a few of emmer wheat, but so far no evidence of flavoring has been found. [10] 
 
 Fruit and vegetables [ edit ] 
 Vegetables were eaten as a complement to the ubiquitous beer and bread; the most common were long-shooted green  scallions  and  garlic  but both also had medical uses. There was also lettuce,  celery  (eaten raw or used to flavor  stews ), certain types of  cucumber  and, perhaps, some types of  Old World   gourds  and even  melons . By Greco-Roman times there were  turnips , but it is not certain if they were available before that period. Various  tubers  of  sedges , including  papyrus  were eaten raw, boiled, roasted or ground into flour and were rich in nutrients.
 Tiger nut ( Cyperus esculentus ) was used to make a dessert made from the dried and ground tubers mixed with honey.  Lily  and similar flowering aquatic plants could be eaten raw or turned into flour, and both root and stem were edible. A number of  pulses  and  legumes  such as  peas ,  beans ,  lentils  and  chickpeas  were vital sources of protein. The excavations of the workers' village at Giza have revealed pottery vessels imported from the Middle East, which were used to store and transport  olive oil [11]  as early as the 4th Dynasty.
 The most common fruit were  dates  and there were also  figs ,  grapes  (and  raisins ),  dom   palm nuts  (eaten raw or steeped to make juice), certain species of  Mimusops , and  nabk  berries ( jujube  or other members of the  genus  Ziziphus ). [3]  Figs were so common because they were high in sugar and protein. The dates would either be dried/dehydrated or eaten fresh. Dates were sometimes even used to ferment wine and the poor would use them as sweeteners. Unlike vegetables, which were grown year-round, fruit was more seasonal. Pomegranates and grapes would be brought into tombs of the deceased.
 
 Meat, fowl and fish [ edit ] 
   Hunting game birds and plowing a field. Depiction on a burial chamber from c. 2700 BC. Tomb of  Nefermaat  and his wife  Itet . 
 Meat came from domesticated animals, game and poultry. This possibly included partridge, quail, pigeon, ducks and geese. The chicken most likely arrived around the 5th to 4th century BC, though no chicken bones have actually been found dating from before the Greco-Roman period. The most important animals were cattle, sheep, goats and pigs (previously thought to have been taboo to eat because the priests of Egypt referred pig to the evil god Seth). [12] 
 5th-century BC Greek historian  Herodotus  claimed that the Egyptians abstained from consuming female cows as they were sacred by association with Isis. They sacrificed male oxen that were inspected to be clean and free of disease and ate the remainder after it was ritually burned. Ill or diseased male oxen not worthy of sacrifice and had died were buried ritually and then dug up after the bones were clean and placed in a temple. Only the heads of the male oxen that were cut off and then cursed were available to be eaten by the Greeks in Egypt as they were not allowed of the sacred sacrifice meat.  [13]  Excavations at the Giza worker's village have uncovered evidence of massive slaughter of oxen, mutton and pork, such that researchers estimate that the workforce building the  Great Pyramid  were fed beef every day. [12] 
 Mutton  and pork were more common, [3]  despite Herodotus' affirmations that swine were held by the Egyptians to be unclean and avoided. [14]  Poultry, both wild and domestic and fish were available to all but the most destitute. The alternative protein sources would rather have been legumes, eggs,  cheese  and the  amino acids  available in the tandem staples of bread and beer. Mice and hedgehogs were also eaten and a common way to cook the latter was to encase a hedgehog in clay and bake it. When the clay was then cracked open and removed, it took the prickly spikes with it. [3] 
 Foie gras , a well-known  delicacy  which is still enjoyed today, was invented by the ancient Egyptians. The technique of  gavage , cramming food into the mouth of domesticated ducks and geese, dates as far back as 2500 BC, when the Egyptians began keeping birds for food. [15] [16] [17] 
 A 14th century book translated and published in 2017 lists 10 recipes for sparrow which was eaten for its aphrodisiac properties. [18] 
 
 See also [ edit ] 
 
 Ancient Egypt portal Food portal History portal 
 Egyptian cuisine 
 Hunting, fishing and animals in ancient Egypt 
 Shedeh 
 List of ancient dishes 
 Notes and references [ edit ] 
 
 
 ^   Sharon LaBorde (6 April 2017).  Following the Sun: A Practical Guide to Egyptian Religion, Revised Edition . Lulu.com. pp. 198–.  ISBN   978-1-365-87722-3 . [ self-published source ] 
 
 ^  a   b   Encyclopedia of Ancient Egypt ;  banquets 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   e   The Oxford Encyclopedia of Ancient Egypt ;  diet 
 
 ^  a   b   c   Encyclopedia of Ancient Egypt ;  bread 
 
 ^   Homan, Michael (2004). "Beer and Its Drinkers: An Ancient near Eastern Love Story".  Near Eastern Archaeology .  67  (2): 84–95.  doi : 10.2307/4132364 .  JSTOR   4132364 .  S2CID   162357890 . 
 
 ^   Homan, Michael (June 2004). "Beer and Its Drinkers: An Ancient near Eastern Love Story".  Near Eastern Archaeology .  67  (2): 86.  doi : 10.2307/4132364 .  JSTOR   4132364 .  S2CID   162357890 . 
 
 ^   Rayment, W.J.  "History of Bread" .  www.breadinfo.com . Archived from  the original  on 26 August 2010 . Retrieved  28 October  2018 . 
 
 ^   Caballero, Benjamin; Finglas, Paul; Toldrá, Fidel.  Encyclopedia of Food and Health . Academic Press. p. 348. 
 
 ^   Jensen, Jon.  "Poor of Cairo drown their sorrows in moonshine" . jonjensen . Retrieved  14 December  2016 . 
 
 ^   Encyclopedia of Ancient Egypt ;  beer 
 
 ^   Hawass, Zahi,  Mountains of the Pharaohs , Doubleday, New York, 2006. p. 165. 
 
 ^  a   b   Hawass, Zahi,  Mountains of the Pharaohs , Doubleday, New York, 2006. p. 211. 
 
 ^   "HERODOTUS: Chapter II:41" . Retrieved  2019-05-03 . 
 
 ^   "HERODOTUS: Chapter II:47" . Retrieved  2019-05-03 . 
 
 ^   "Ancient Egypt: Farmed and domesticated animals" . Archived from  the original  on 2017-12-16 . Retrieved  2017-12-07 . 
 
 ^   "A Global Taste Test of Foie Gras and Truffles" .  NPR .  Archived  from the original on 2018-07-14 . Retrieved  2018-04-05 . 
 
 ^   Myhrvold, Nathan.  "Cooking" .  Britannica . Britannica.  Archived  from the original on 2017-12-07 . Retrieved  7 December  2017 . 
 
 ^   Nasrallah, Nawal (30 July 2018).  "14th-Century Cookbook 'Profoundly Rich Resource for Egyptian Culinary Heritage' " .  Arablit & Arablit Quarterly .  Archived  from the original on 2018-08-01 . Retrieved  6 September  2018 . 
 
 
 External links [ edit ] 
 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons has media related to  Cuisine of ancient Egypt . 
 
 Food: Bread, beer, and all good things , reshafim.org.il, 2000–2005. 
 v t e Cuisines Continental 
 African 
 North 
 West 
 list 
 Americas 
 Caribbean 
 North 
 South 
 list 
 Asian 
 Caucasian 
 Central 
 Indian subcontinent 
 Levantine 
 list 
 European 
 Balkan 
 Central 
 Eastern 
 list 
 Oceanic 
 Intercontinental
 Global 
 Latin American 
 Mediterranean 
 Middle Eastern 
 National  and regional 
 Afghan 
 Albanian 
 Algerian 
 American 
 Californian 
 Floribbean 
 Hawaiian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Lowcountry (South Carolina) 
 New England 
 New Mexico 
 Pacific Northwest 
 Pennsylvania Dutch 
 Puerto Rican 
 Southern US 
 Southwest US 
 Texas 
 Angolan 
 Argentine 
 Armenian 
 Australian 
 Austrian 
 Azerbaijani 
 Bahraini 
 Bangladeshi 
 Barbadian 
 Belarusian 
 Belgian 
 Belizean 
 Beninese 
 Bhutanese 
 Bolivian 
 Bosnian-Herzegovinian 
 Botswana 
 Brazilian 
 British 
 Channel Islands 
 English 
 Gibraltarian 
 Northern Irish 
 Saint Helena 
 Scottish 
 Welsh 
 Bruneian 
 Bulgarian 
 Burkinabé 
 Burmese 
 Burundian 
 Cambodian 
 Cameroonian 
 Canadian 
 Acadian 
 Québécois 
 Central African Republic 
 Chadian 
 Chilean 
 Chinese 
 Cantonese 
 Hong Kong 
 Macanese 
 Tibetan 
 Xinjiang 
 Colombian 
 Congolese 
 Corsican 
 Croatian 
 Cuban 
 Cypriot 
 Czech 
 Danish 
 Faroese 
 Greenlandic 
 Djiboutian 
 Dominican 
 Dominican Republic 
 Dutch 
 East Timorese 
 Ecuadorian 
 Egyptian 
 Emirati 
 Equatorial Guinean 
 Eritrean 
 Estonian 
 Ethiopian 
 Fijian 
 Filipino 
 Finnish 
 French 
 Occitan 
 French Guianan 
 Gabonese 
 Gambian 
 Georgian 
 German 
 Ghanaian 
 Greek 
 Cretan 
 Epirotic 
 Greek Macedonian 
 Heptanesean 
 Guatemalan 
 Guinea-Bissauan 
 Guinean 
 Haitian 
 Honduran 
 Hungarian 
 Icelandic 
 Indian 
 Arunachalese 
 Assamese 
 Bengali 
 Bihari 
 Goan 
 Gujarati 
 Himachal Pradesh 
 Kashmiri 
 Jharkhandi 
 Karnataka 
 Kerala 
 Maharashtrian 
 Manipuri 
 Meghalayan 
 Mizo 
 Naga 
 Odia 
 Punjabi 
 Rajasthani 
 Sikkimese 
 Sindhi 
 Tamil 
 Telangana 
 Telugu 
 Indonesian 
 Acehnese 
 Balinese 
 Banjar 
 Batak 
 Betawi 
 Indo 
 Javanese 
 Madurese 
 Makassar 
 Minahasan 
 Minangkabau 
 Palembangese 
 Sundanese 
 Iranian 
 Iraqi 
 Irish 
 Israeli 
 Italian 
 Abruzzese 
 Ligurian 
 Lombard 
 Lucanian 
 Neapolitan 
 Roman 
 Sardinian 
 Sicilian 
 Venetian 
 Ivorian 
 Jamaican 
 Japanese 
 Okinawan 
 Jordanian 
 Kazakh 
 Kenyan 
 Korean 
 North Korean 
 South Korean 
 Kosovan 
 Kuwaiti 
 Kyrgyz 
 Lao 
 Latvian 
 Lebanese 
 Lesotho 
 Liberian 
 Libyan 
 Liechtensteiner 
 Lithuanian 
 Luxembourg 
 Macedonian 
 Malagasy 
 Malawian 
 Malaysian 
 Sabahan 
 Sarawakian 
 Maldivian 
 Malian 
 Maltese 
 Mauritanian 
 Mauritian 
 Mexican 
 Moldovan 
 Monégasque 
 Mongolian 
 Montenegrin 
 Moroccan 
 Mozambican 
 Namibian 
 Nauruan 
 Nepalese 
 New Zealand 
 Nicaraguan 
 Niger 
 Nigerian 
 Niuean 
 Norwegian 
 Omani 
 Pakistani 
 Palestinian 
 Panamanian 
 Peruvian 
 Polish 
 Portuguese 
 Qatari 
 Romanian  (incl.  Transylvanian Saxon ) 
 Russian 
 Bashkir 
 Chechen 
 Circassian 
 Komi 
 Mordovian 
 Sakha 
 Tatar 
 Udmurt 
 Yamal 
 Rwandan 
 Saint Lucian 
 Salvadoran 
 Sammarinese 
 São Tomé and Príncipe 
 Saudi Arabian 
 Senegalese 
 Serbian 
 Seychellois 
 Sierra Leonean 
 Singaporean 
 Slovak 
 Slovenian 
 Somali 
 South African 
 Spanish 
 Andalusian 
 Asturian 
 Balearic 
 Basque 
 Canarian 
 Cantabrian 
 Catalan 
 Extremaduran 
 Galician 
 Manchegan 
 Valencian 
 Sri Lankan 
 Sudanese 
 Swazi 
 Swedish 
 Swiss 
 Syrian 
 Taiwanese 
 Tajik 
 Tanzanian 
 Zanzibari 
 Thai 
 Togolese 
 Tunisian 
 Turkish 
 Turkmen 
 Trinidadian and Tobagonian 
 Ugandan 
 Ukrainian 
 Uruguayan 
 Uzbek 
 Venezuelan 
 Vietnamese 
 Western Saharan 
 Yemeni 
 Zambian 
 Zimbabwean 
 Ethnic 
 Ainu 
 Arab 
 Indonesian 
 Aromanian 
 Assyrian 
 Balochi 
 Berber 
 Cajun 
 Chinese 
 American 
 Canadian 
 Chifa 
 Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Crimean Tatar 
 Greek American 
 Hazaragi 
 Indian 
 Anglo-Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Indigenous American 
 Inuit 
 Italian American 
 Kurdish 
 Livonian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Malay 
 Ossetian 
 Parsi 
 Pashtun 
 Peranakan 
 Romani 
 Sámi 
 Soul food 
 Sylheti 
 Transylvanian Saxon 
 Yup'ik 
 Religious 
 Buddhist 
 Christian 
 Goan Catholic 
 Mangalorean Catholic 
 Mennonite 
 Hindu 
 Islamic 
 Chinese 
 Ital 
 Jain 
 Jewish 
 American 
 Ashkenazi 
 Bukharan 
 Ethiopian 
 Mizrahi 
 Sephardic 
 Syrian 
 Ritual slaughter 
 Sikh 
 Historical 
 Ancient Egyptian 
 Ancient Greek 
 Ancient Israelite 
 Ancient Roman 
 Antebellum America 
 Aztec 
 Byzantine 
 Early modern European 
 Historical Chinese 
 Historical Indian subcontinent 
 Historical North Indian and Pakistani 
 History of agriculture 
 History of alcoholic drinks 
 History of bread 
 History of seafood 
 History of vegetarianism 
 Historical Argentine 
 Historical Japanese 
 Inca 
 Mayan 
 Muisca 
 Mughal 
 Medieval 
 Ottoman 
 Peasant 
 Soviet 
 Thirteen Colonies 
 Styles 
 Classique 
 Fast food 
 Fusion 
 New American 
 Eurasian 
 Haute 
 Molecular gastronomy 
 Note by Note 
 Nouvelle 
 Lists 
 List of cuisines 
 List of historical cuisines 
 Lists of prepared foods 
 Related 
 Cookbook 
 Cooking 
 Culinary arts 
 Drink 
 Food 
 history 
 Diet 
 Meal preparation 
 
   Food portal 
   Drink portal 
   Category 
   Commons 
   Cookbook 
   WikiProject 
   Outline 
 
 v t e Ancient Egypt  topics 
 Index 
 Major topics 
 Glossary of artifacts 
 
 Agriculture 
 Architecture  ( Revival ,  Obelisks ,  Pylon ) 
 Art 
 Portraiture 
 Astronomy 
 Chronology 
 Cities  ( List ) 
 Clothing 
 Ancient Egyptian race controversy 
 Population history of Egypt 
 Prehistoric Egypt 
 Cuisine 
 Dance 
 Dynasties 
 Funerary practices 
 Geography 
 Great Royal Wives  ( List ) 
 Hieroglyphs  ( Cursive hieroglyphs ) 
 History 
 Language  ( Demotic ,  Hieratic ) 
 Literature 
 Mathematics 
 Medicine 
 Military 
 Music 
 Mythology 
 People 
 Pharaohs  ( List ,  Titulary ) 
 Philosophy 
 Pottery 
 Religion 
 Sites  ( District ) 
 Technology 
 Trade 
 Egypt–Mesopotamia relations 
 
 Egyptology 
 Egyptologists 
 Museums 
 
   Ancient Egypt portal 
   Category 
   WikiProject 
   Commons 
   Outline 
 
  
NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw2276
Cached time: 20230311123219
Cache expiry: 1814400
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc, no‐toc‐conversion]
CPU time usage: 0.582 seconds
Real time usage: 0.751 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1666/1000000
Post‐expand include size: 104258/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2099/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 8/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 64840/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.322/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 8110573/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/400
 
 
Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  558.873      1 -total
 33.98%  189.922      1 Template:Reflist
 16.34%   91.319      2 Template:Cite_book
 15.86%   88.656      1 Template:Ancient_Egyptian_culture
 15.45%   86.372      1 Template:Sidebar
 11.64%   65.039      2 Template:Navbox
 11.31%   63.218      1 Template:Short_description
 10.67%   59.606      1 Template:Cuisines
  8.52%   47.628      2 Template:Fix
  7.62%   42.608      1 Template:Self-published_inline
 
  Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:idhash:11298796-0!canonical and timestamp 20230311123218 and revision id 1141171606. Rendering was triggered because: page-view
  
 esi <esi:include src="/esitest-fa8a495983347898/content" />  
 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ancient_Egyptian_cuisine&oldid=1141171606 " 
 Categories :  Ancient Egyptian culture Cuisine by culture Historical foods Ancient dishes Egyptian cuisine Ancient Egyptian cuisine Hidden categories:  All accuracy disputes Accuracy disputes from June 2022 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with self-published sources Articles with self-published sources from February 2020 Commons category link is on Wikidata 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  This page was last edited on 23 February 2023, at 18:47  (UTC) . 
 Text is available under the  Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0 ;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the  Terms of Use  and  Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the  Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. 
 
 
 Privacy policy 
 About Wikipedia 
 Disclaimers 
 Contact Wikipedia 
 Mobile view 
 Developers 
 Statistics 
 Cookie statement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
