
 
 
 Jump to content 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle sidebar 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Create account Log in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Personal tools 
 
 
 
 
   Create account   Log in 
 
 
 
 
		Pages for logged out editors  learn more 
 
 
 Contributions Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Navigation 
 
 
 Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate 
 
 
 
 
 Contribute 
 
 
 Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file 
 
 
 
 
 Tools 
 
 
 What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item 
 
 
 
 
 Print/export 
 
 
 Download as PDF Printable version 
 
 
 
 
 Languages 
 
 On this Wikipedia the language links are at the top of the page across from the article title.  Go to top . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CentralNotice  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Contents 
 move to sidebar 
 hide 
 
 
 
 
 (Top) 
 
 
 
 
 
 1 Ethnohistoric and paleoethnobotanical evidence for plant staples 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 Ethnohistorical and zooarchaeological evidence of meat usage 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 Stable isotopic evidence of the ancient Maya diet 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4 Ancient Mayan cuisine present in modern cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5 See also 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6 Notes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 7 References 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
						Toggle the table of contents
					 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle the table of contents 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ancient Maya cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 7 languages 
 
 
 
 Español فارسی Bahasa Indonesia Jawa ქართული Русский Українська 
 Edit links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Article Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 English 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 More 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
 
 
 Diet of the Ancient Mesoamerican civilization 
   Tamal colado— typical Maya dish, corn dough mixed with turkey and vegetables, wrapped and baked in a plantain leaf 
 This article is part of  a series  on the Maya civilization 
 People 
 Society 
 Languages 
 Writing 
 Religion 
 Mythology 
 Sacrifice 
 Cities 
 Architecture 
 Astronomy 
 Calendar 
 Stelae 
 Art 
 Textiles 
 Trade 
 Music 
 Dance 
 Medicine 
 Cuisine 
 Warfare 
 
 
 History 
 Preclassic Maya 
 
 Classic Maya collapse 
 
 Spanish conquest of the Maya 
 Yucatán 
 Chiapas 
 Guatemala 
 Petén 
 
 
   Mesoamerica portal v t e 
 Ancient Maya  cuisine  was varied and extensive. Many different types of resources were consumed, including maritime,  flora , and  faunal  material, and food was obtained or produced through strategies such as  hunting ,  foraging , and large-scale  agricultural production . Plant  domestication  concentrated upon several core foods, the most important of which was  maize . [1] 
 Much of the ancient Maya food supply was grown in agricultural fields and  forest gardens , known as  pet kot . [2]   The system takes its name from the pet stones ( pet  meaning "circular" and  kot  "wall of loose stones") that characteristically surrounded the gardens.
 The ancient Maya adopted a number of adaptive techniques that, if necessary, allowed for the clear-cutting of land and re-infused the soil with nutrients. Among these was  slash-and-burn , or swidden, agriculture, a technique that cleared and temporarily fertilized the area. For example, the introduction of ash into the soil raises the soil's  pH . This in turn temporarily raises the content of a variety of nutrients, especially  phosphorus .
 The effect lasts about two years. However, the soil will not remain suitable for planting for as many as ten years. This technique, common throughout the Maya area, is still practiced in the region today. Complementing swidden techniques were  crop rotation  and farming, employed to maintain soil viability and increase the variety of crops.
 To understand how and in what quantities food resources were relied upon by the Ancient Maya, stable isotopic analysis has been utilized. [3]  This method allows for the stable carbon and nitrogen isotopes to be chemically extracted from animal and human skeletal remains. These elements are then run through a mass spectrometer and the values display the enrichment of maize and the extent of aquatic resources in an individual's diet. [4] 
 Many foods and food production techniques used by the ancient Maya civilization remain in use today by the modern  Maya peoples , and many have spread far beyond the Maya region.
 
 
 Ethnohistoric and paleoethnobotanical evidence for plant staples [ edit ] 
   Varieties of  maize 
 Paleoethnobotanical  studies consist of the examination of micro- and macro- plant remains found within measured units of soil taken from an archaeological context. [5]  Macro-remains are separated from the soil through a flotation process while micro-remains are chemically extracted from the flotation samples. [6] 
 The earliest archaeological plant remains within the Maya region are from  Cuello , Belize, and predate Preclassic sites. The majority of plant remains fall within the Preclassic-Postclassic and allow for researchers to discuss  subsistence patterns  that revolve around domesticated and wild/partially cultivated plants.
 Information for the Classic period, the most widely studied period for the Maya civilization, come from the sites of  Cobá , Cerén,  Dos Pilas , Wild Cane Cay,  Copán ,  Tikal , and  Río Azul . [5]  This range of sites also allows for insight into regional differences based on the environment and access to local resources, such as aquatic and marine life. [7] 
 Ancient Maya diet focused on four domesticated crops ( staple crops ): maize,  squash ,  beans  (typically  Phaseolus vulgaris ) and  chili peppers . The first three cultivars are commonly referred to in  North America  as the " Three Sisters " and, when incorporated in a diet, complement one another in providing necessary nutrients. [8]  Among the three, maize was the central component of the diet of the ancient Maya, and figured prominently in  Maya mythology  and  ideology . Archaeological evidence suggests that Chapalote-Nal-Tel was the dominant species; however, it is likely others were being exploited also. [9] 
 Maize was used and eaten in a variety of ways, but was always  nixtamalized . Nixtamalization (a term that derives from the  Nahuatl  word for the process) is a procedure in which maize is soaked and cooked in an  alkaline  solution. This releases  niacin , a necessary  B vitamin  (vitamin B 3 ) that prevents  pellagra  and reduces incidents of  protein  deficiency.
 Once nixtamalized, maize was typically ground up on a  metate  and prepared in a number of ways.  Tortillas , cooked on a  comal  and used to wrap other foods (meat, beans, etc.), were common and are perhaps the best-known  pre-Columbian   Mesoamerican  food.  Tamales  consist of corn dough, often containing a filling, that is wrapped in a corn  husk  and steam-cooked.
 Both  atole  and  pozole  were liquid-based  gruel -like dishes that were made by mixing ground maize ( hominy ) with water, with  atole  being denser and used as a drinking source and  pozole  having complete big grains of maize incorporated into a turkey broth. Though these dishes could be consumed plain, other ingredients were added to diversify flavor, including chili peppers,  cacao , wild onions and  salt .
 Along with maize and beans, both domestic and wild, squash was relied on, as is evident from the remains at  Joya de Cerén ,  El Salvador . [10] 
 An alternative view is that  manioc   cassava  was the easily grown staple crop of the ancient Maya and that maize was revered because it was prestigious and harder to grow. [11]  This proposal was based on the inability of maize to meet the nutritional needs of densely populated Maya areas. Manioc can meet those needs. Because tuberous  manioc  rarely survives in the  archaeological  record, evidence for this view has been lacking, although recent finds in volcanic ash at the southern Maya site of  Joya de Cerén  in  El Salvador  may be such evidence. [12] 
 
   Theobroma cacao 
 Several different varieties of beans were grown, including  pinto , red and black beans.
 The ancient Maya also relied on tree-cropping for access to foods such as  tomato ,  chili peppers ,  avocado ,  breadnut ,  guava ,  soursop ,  mammee apple ,  papaya ,  pineapple ,  pumpkin ,  sweet potato , and  Xanthosoma . [5]   Chaya  was cultivated for its green leaves.  Chayote  was cultivated for its fruit, and its tender green shoots were used as a vegetable.
 Various herbs were grown and used, including  vanilla ,  epazote ,  achiote  (and the  annatto  seed),  Canella , Hoja santa  ( Piper auritum ) ,  avocado  leaves, garlic vine,  Mexican oregano , and  allspice .
 While paleoethnobotanical remains demonstrate these crops were relied on in some form by all Maya groups, it is clear that different subsistence strategies were relied on. For instance, some fields were planted away from the household groups while some fields were adjacent to households.
 Farming techniques include terracing, raised fields, check dams, drained fields, kitchen gardens, forest gardens, and other forms of irrigation. [13] [14] [15] 
 Other crops have also been investigated as part of the diet of Ancient Maya; chili peppers, manioc, cotton, and agave are thought to have been cultivated in gardens tended near the home. [5] 
 
 Ethnohistorical and zooarchaeological evidence of meat usage [ edit ] 
 Hunting is believed to have supplied the ancient Maya with their main source of meat, though several animals, such as  dog   pek [16]   [pek]  and  turkey   ulum [16]   [ulum] , may have been domesticated.  Animals hunted for meat as well as for other purposes include  deer ,  manatee ,  armadillo ,  tapir ,  peccary ,  monkey ,  guinea pig ,  turtle  and  iguana , with the majority of meat coming from white-tailed deer, as is evident from animal remains found in middens. [5]  The ancient Maya diet was also supplemented by the exploitation, at least in  coastal  areas, of maritime resources, including  fish ,  lobster ,  shrimp ,  conch , and other  shellfish .
 The zooarchaeological evidence from the sites of Lamanai and Tipu have provided considerable information about the types of animals being exploited. The zooarchaeological evidence (5,737 remains from Lamanai and 24,590 remains from Tipu) were collected from midden deposits and structures near and in the ceremonial center of the site. [17] 
 While white-tailed deer remain the most exploited animal at the sites throughout time, there are shifts over time from larger mammals to small mammals, aviary species such as turkey, and aquatic resources such as fish, turtles, and mollusks. [18] 
 While it may seem improbable that aquatic resources were being exploited by inland sites, the site of Caracol, located in the Maya Mountains of Belize, displays evidence of marine resources being brought to the site and transported while still alive. [19]  Archaeological evidence supported this, as a diverse set of marine resources were found from subsistence and ceremonial contexts at Caracol. [20]  The most likely candidates for this type of live transport from the ocean up to the mountains by river would be stingrays, grunts, sea catfish, and parrotfish.
 
 Stable isotopic evidence of the ancient Maya diet [ edit ] 
 Stable isotopic analysis of carbon and nitrogen from human skeletal remains has been conducted at multiple Maya archaeological sites from the lowlands of Belize, the Peten, the Yucatán peninsula, and the highlands of Guatemala. [21]  The first applications of this practice were conducted on the remains found in the Tehuacan Valley and suggest that maize was a dietary staple as early at 4500 BP. [22]   However, the bulk of information is represented by over 600 individuals dating from the Preclassic to the Postclassic period and substantiates that subsistence adaptations were present and caused by chronology, geographic and environmental factors, and cultural pressures. [21] 
 In the Maya lowlands of Belize, carbon and nitrogen data from collagen have been analyzed from ten sites. The average C13 collagen values are -12.6 ± 1.2 per mil, indicating that C4 sources made up 50% of the ancient Maya diet. These average values change very slightly in the Early, Late, and Terminal Classic periods, with averages of -11.3 ± -2.3 per mil. In the Peten region, Preclassic values for collagen C13 average -10.2 ± -1.2 per mil, indicating that C4 sources made up 70% of the ancient Maya diet in this region. These differences in the region may be attributed to the greater access to marine and aquatic resources in Belize. As discussed earlier, there is evidence that marine animals were being brought alive to inland sites by means of river waterways. [19]  Areas of the Peten and the Yucatán may have been too far away from coastal regions for this concept to be utilized.
 Diet varied greatly by site and region. For example, at Pacbitun maize was found to be heavily relied upon by the elite males found in the ceremonial center. This goes against ideas about maize as a more common food and the idea that elites had greater access to a wide variety of resources. Furthermore, this data contradicts what is found about elite diets at other sites like Copan and Lamania.
 Overall, maize played a large role in the diet at the site, but access to maize varied by age, sex, and social status. Adult males consumed more than females and children, and this difference is most likely caused by social status. [23]  Furthermore, maize consumption varied through time. During the flourishing periods of the Early and Late Classic, maize constituted about 72-77% of the diet of individuals living at Pacbitun. [23]  This drops 10% in the Terminal Classic, as the population became less reliant on maize. [23]  This could be caused by a more diverse diet due to trade or increased reliance on other local foods. Another possibility is that attempts at producing enough maize to support the growing population failed.
 
 Ancient Mayan cuisine present in modern cuisine [ edit ] 
 The origins of Mayan cuisine can be established by archaeological evidence, dating as early as 1500 BC and extending through the 16th century AD. [24]  With maize as a significant and sustainable food source, the Maya expanded their palate and began to cultivate and incorporate many other foods into their diet. The evolution of Maya food culture allowed for experimentation with new staples and the development of new Maya cuisine. These, in turn, became established in modern food practices of the  Mayan peoples  and many other peoples of the Americas.
 In the 21st century, many foods that come from ancient Maya techniques, such as chocolate, avocado/guacamole, tortillas, and tamales, have spread far beyond the Maya region.
 
   Common cocoa seed that would be used to make hot chocolate. 
 Chocolate : The cocoa tree is native to Maya territory, and the Maya are believed to be the first people to have cultivated the  cacao   plant  for food. [25]  For the ancient Maya, cocoa was a sacred gift from the gods. [26]  The cocoa plant,  theobroma , literally translates to "food of the gods".
 Cacao beans were historically used as ceremonial sacrifices to the  Mayan gods . Cocoa was enjoyed by all social classes of the ancient Maya people because of its stimulative aphrodisiac powers. Maya couples drank chocolate during ceremonies of marriage and engagement. [27] 
 Cocoa beans  were also ground and mixed with chili peppers,  cornmeal  and  honey  to create a drink called  xocolatl  (a  Nahuatl  word), which only the rich and noble could drink. This ancient Maya chocolate drink was very different from today's hot chocolate; it may have been served unsweetened and with a frothy texture. [28] 
 Avocado / guacamole : Originating from southern Mexico and Guatemala, avocados became a staple of Mayan cuisine. The avocado tree thrives in subtropical climates that existed during the Maya civilization. Avocados are a versatile product that are incorporated in modern cuisine. They have a smooth texture, and rich and buttery taste, which has made them a popular appetizer. [26] 
 Corn tortillas : Maize plays a central role in Mayan culture and mythology. It is said in the  Popul Vuh  that the first humans were crafted from an ear of corn. [29]  The Maya creation story contends that people were fundamentally made of masa or corn dough.
 Tortillas , imbued by the divine quality of maize, offered countless opportunities for food creation and allowed people of all economic standings to eat freely. Ancient Maya tortillas differ from their modern counterparts. The ancient Mayans produced a small three to four-inch masa patty that was thicker than today's version to provide a sturdy base for the dish they would be serving. These dishes often included meat and avocado or could be a side for a stew at a ritualistic meeting.
 Today's tortillas are thinner and often larger in diameter than ancient Maya tortillas. The presence of tortillas serves as a base for many different food dishes, including  tacos ,  burritos ,  quesadillas , chips, soups, and even  crepes .
 
   Mayan civilian with tamales as offerings for the gods. 
 Tamales : Crafted from masa, or corn dough, and a mix of meat and vegetables, tamales have historically been one of the world's most convenient foods [24]  because of their ease of transport. [26]  Like many popular dishes in ancient Maya culture, the  tamal  included the use of the corn husks to ferment and enhance the cooking process of the meal. After the cooking process, the  tamal  would be unwrapped and topped with  salsa ,  which could be eaten on the go.
 Often, tamales would be served at Maya holiday celebrations. Maya women would also sell freshly made tamales, often in exchange for cocoa seeds. Ancient evidence of tamales are prominent on many Maya artifacts and paintings. [26]  The modern  tamal  is enjoyed in much the same way as in ancient Maya cuisine. Mayan food is still used today but modified a little
 
 See also [ edit ] 
 
 Food portal History portal 
 
 Agriculture in Mesoamerica 
 Domesticated plants of Mesoamerica 
 Maya maize god 
 Aztec cuisine 
 Muisca cuisine 
 Inca cuisine 
 
 Notes [ edit ] 
 
 
 ^   "Maya Food & Agriculture" .  World History Encyclopedia . Retrieved  2019-12-13 . 
 
 ^   Michael Ernest Smith and Marilyn A. Masson (2000).  The Ancient Civilizations of Mesoamerica . p. 127.  ISBN   9780631211167 . {{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: uses authors parameter ( link ) 
 
 ^   Rand, A. J.; Healy, P. F.; Awe, J. J. (2013-02-25). "Stable Isotopic Evidence of Ancient Maya Diet at Caledonia, Cayo District, Belize".  International Journal of Osteoarchaeology .  25  (4): 401–413.  doi : 10.1002/oa.2308 .  ISSN   1047-482X . 
 
 ^   White, Christine (1999).  Reconstructing Ancient Maya Diet . Salt Lake City: The University of Utah Press. 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   e   Lentz, David (1999).  White, Christine (ed.). "Plant Resources of the Ancient Maya: The Paleoethnobotanical Evidence".  Reconstructing Ancient Maya Diet . The University of Utah Press. 
 
 ^   Pearsall, D.M. (1989).  Paleoethnobotany: A Handbook of Procedures . San Diego: Academic Press. 
 
 ^   McKillop, Heather (1994). "Ancient Maya tree cropping, a viable subsistence adaptation for the island Maya".  Ancient Mesoamerica .  doi : 10.1017/s0956536100001085 .  S2CID   181784601 . 
 
 ^   Mount Pleasant, Jane  (2006). "The science behind the Three Sisters mound system: An agronomic assessment of an indigenous agricultural system in the northeast".  In Staller, John E.; Tykot, Robert H.; Benz, Bruce F. (eds.).  Histories of Maize: Multidisciplinary Approaches to the Prehistory, Linguistics, Biogeography, Domestication, and Evolution of Maize . Amsterdam: Academic Press. pp. 529–537.  ISBN   978-1-5987-4496-5 . 
 
 ^   Benz, B.F. (1986).  Taxonomy and Evolution of Mexican Maize  (doctoral dissertation). University of Wisconsin, Madison. 
 
 ^   Sheets, Pason (1994). "Tropical Time Capsule".  Archaeology . 
 
 ^   Bronson, Bennet (1966). "Roots and the Subsistence of the Ancient Maya".  Southwestern Journal of Anthropology .  22  (3): 251–279.  doi : 10.1086/soutjanth.22.3.3629373 .  S2CID   126859686 . 
 
 ^   Atwood, Roger (2009). "Maya Roots".  Archaeology .  62  (4): 18. 
 
 ^   Beach, T.; Dunning, N.P. (1995). "Ancient Maya terracing and modern conservation in the Peten rainforest in Guatemala".  Journal of Soil and Water Conservation . 
 
 ^   Turner, B.L.II; Harrison, P.D. (1983).  Pulltrouser Swamp: Ancient maya Habitat, Agriculture, and Settlement in Northern Belize . Austin: University of Texas Press. 
 
 ^   Turner, B.L.II; Johnson, W.C. (1979). "A Maya dam in the Copan Valley, Honduras".  American Antiquity .  44  (2): 299–305.  doi : 10.2307/279080 .  JSTOR   279080 .  S2CID   34890102 . 
 
 ^  a   b   Mayan dictionary  (1997). Wired Humanities Project. Retrieved September 13, 2012, from  link   Archived  2012-12-27 at the  Wayback Machine 
 
 ^   Emery, Kitty (1999). "Continuity and Variability in Postclassic and Colonial Animal Use at Lamanai and Tipu, Belize".  In White, Christine (ed.).  Reconstructing Ancient Maya Diet . University of Utah Press. pp. Salt Lake City. 
 
 ^   Pendergast, D.M. (1986). "Stability through change: Lamanai, Belize from the ninth to seventeenth century".  In Sabloff, J.A.; Andrews, E.W. (eds.).  Late Lowland Maya Civilization: Classic to Postclassic . Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press. 
 
 ^  a   b   Cunningham-Smith, Petra; Chase, Arlen; Chase, Diane (2014). "Fish from afar: marine resource at Caracol, Belize".  Research Reports in Belize Archaeology . 
 
 ^   Teeter, W.G. (2001).  Maya animal utilization in a growing city: vertebrate exploitation at Caracol, Belize . Los Angeles: University of California. 
 
 ^  a   b   Tykot, Robert (2002).  "Contributions of Stable Isotope Analysis to Understanding Dietary Variation among the Maya" .  ACS Symposium Series .  831 : 214–230.  doi : 10.1021/bk-2002-0831.ch014 .  ISBN   0-8412-3810-3 . 
 
 ^   Norr, L. (1995).  Archaeology in the Lowland American Tropics . Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press. pp. 198–223. 
 
 ^  a   b   c   White, Christine; Healy, Paul; Schwarcz, Henry (1993). "Intensive Agriculture, Social Status, and Maya Diet at Pacbitun, Belize".  Journal of Anthropological Research .  49  (4): 347–375.  doi : 10.1086/jar.49.4.3630154 .  S2CID   163419661 . 
 
 ^  a   b   Olver, Lynne .  "The Food Timeline--Aztec, Maya & Inca foods" .  The Food Timeline . Retrieved  2016-11-18 . 
 
 ^   Bogin 1997, Coe 1996, Montejo 1999, Tedlock 1985 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   Shapiro, Michael (2012-09-12).  "Top 10 Foods of the Maya World" .  National Geographic . Retrieved  2016-11-18 . 
 
 ^   "An Ancient Maya Chocolate Recipe For Romance... - The Sacred Science" .  The Sacred Science . 2015-02-12 . Retrieved  2016-11-18 . 
 
 ^   "Ancient Chocolate Found in Maya "Teapot" -- National Geographic" . 2002-07-17 . Retrieved  2018-02-09 . 
 
 ^   "Penn Museum Blog | Maya Fun Fact: The Importance of Corn - Penn Museum" .  www.penn.museum . Retrieved  2016-11-19 . 
 
 
 References [ edit ] 
 Benz, B.F. (1986).  Taxonomy and Evolution of Mexican Maize  (doctoral dissertation). University of Wisconsin, Madison. 
 Coe, Sophie D.  (1994)  America's First Cuisines   ISBN   0-292-71159-X 
 v t e Cuisines Continental 
 African 
 North 
 West 
 list 
 Americas 
 Caribbean 
 North 
 South 
 list 
 Asian 
 Caucasian 
 Central 
 Indian subcontinent 
 Levantine 
 list 
 European 
 Balkan 
 Central 
 Eastern 
 list 
 Oceanic 
 Intercontinental
 Global 
 Latin American 
 Mediterranean 
 Middle Eastern 
 National  and regional 
 Afghan 
 Albanian 
 Algerian 
 American 
 Californian 
 Floribbean 
 Hawaiian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Lowcountry (South Carolina) 
 New England 
 New Mexico 
 Pacific Northwest 
 Pennsylvania Dutch 
 Puerto Rican 
 Southern US 
 Southwest US 
 Texas 
 Angolan 
 Argentine 
 Armenian 
 Australian 
 Austrian 
 Azerbaijani 
 Bahraini 
 Bangladeshi 
 Barbadian 
 Belarusian 
 Belgian 
 Belizean 
 Beninese 
 Bhutanese 
 Bolivian 
 Bosnian-Herzegovinian 
 Botswana 
 Brazilian 
 British 
 Channel Islands 
 English 
 Gibraltarian 
 Northern Irish 
 Saint Helena 
 Scottish 
 Welsh 
 Bruneian 
 Bulgarian 
 Burkinabé 
 Burmese 
 Burundian 
 Cambodian 
 Cameroonian 
 Canadian 
 Acadian 
 Québécois 
 Central African Republic 
 Chadian 
 Chilean 
 Chinese 
 Cantonese 
 Hong Kong 
 Macanese 
 Tibetan 
 Xinjiang 
 Colombian 
 Congolese 
 Corsican 
 Croatian 
 Cuban 
 Cypriot 
 Czech 
 Danish 
 Faroese 
 Greenlandic 
 Djiboutian 
 Dominican 
 Dominican Republic 
 Dutch 
 East Timorese 
 Ecuadorian 
 Egyptian 
 Emirati 
 Equatorial Guinean 
 Eritrean 
 Estonian 
 Ethiopian 
 Fijian 
 Filipino 
 Finnish 
 French 
 Occitan 
 French Guianan 
 Gabonese 
 Gambian 
 Georgian 
 German 
 Ghanaian 
 Greek 
 Cretan 
 Epirotic 
 Greek Macedonian 
 Heptanesean 
 Guatemalan 
 Guinea-Bissauan 
 Guinean 
 Haitian 
 Honduran 
 Hungarian 
 Icelandic 
 Indian 
 Arunachalese 
 Assamese 
 Bengali 
 Bihari 
 Goan 
 Gujarati 
 Himachal Pradesh 
 Kashmiri 
 Jharkhandi 
 Karnataka 
 Kerala 
 Maharashtrian 
 Manipuri 
 Meghalayan 
 Mizo 
 Naga 
 Odia 
 Punjabi 
 Rajasthani 
 Sikkimese 
 Sindhi 
 Tamil 
 Telangana 
 Telugu 
 Indonesian 
 Acehnese 
 Balinese 
 Banjar 
 Batak 
 Betawi 
 Indo 
 Javanese 
 Madurese 
 Makassar 
 Minahasan 
 Minangkabau 
 Palembangese 
 Sundanese 
 Iranian 
 Iraqi 
 Irish 
 Israeli 
 Italian 
 Abruzzese 
 Ligurian 
 Lombard 
 Lucanian 
 Neapolitan 
 Roman 
 Sardinian 
 Sicilian 
 Venetian 
 Ivorian 
 Jamaican 
 Japanese 
 Okinawan 
 Jordanian 
 Kazakh 
 Kenyan 
 Korean 
 North Korean 
 South Korean 
 Kosovan 
 Kuwaiti 
 Kyrgyz 
 Lao 
 Latvian 
 Lebanese 
 Lesotho 
 Liberian 
 Libyan 
 Liechtensteiner 
 Lithuanian 
 Luxembourg 
 Macedonian 
 Malagasy 
 Malawian 
 Malaysian 
 Sabahan 
 Sarawakian 
 Maldivian 
 Malian 
 Maltese 
 Mauritanian 
 Mauritian 
 Mexican 
 Moldovan 
 Monégasque 
 Mongolian 
 Montenegrin 
 Moroccan 
 Mozambican 
 Namibian 
 Nauruan 
 Nepalese 
 New Zealand 
 Nicaraguan 
 Niger 
 Nigerian 
 Niuean 
 Norwegian 
 Omani 
 Pakistani 
 Palestinian 
 Panamanian 
 Peruvian 
 Polish 
 Portuguese 
 Qatari 
 Romanian  (incl.  Transylvanian Saxon ) 
 Russian 
 Bashkir 
 Chechen 
 Circassian 
 Komi 
 Mordovian 
 Sakha 
 Tatar 
 Udmurt 
 Yamal 
 Rwandan 
 Saint Lucian 
 Salvadoran 
 Sammarinese 
 São Tomé and Príncipe 
 Saudi Arabian 
 Senegalese 
 Serbian 
 Seychellois 
 Sierra Leonean 
 Singaporean 
 Slovak 
 Slovenian 
 Somali 
 South African 
 Spanish 
 Andalusian 
 Asturian 
 Balearic 
 Basque 
 Canarian 
 Cantabrian 
 Catalan 
 Extremaduran 
 Galician 
 Manchegan 
 Valencian 
 Sri Lankan 
 Sudanese 
 Swazi 
 Swedish 
 Swiss 
 Syrian 
 Taiwanese 
 Tajik 
 Tanzanian 
 Zanzibari 
 Thai 
 Togolese 
 Tunisian 
 Turkish 
 Turkmen 
 Trinidadian and Tobagonian 
 Ugandan 
 Ukrainian 
 Uruguayan 
 Uzbek 
 Venezuelan 
 Vietnamese 
 Western Saharan 
 Yemeni 
 Zambian 
 Zimbabwean 
 Ethnic 
 Ainu 
 Arab 
 Indonesian 
 Aromanian 
 Assyrian 
 Balochi 
 Berber 
 Cajun 
 Chinese 
 American 
 Canadian 
 Chifa 
 Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Crimean Tatar 
 Greek American 
 Hazaragi 
 Indian 
 Anglo-Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Indigenous American 
 Inuit 
 Italian American 
 Kurdish 
 Livonian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Malay 
 Ossetian 
 Parsi 
 Pashtun 
 Peranakan 
 Romani 
 Sámi 
 Soul food 
 Sylheti 
 Transylvanian Saxon 
 Yup'ik 
 Religious 
 Buddhist 
 Christian 
 Goan Catholic 
 Mangalorean Catholic 
 Mennonite 
 Hindu 
 Islamic 
 Chinese 
 Ital 
 Jain 
 Jewish 
 American 
 Ashkenazi 
 Bukharan 
 Ethiopian 
 Mizrahi 
 Sephardic 
 Syrian 
 Ritual slaughter 
 Sikh 
 Historical 
 Ancient Egyptian 
 Ancient Greek 
 Ancient Israelite 
 Ancient Roman 
 Antebellum America 
 Aztec 
 Byzantine 
 Early modern European 
 Historical Chinese 
 Historical Indian subcontinent 
 Historical North Indian and Pakistani 
 History of agriculture 
 History of alcoholic drinks 
 History of bread 
 History of seafood 
 History of vegetarianism 
 Historical Argentine 
 Historical Japanese 
 Inca 
 Mayan 
 Muisca 
 Mughal 
 Medieval 
 Ottoman 
 Peasant 
 Soviet 
 Thirteen Colonies 
 Styles 
 Classique 
 Fast food 
 Fusion 
 New American 
 Eurasian 
 Haute 
 Molecular gastronomy 
 Note by Note 
 Nouvelle 
 Lists 
 List of cuisines 
 List of historical cuisines 
 Lists of prepared foods 
 Related 
 Cookbook 
 Cooking 
 Culinary arts 
 Drink 
 Food 
 history 
 Diet 
 Meal preparation 
 
   Food portal 
   Drink portal 
   Category 
   Commons 
   Cookbook 
   WikiProject 
   Outline 
 
 v t e Maya civilization History 
 Preclassic Maya 
 Classic Maya collapse 
 Spanish conquest 
 Chiapas 
 Guatemala 
 Petén 
 Yucatán 
 Topics 
 Architecture 
 E-Group 
 Triadic pyramid 
 Twin-pyramid complex 
 Revival 
 Art 
 Graffiti 
 Ceramics 
 Cities 
 Cuisine 
 Dance 
 Economy 
 Trade 
 Maritime trade 
 Languages 
 Classic 
 Script 
 List 
 Mayanist 
 Medicine 
 Music 
 Mythology 
 Numerals 
 People 
 Sites 
 Stelae 
 Textiles 
 Warfare 
 Society 
 Childhood 
 Women 
 Midwifery 
 Religion 
 Priesthood 
 Sacrifice 
 Human sacrifice 
 Death rituals 
 Social classes 
 Ajaw 
 Rulers 
 Households 
 Calendar 
 Ajaw 
 Baktun 
 Haabʼ 
 Kʼatun 
 Kʼin 
 Tun 
 Tzolkʼin 
 Winal 
 Literature 
 Annals of the Cakchiquels 
 Chilam Balam 
 Codices 
 Dresden 
 Grolier 
 Madrid 
 Paris 
 Popol Vuh 
 Rabinal Achí 
 Ritual of the Bacabs 
 Songs of Dzitbalche 
 Título Cʼoyoi 
 Título de Totonicapán 
 Deities 
 Classic 
 Bacab 
 Chaac 
 Death gods 
 God L 
 Goddess I 
 Hero Twins 
 Howler monkey gods 
 Itzamna 
 Ixchel 
 Jaguar gods 
 Kʼawiil 
 Kinich Ahau 
 Maize god 
 Mam 
 Moon goddess 
 Yopaat 
 Post-Classic 
 Acat 
 Ah-Muzen-Cab 
 Akna 
 Chin 
 Ixtab 
 Kukulkan 
 Yum Kaax 
 Popol Vuh 
 Awilix 
 Camazotz 
 Hun Hunahpu 
 Huracan 
 Jacawitz 
 Qʼuqʼumatz 
 Tohil 
 Vucub Caquix 
 Xmucane and Xpiacoc 
 Xquic 
 Zipacna 
 Kings 
 Bʼalaj Chan Kʼawiil 
 Haʼ Kʼin Xook 
 Itzam Kʼan Ahk II 
 Kʼakʼ Tiliw Chan Yopaat 
 Kʼinich Janaabʼ Pakal 
 Kʼinich Yat Ahk II 
 Kʼinich Yax Kʼukʼ Moʼ 
 Kʼinich Yoʼnal Ahk I 
 Uaxaclajuun Ubʼaah Kʼawiil 
 Yoʼnal Ahk III 
 Yuknoom Chʼeen II 
 Yuknoom Yichʼaak Kʼahkʼ 
 Queens 
 Lady Eveningstar 
 Lady of Itzan 
 Lady of Tikal 
 Lady Xoc 
 Sak Kʼukʼ 
 Wak Chanil Ajaw 
 Yohl Ikʼnal 
 
  
NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw2361
Cached time: 20230311125021
Cache expiry: 1814400
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc, no‐toc‐conversion]
CPU time usage: 0.549 seconds
Real time usage: 0.688 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2227/1000000
Post‐expand include size: 130692/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 969/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 4/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 103789/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.288/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 7767451/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/400
 
 
Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  474.987      1 -total
 46.37%  220.232      1 Template:Reflist
 16.54%   78.572      1 Template:Maya_civilization
 16.17%   76.795      1 Template:Sidebar
 15.35%   72.896      4 Template:Cite_web
 13.65%   64.831      2 Template:Navbox
 12.61%   59.888      1 Template:Cuisines
 10.86%   51.591     11 Template:Cite_journal
  9.47%   44.973      1 Template:Short_description
  9.09%   43.186     10 Template:Cite_book
 
  Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:idhash:7083974-0!canonical and timestamp 20230311125021 and revision id 1139607363. Rendering was triggered because: page-view
  
 esi <esi:include src="/esitest-fa8a495983347898/content" />  
 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ancient_Maya_cuisine&oldid=1139607363 " 
 Categories :  Maya society Mesoamerican cuisine Mexican cuisine Central American cuisine Native American cuisine Indigenous cuisine of the Americas Mesoamerican diet and subsistence Ancient dishes Cuisine by culture Hidden categories:  CS1 maint: uses authors parameter Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  This page was last edited on 16 February 2023, at 00:10  (UTC) . 
 Text is available under the  Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0 ;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the  Terms of Use  and  Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the  Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. 
 
 
 Privacy policy 
 About Wikipedia 
 Disclaimers 
 Contact Wikipedia 
 Mobile view 
 Developers 
 Statistics 
 Cookie statement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
