
 
 
 Jump to content 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle sidebar 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Create account Log in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Personal tools 
 
 
 
 
   Create account   Log in 
 
 
 
 
		Pages for logged out editors  learn more 
 
 
 Contributions Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Navigation 
 
 
 Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate 
 
 
 
 
 Contribute 
 
 
 Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file 
 
 
 
 
 Tools 
 
 
 What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item 
 
 
 
 
 Print/export 
 
 
 Download as PDF Printable version 
 
 
 
 
 Languages 
 
 On this Wikipedia the language links are at the top of the page across from the article title.  Go to top . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CentralNotice  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Contents 
 move to sidebar 
 hide 
 
 
 
 
 (Top) 
 
 
 
 
 
 1 Sources 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 History 
 
 
				Toggle History subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 2.1 Pre-Israelite 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.2 Israelite period 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.3 Post-Second Temple era 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 Characteristics 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4 Foods 
 
 
				Toggle Foods subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 4.1 Grains and bread 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.1.1 Barley 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.1.2 Wheat 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.1.3 Preparation of grains 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.1.4 Bread making 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.2 Legumes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.3 Vegetables 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.4 Fruit 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.4.1 Olives and olive oil 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.4.2 Grapes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.4.3 Figs 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.4.4 Dates 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.4.5 Pomegranates 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.4.6 Other fruits and nuts 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.5 Wine and other drinks 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.5.1 Wine 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.5.2 Beer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.6 Meat 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.7 Poultry and eggs 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.8 Fish 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.9 Dairy foods 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.10 Honey 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.11 Seasonings 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5 Storage and preparation of food 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6 Meals 
 
 
				Toggle Meals subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 6.1 Daily meals 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6.2 Festive meals and feasts 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6.3 Hospitality 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6.4 Sacrificial meals 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 7 Forbidden foods 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8 See also 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 9 References 
 
 
				Toggle References subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 9.1 References cited 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 10 Further reading 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 11 External links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
						Toggle the table of contents
					 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle the table of contents 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ancient Israelite cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 1 language 
 
 
 
 Bahasa Indonesia 
 Edit links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Article Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 English 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 More 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
 
 
 Cuisine of the ancient Israelites from the Iron Age to the Roman period 
 Part of  a series  on Jews  and  Judaism 
 Etymology 
 Who is a Jew? 
 Religion 
 God in Judaism  ( names ) 
 Principles of faith 
 Mitzvot  ( 613 ) 
 Halakha 
 Shabbat 
 Holidays 
 Prayer 
 Tzedakah 
 Land of Israel 
 Brit 
 Bar and bat mitzvah 
 Marriage 
 Bereavement 
 Philosophy 
 Ethics 
 Kabbalah 
 Customs 
 Rites 
 Synagogue 
 Rabbi 
 
 Texts 
 Tanakh 
 Torah 
 Nevi'im 
 Ketuvim 
 
 Talmud 
 Mishnah 
 Gemara 
 
 Rabbinic 
 Midrash 
 Tosefta 
 
 Targum 
 Beit Yosef 
 Mishneh Torah 
 Tur 
 Shulchan Aruch 
 Zohar 
 
 
 Communities 
 Ashkenazim  ( Galician ) 
 Mizrahim 
 Sephardim 
 Teimanim 
 Beta Israel 
 Gruzinim 
 Juhurim 
 Bukharim 
 Italkim 
 Romanyotim 
 Cochinim 
 Bene Israel 
 Berber 
 
Related groups 
 Bnei Anusim 
 Lemba 
 Crimean Karaites 
 Krymchaks 
 Kaifeng Jews 
 Igbo Jews 
 Samaritans 
 Crypto-Jews 
 Mosaic Arabs 
 Subbotniks 
 Noahides 
 
 
 Population 
 
 Judaism by country 
 Lists of Jews 
 Diaspora 
 Historical population by country 
 Genetic studies 
 
 Land of Israel 
 Old Yishuv 
 New Yishuv 
 Israeli Jews 
 
 Europe 
 Armenia 
 Austria 
 Azerbaijan 
 Belarus 
 Bulgaria 
 Cyprus 
 Czech lands 
 Estonia 
 Finland 
 France 
 Georgia 
 Germany 
 Greece 
 Hungary 
 Italy 
 Latvia 
 Lithuania 
 Moldova 
 Netherlands 
 Poland 
 Portugal 
 Romania 
 Russia 
 Serbia 
 Spain 
 Sweden 
 Ukraine 
 United Kingdom 
 
Asia 
 Afghanistan 
 China 
 India 
 Indonesia 
 Iran 
 Iraq 
 Japan 
 Lebanon 
 Malaysia 
 Pakistan 
 Philippines 
 Singapore 
 Syria 
 Turkey 
 Uzbekistan 
 Vietnam 
 Yemen 
 
 Africa 
 Algeria 
 Angola 
 Egypt 
 Ethiopia 
 Somalia 
 Djibouti 
 Libya 
 Morocco 
 South Africa 
 Tunisia 
 Zimbabwe 
 
Northern America 
 Canada 
 United States 
 
 Latin America and Caribbean 
 Argentina 
 Bolivia 
 Brazil 
 Chile 
 Colombia 
 Cuba 
 Dominican Republic 
 Ecuador 
 El Salvador 
 Guyana 
 Haiti 
 Jamaica 
 Mexico 
 Paraguay 
 Peru 
 Puerto Rico 
 Suriname 
 Uruguay 
 Venezuela 
 
 Oceania 
 Australia 
 Fiji 
 Guam 
 New Zealand 
 Palau 
 
 
 Denominations 
 Orthodox 
 Modern 
 Haredi 
 Hasidic 
 Reform 
 Conservative 
 Karaite 
 Reconstructionist 
 Renewal 
 Science 
 Haymanot 
 Humanistic 
 
 Culture 
 Yiddish theatre 
 Dance 
 Humour 
 Minyan 
 Wedding 
 Clothing 
 Niddah 
 Pidyon haben 
 Kashrut 
 Shidduch 
 Zeved habat 
 Conversion to Judaism 
 Hiloni 
 
 Music 
 Religious 
 Secular 
 
 Cuisine 
 American 
 Ashkenazi 
 Bukharan 
 Ethiopian 
 Israeli 
 Israelite 
 Mizrahi 
 Sephardic 
 Yemenite 
 
 Literature 
 Israeli 
 Yiddish 
 American 
 
 
 Languages 
 Hebrew 
 Biblical 
 Yiddish 
 Yeshivish 
 Jewish Koine Greek 
 Yevanic 
 Juhuri 
 Shassi 
 Judaeo-Iranian 
 Ladino 
 Judeo-Gascon 
 Ghardaïa Sign 
 Bukharian 
 Knaanic 
 Zarphatic 
 Italkian 
 Gruzinic 
 Judeo-Aramaic 
 Judeo-Arabic 
 Judeo-Berber 
 Judeo-Malayalam 
 
 History 
 Timeline 
 Name "Judea" 
 
 Leaders 
 Twelve Tribes of Israel 
 Ancient history 
 Kingdom of Judah 
 Temple in Jerusalem 
 Babylonian captivity 
 Assyrian captivity 
 Yehud Medinata 
 Second Temple 
 Jerusalem   ( in Judaism 
 timeline ) 
 Hasmonean dynasty 
 Sanhedrin 
 Schisms 
 Pharisees 
 Sadducees 
 Essenes 
 Bana'im 
 Hemerobaptists 
 Maghāriya 
 Hellenistic Judaism 
 Jewish–Roman wars 
 History of the Jews in the Byzantine Empire 
 Christianity and Judaism   ( Jews and Christmas ) 
 Hinduism and Judaism 
 Islamic–Jewish  relations 
 Middle Ages 
 Golden Age 
 Sabbateans 
 Hasidism 
 Haskalah 
 Emancipation 
 Antisemitism 
 Anti-Judaism 
 Persecution 
 The Holocaust 
 Israel 
 Land of Israel 
 Aliyah 
 Jewish atheism 
 Baal teshuva 
 Arab–Israeli  conflict 
 Historical population comparisons 
 
 
 Politics 
 Jewish political movements 
 Anarchism 
 Autonomism 
 Bundism 
 Feminism 
 Leftism 
 Secularism 
 Territorialism 
 World Agudath Israel 
 
 Politics of Israel 
 Anarchism 
 Liberalism 
 Secularism 
 
 Zionism 
 General 
 Green 
 Labor 
 Kahanism 
 Maximalism 
 Neo-Zionism 
 Religious 
 Revisionist 
 Post-Zionism 
 
 
 Category 
 Portal v t e 
 
 Ancient Israelite cuisine  refers to the culinary practices of the  Israelites  from the  Late Bronze Age  arrival of Israelites in the  Land of Israel  through to the  mass expulsion of Jews  from  Roman Judea  in the 2nd century CE. Dietary staples among the Israelites were  bread ,  wine , and  olive oil ; also included were  legumes ,  fruits  and  vegetables ,  dairy products ,  fish , and  meat .
 Israelite cuisine was adherent to the dietary restrictions and guidelines of  Yahwism  and its later-developed forms:  Judaism  and  Samaritanism . There was a considerable continuity in the main components of the diet over time, despite the introduction of new foodstuffs at various stages. The food of  ancient Israel  was similar to that of other  Mediterranean cuisines  of the time.
 
 
 Sources [ edit ] 
 Information about the food of the ancient Israelites is based on written sources,  archaeological records  and comparative evidence from the wider region of the  ancient Levant . The primary written source for the period is the  Hebrew Bible , the largest collection of written documents surviving from ancient Israel. Other texts, such as the  Dead Sea Scrolls ,  apocryphal works , the  New Testament , the  Mishnah  and the  Talmud  also provide information.  Epigraphic  sources include  ostraca  from  Samaria  and  Arad . [1] 
 The Bible provides names of plants and animals that were used for food, such as the lists of  permitted and forbidden animals  (for example,  Leviticus 11  and  Deuteronomy 14 ), and the lists of foods brought to the  king ’s table (for example,  1 Kings 5:2–3 ) or the foods that the Israelites are said to have longed for after  leaving Egypt  ( Numbers 11:5 ). These lists indicate the potential foods that were available, but not necessarily how regularly the food was eaten or how significant it was in the cuisine, which needs to be derived from other sources. [1] [2] 
 Archaeological remains include the items used for the production of food, such as  wine  or  olive presses , stone and metal implements used in the preparation of food, and  amphorae , jars, storerooms and grain pits used for storage. Animal bones provide evidence of meat consumption, the types of animals eaten, and whether they were kept for milk production or other uses, while  paleobotanical  remains, such as seeds or other  carbonized  or  desiccated  plant remains provide information about plant foods. [1] 
 Using both written and archaeological data, some comparisons can be drawn between the food of ancient Israel and its neighbors. Although there is much information about the foods of  ancient Egypt  and  Mesopotamia , the inferences that can be made are limited due to differences in  topography  and  climate ; Israelite agriculture also depended on rainfall rather than the river-based irrigation of these two civilizations, resulting in the preference for different crops.  Ugarit  and  Phoenicia  were closer neighbors of ancient Israel, and shared a topography and climate similar to that of ancient Israel. Thus, conclusions about the food and drink in ancient Israel have been made with some confidence from this evidence. [1] [3] 
 
 History [ edit ] 
 Significant milestones in the availability and development food production characteristic of Israelite cuisine occurred well before the Israelite period. On the other hand, vestiges of the cuisine and the practices associated with it continue to resonate in later  Jewish cuisine  and traditions that developed in Israel and  Babylonia  during the  Talmudic period  (200 CE-500 CE), and may still be discerned in the various culinary styles that have developed among  Jewish communities  since then. [4] 
 
 Pre-Israelite [ edit ] 
 Wild species of  barley  and  emmer wheat  were  domesticated  and  cultivated  in the  Jordan River Valley  as early as the 9th millennium BCE. [5]  Archaeologists have found the carbonized seeds of two kinds of primitive wheat,  einkorn  and emmer, and  two-row barley , in the earliest levels of digs at  Jericho , one of the first cities in the world. [6] 
 During the  Pottery Neolithic period  (6000-4300 BCE), the development of  pottery  enabled people to produce portable containers for the transportation and storage of food, and an economy based on  agriculture  and  herding  developed. [7]  Archaeological evidence indicates that  figs ,  lentils  and  broad beans  were being cultivated from Neolithic times. [8]  During the  Chalcolithic period  (4300-3300 BCE),  large pottery containers , indicative of settled peoples, appear in the archaeological record.  Date palm  cultivation began in the Jordan River Valley, and the earliest date pits have been discovered at  Ein Gedi  by the  Dead Sea . In the  Golan , olives trees were grown and  olive oil  was produced there. [7] 
 Chickpea  cultivation dates back to the  Bronze Age  (3300 – 1200 BCE) [8]  and grapes and olives became important crops in the hill country. Wine and oil were traded for wheat with the cities on the coastal plain, and for meat and skins with semi-nomadic herders. Wine and  carobs  were also exported to Egypt during this period. At  Arad  in the northern  Negev , the remains of wheat, barley and legumes have been found, along with stone-lined  storage pits  for grain from this period. Pottery was imported from  Cyprus  and  Mycenae  in  Greece  for the first time, probably for use as good-quality tableware. After the  Bronze Age collapse  of urban culture, there was an increase in herding and the disappearance of smaller agricultural communities. [7] 
 
 Israelite period [ edit ] 
   Granaries from an Iron Age Israelite fortress in the Negev, reconstructed at Derech Hadorot,  Hecht Museum ,  Haifa . 
 The Israelite presence emerged during the  Early Iron Age   (1200-1000 BCE), at first in the  central hill country ,  Transjordan  and the northern  Negev , and later in the  Galilee , while the  Philistines  and other  Sea Peoples  arrived at roughly the same time and settled in the  coastal regions .  Pastoralism  and  animal husbandry  remained important, and walled open spaces in villages that probably served as paddocks have been discovered. The construction of terraces in the hills, and of additional plastered cisterns for water storage, enabled more cultivation than before. Storage pits and silos were dug into the ground to hold grain. Under the  united Israelite monarchy , central store cities were built, and greater areas of the northern Negev came under cultivation. The  Gezer agricultural calendar , detailing the crops that were raised, dates from this period. [7] 
 After the  division of the Israelite kingdom ,  Jerusalem  and a number of other cities expanded, supported by the surrounding villages and farms. These were called “daughters of” the major towns in the Hebrew Bible (for example,  Josh 17:11  and  Josh 15:47 ). Large food storage facilities and granaries were built, such as the city of  Hazor . During the later Iron Age (Iron Age II) period, roughly the same period as the  Israelite  and  Judean  monarchies, olive oil and wine were produced on a large scale for commerce and export, as well as for local consumption. [7] 
 The ancient Israelites depended on bread, wine and oil as the basic dietary staples [9]  and this trio is often mentioned in the Bible (for example,  Deut 7:13  and  2 Kings 18:32 ) and in other texts, such as the  Samaria  and  Arad  ostraca. [10]  Written and archaeological evidence indicate that the diet also included other products from plants, trees and animals. Seven basic agricultural products, called the  Seven Species , are listed in the Bible: wheat, barley, figs, grapes, olives, pomegranates, and dates ( Deut 8:8 ). [4]  The Bible also often describes the land of Israel as a land "flowing with milk and honey" (for example,  Exod 3:8 ). [11] 
 The cuisine maintained many consistent traits based on the main products available from the early Israelite period until the  Roman period , even though new foods became available during this extended time. For example,  rice  was introduced during the  Persian era ; during the  Hellenistic period , as trade with the  Nabateans  increased, more spices became available, at least for those who could afford them, and more Mediterranean fish were imported into the cities; and during the Roman period,  sugar cane  was introduced. [7] 
 
 Post-Second Temple era [ edit ] 
 The symbolic food of the ancient Israelites continued to be important among  Jews  after the destruction of the  Second Temple  in 70 CE (AD) and the beginning of the  Jewish Diaspora . Bread, wine, and olive oil were seen as direct links to the three main crops of ancient Israel—wheat, grapes, and olives. In the Bible, this trio is described as representing the  divine  response to human needs ( Hosea 2:23–24 ) and particularly the need for the seasonal rains vital for the successful cultivation of these three crops. ( Deuteronomy 11:13–14 ). [12]  The significance of wine, bread and oil is indicated by their incorporation into  Jewish religious   ritual , with the  blessings  over wine and bread for  Shabbat  and  holiday  meals and at religious ceremonies such as  weddings , and the lighting of Shabbat and festival lights with olive oil. [4] [13] : 22–23  [14] 
 
 Characteristics [ edit ] 
 The daily diet of the ordinary ancient Israelite was mainly one of bread, cooked grains, and legumes. Bread was eaten with every meal. Vegetables played a smaller, but significant role in the diet. Legumes and vegetables were typically eaten in  stews . The Israelites drank  goat  and  sheep’s milk  when it was available in the spring and summer, and ate butter and cheese. Honey, both from bees and  date honey , was also eaten. 
Figs and grapes were the fruits most commonly eaten, while dates, pomegranates, and other fruits and nuts were eaten more occasionally. Wine was the most popular beverage and sometimes other  fermented beverages  were produced. Meat, usually  goat  and  mutton , was eaten rarely by most Israelites and was reserved for special occasions such as celebrations, festival meals, or sacrificial feasts. The wealthy ate meat more frequently. Olives were used primarily for their oil, which was used raw and to cook meat and stews.  Game , birds, eggs, and fish were also eaten, depending on availability. [13] : 22–24  [15] [16] [17] [18] 
 Most food was eaten fresh and in season. Fruits and vegetables had to be eaten as they ripened and before they spoiled. People had to contend with periodic episodes of hunger and famine; producing enough food required hard and well-timed labor, and the  climatic conditions  resulted in unpredictable harvests and the need to store as much food as possible. Thus, grapes were made into raisins and wine; olives were made into oil; figs, beans, and lentils were dried; and grains were stored for use throughout the year. [9] 
 An Israelite meal is illustrated by the biblical description of the rations that  Abigail  brought to  David’s  group: bread loaves, wine, butchered sheep, parched grain, raisins, and fig cakes ( 1 Samuel 25:18 ). [3] [19] 
 
 Foods [ edit ] 
 Grains and bread [ edit ] 
   Durum wheat  was the wheat most commonly grown in ancient Israel 
 Grain  products constituted the majority of the food consumed by the ancient Israelites. The staple food was bread, and it was such a vital part of each meal that the  Hebrew  word for bread,  lehem , also referred to food in general. The supreme importance of bread to the ancient Israelites is also demonstrated by how  Biblical Hebrew  has at least a dozen words for bread, and bread features in numerous Hebrew  proverbs  (for example,  Proverbs 20:17 ,  Proverbs 28:19 ). [14] [20]  Bread was eaten at just about every meal and is estimated to have provided from 50 to 70 percent of an ordinary person’s daily  calories . The bread eaten until the end of the Israelite monarchy was mainly made from barley flour; during the Second Temple period, bread from wheat flour become predominant. [12] [14] 
 Porridge  and  gruel  were made from ground grain, water, salt, and butter. This mixture also formed the basis for cakes, to which oil, called  shemen , and fruits were sometimes added before baking. [21] 
 The Israelites cultivated both  wheat  and  barley ; these two grains are mentioned first in the biblical list of the Seven Species of the land of Israel and their importance as food is also seen in the celebration of the barley harvest at the festival of  Shavuot  and of the wheat harvest at the festival of  Sukkot . [10] 
 Rice  was introduced during the early Second Temple period through contact with the Persians. By the Roman period, rice had become an important export, and the  Jerusalem Talmud  states about rice that “there is none like it outside Israel,” and that notable rabbis served rice at the  Passover seder . [7] [22] 
 
 Barley [ edit ] 
   Barley  was the grain most commonly used to make into flour for bread in Iron Age Israel. 
 Barley  ( hordeum vulgare ) was the most important grain during the biblical period, and this was recognized ritually on the second day of  Passover  in the Omer offering, consisting of barley flour from the newly ripened crop. Furthermore, its significance to Israelite society, not only as a source of food, is illustrated by the biblical method for  measuring a field  by the amount of barley (rather than of wheat) with which it could be sown. [23] 
 Barley was initially predominant because it matured earlier and tolerated harsher conditions than wheat, growing in areas with less rainfall and poorer soils, such as northern Negev and the hill country. [10]  It had high yield potential and was resistant to insect infestation. It could be sown without plowing and could therefore be grown on small plots of land that oxen or even donkeys could not reach, and it did not need artificial irrigation. It ripened a month earlier than wheat and was thus available to replenish supplies used up during the winter sooner than wheat, and also provide some  food security  if the more vulnerable wheat crop was poor or failed. [23]  Two varieties of barley were cultivated:  two-rowed, and six-rowed .  Two-rowed barley  was the older, hulled form; six-rowed barley was unhulled and easier to thresh, and, since the kernels remained intact, store for longer periods. Hulled barley was thus the prevalent type during the Iron Age, but gruels made from it must have had a gritty taste due to the barley’s tough outer layers. [23] 
 Bread was primarily made from barley flour during the Iron Age ( Judges 7:13 ,  2 Kings 4:42 ), as barley was more widely and easily grown, and was thus more available, cheaper, and could be made into bread without a  leavening agent [4]  even though wheat flour was regarded as superior. [10]  It was presumably made from dough that was a simple mixture of barley flour and water, divided into small pieces, formed by hand into round shapes, then baked. [23]  However, barley declined as the staple from the biblical period to a poverty food by the end of the Second Temple period, and by the  Talmudic era , it was regarded mostly as animal  fodder . [23] 
 
 Wheat [ edit ] 
 Emmer  wheat ( Triticum dicoccum ) was initially the most widespread variety of wheat, as it grew well in the warm climate and was resistant to  fungal rot . It was high yielding, with large grains and relatively high amounts of  gluten , and bread made from emmer wheat flour was thus fairly light in texture. However, emmer required time-consuming pounding or roasting to remove its  husk , and during the Iron Age,  durum  wheat ( Triticum durum ), a descendant of emmer, gradually replaced emmer and became the favored grain for making fine flour. Durum grew well in the rich soil of the larger valleys of the central and northern areas of the country, where rainfall exceeded 225 millimeters per year, was higher yielding than emmer, and its grains released more easily from the  chaff . It could therefore be separated from the husk without roasting or pounding first, thus reducing the work required for threshing, and also leaving most of the grains whole, which was better for longer storage. [10] [24] 
 However, durum is a hard grain and was difficult to grind with the early hand-held  grindstones . The flour also had to be sifted repeatedly to obtain fine flour (such as the  solet  required in the Temple offerings). Thus, durum was primarily used for porridges, or parboiled and dried, or roasted and boiled, and barley flour continued to be used for making bread until another hybrid of emmer,  common or "bread" wheat  ( Triticum aestivum ) replaced barley as the primary grain after the  Greek conquest  of the land of Israel; this together with durum wheat, became widespread during the Greco-Roman period, constituting the bulk of the grain crop by the end of the Second Temple period. The introduction of common wheat, which contained more  starch  and had a higher level of gluten, spread the use of wheat for bread-making and led to the production of loaves that were more lightly textured than barley and durum wheat breads. [25] 
 
 Preparation of grains [ edit ] 
 A series of developments in technology for  threshing ,  milling , and  baking  improved both the quantity and the quality of the grain and the means for preparation that were available from the beginning of the Iron Age until the end of the Second Temple period. In the early Iron Age, grain was threshed to remove it from the stalks by beating it with sticks or by oxen treading on it. This usually broke most of the grain  kernels , which limited their storage time because broken kernels spoil more quickly than unbroken ones. The development of the  threshing-board , which was pulled over the stalks by oxen, left most of the grain kernels intact and enhanced their storage time. Numerous  threshing floors  and threshing boards have been discovered at  archaeological sites of ancient Israel . [6] 
 Once separated from the stalks, the grain was used in a number of ways: Most simply, unripe kernels of grain were eaten fresh, particularly in the spring, before ripe grain was available, and both unripe and ripe grain was roasted over fire for immediate use. Ripe grains of wheat were also  parboiled  and dried, like modern  bulgur , and then prepared as porridge. Whole or cracked grain was also used in stews and to make gruel. Most frequently, grains were ground into flour to prepare bread. [4] [20] 
 
 Bread making [ edit ] 
 Bread  was the main source of nourishment in biblical times, and making bread was a daily activity: [14] 
 
   An upper hand stone was used to grind grain on the lower  quern stone . 
 Bread-making began with the  milling  of the grain. It was a difficult and time-consuming task performed by women. Each household stored its own grain, and it is estimated that it required at least three hours of daily effort to produce enough flour to make sufficient bread for a family of five. The earliest milling was performed with a  pestle and mortar , or a  stone quern  consisting of a large lower stone that held the grain and a smooth upper stone that was moved back and forth over the grains ( Numbers 11:8 ). This often left small pieces of grit in the flour. The use of the  millstone  became more widespread during the Iron Age, resulting in greater speed and increased production of flour. Smaller versions for household use, the  rotary or beehive quern , appeared during the early Persian period. [10] [14]  After the grain was milled into flour, it was mixed with water and kneaded in a large trough. For dough made with wheat flour,  starter , called  seor , was added. The starter was prepared by reserving a small portion of dough from a previous batch to absorb the yeasts in the air and thus help leaven the new dough.  Seor  thus gave the bread a  sourdough  flavor. [14] 
 Once prepared, the dough could be baked in various ways: Originally, the dough was placed directly on the heated stones of a cooking fire or in a  griddle  or pan made of clay or iron ( Leviticus 7:9 ). In the time of the  First Temple , two types of oven were used for baking bread: the  jar-oven , and the  pit-oven . The jar-oven was a large pottery container, narrowing into an opening toward the top; fuel was burned on the inside to heat it and the dough was pressed against the outside to bake. The pit-oven was a clay-lined excavation in the ground in which the fuel was burned and then pushed aside before the loaves were baked on the heated surface. People also began placing a convex dome, initially earthenware and later metal, over the pit-oven and cooking the flatbreads on the dome instead of on the ash-covered surface; this type of oven is probably what was meant by the biblical  machabat , often translated as "griddle". [14] 
 The Persians introduced a clay oven called a  tanur  (similar to the Indian  tandoor ), which had an opening at the bottom for the fire, and through which the bread was placed to be baked on the inner wall of the upper chamber from the heat of the oven and ashes after the flames had died down. This continued to be the way in which  Yemenite Jews  baked bread until modern times. The remains of clay ovens and fragments of bread trays have been found in several archaeological excavations. [4] [20]  All these methods produced only thin loaves, and the custom was thus to  break   bread  rather than cut it. The bread was soft and pliable and used for dipping and sopping up gravies and juices. [4] [20] 
 The Romans introduced an oven called a  furn  ( purni  in  Talmudic Aramaic ), a large, wood-burning,  stone-lined oven  with a bottom on which the dough or baking sheet was placed. This provided a major advance in bread and  pastry  baking, and made the baking of much thicker loaves possible. [14] 
 A variety of breads were produced. Probably most common were  unleavened flat loaves  called  ugah  or  kikkar . [10]  Another type was a thin wafer, known as a  rakik . A thicker loaf, known as  hallah , was made with the best-quality flour, usually for ritual purposes. [4] [14] 
 Bread was sometimes enriched by the addition of flour from legumes ( Ezekiel 4:9 ). The  Mishna  ( Hallah  2:2) mentions bread dough made with fruit juice instead of water. The  sugar in the juice , interacting with the flour and water, provided some leavening and sweetened the bread. [2]  The Israelites also sometimes added  fennel  and  cumin  to bread dough for flavor and dipped their bread in vinegar ( Ruth 2:14 ), olive oil, or sesame oil for extra flavor. [4] 
 
 Legumes [ edit ] 
 After grain,  legumes  such as  lentils ,  broad or fava beans ,  chickpeas , and  peas  were the main element in the diet and were the main source of  protein , since meat was rarely eaten. [26] 
 Broad beans, chickpeas, and lentils are the only legumes mentioned in the Bible but lentils, broad beans, chickpeas,  fenugreek ,  field peas  and  bitter vetch  have been found at Iron Age Israelite sites. By the Roman period, legumes are mentioned frequently in other texts. They are cited as one of the elements of the “wife’s food basket” in the  Mishna  ( Ketubot  5:8), by which it is estimated that legumes supplied 17% of daily calories at that time. [26] 
 Lentils were the most important of the legumes and were used to make  pottages  and soups, as well as fried lentil cakes called  ashishim , such as those that King David is described as distributing to the people when the  Ark of the Covenant  was brought to  Jerusalem . [27]  According to Tova Dickstein, a researcher at  Neot Kedumim  in Israel,  ashishim  were honey-dipped pancakes made from crushed red lentils and sesame seeds. [28] 
 Stews made of lentils or beans were common and they were cooked with onion, garlic, and leeks for flavor. Fresh legumes were also roasted, or dried and stored for extended periods. They were then cooked in a soup or a stew. The Bible mentions roasted legumes ( 2 Samuel 17:28 ), and relates how  Jacob  prepared bread and a pottage of lentils for  Esau  ( Genesis 25:29–34 ). [15] [26] 
 
 Vegetables [ edit ] 
 Vegetables are not found often in the archaeological record, and it is difficult to determine the role that they played, because plant foods were often eaten raw or were simply boiled, without requiring special equipment for preparation, and thus barely leaving any trace other than the type of food itself. [29] 
 Vegetables also are not mentioned often in the written record, and when the Bible does mention them, the attitude is mixed: sometimes they are regarded as a delicacy, but more often, they were held in low esteem (for example, ( Proverbs 15:17 ,  Daniel 1:11–15 ). [26] [30] 
 Vegetables were perhaps a more important food at the extremes in society: the wealthy who could afford to dedicate land and resources to grow them, and the poor who depended on gathering them in the wild to supplement their meager supplies. More people may have gathered wild plants during famine conditions. [26] 
 Vegetables that were commonly eaten included  leeks ,  garlic ,  onions , black  radishes , net or  muskmelons  (sometimes misidentified as the  cucumber ) and  watermelons . [31]  Other vegetables played a minor role in the diet of the ancient Israelites. Field greens and root plants were generally not cultivated and were gathered seasonally when they grew in the wild. [30]  Leafy plants included  dandelion greens  and the young leaves of the  orach  plant. [21] [30] 
 Leeks, onions, and garlic were eaten cooked in stews, and uncooked with bread, and their popularity may be indicated by the observation in the Bible that they are among the foods that the Israelites yearned for after leaving Egypt. [21] [32] 
 Gourds and melons were eaten raw or flavored with  vinegar . Black radishes were also eaten raw when in season during the autumn and winter. The Talmud mentions the use of radish seeds to produce oil and considered eating radishes to have health benefits. [32] 
 
   Wild lettuce , or  chazeret , was eaten as a bitter herb at the Passover meal   Wild herbs  were collected and eaten uncooked or cooked. These are known to have included  garden rocket  and  mallow , [31]  and both  leaf chicory  and  endive . [33] 
 Wild lettuce , known as  chazeret , was a leafy herb with prickly, red tinged leaves that became bitter as they matured. It was cultivated from around 800 BC. Sweeter  head-lettuce  was only developed and introduced by the Romans.
 Bitter herbs  eaten at the  Passover sacrifice  with the unleavened bread,  matza , were known as  merorim .  Chazeret  is listed in the  Mishna  ( Pesahim  2:6) as the preferred bitter herb for this Passover ritual, along with other bitter herbs, including chicory or endive ( ulshin ),  horehound  ( tamcha ),  reichardia  or  eryngo  ( charchavina ), and  wormwood  ( maror ). [31] [34] 
 Mushrooms , especially of the  Boletus  type, were gathered in many areas, particularly when plentiful after a major rainfall. The Talmud mentions mushrooms in connection with their exemption from  tithes  and as a dessert at the Passover seder. [35] 
 Sesame  seeds were used in the preparation of  oil , were eaten dry, or were added to dishes such as stews as a flavoring; the leftovers after pressing out the oil were eaten in a cake form. [36]  The Hebrew for sesame,  shumshum , is related to the  Akkadian   samassammu , meaning "oil plant", as the seeds contain about 50% oil, which was pressed from the seeds. Sesame is not mentioned in the Bible, but the  Mishna  lists sesame oil as suitable for lighting the Sabbath lights, and the oil was also used for frying. [37] 
 
 Fruit [ edit ] 
 Fruit  was an important source of food for the Israelites, particularly grapes, olives, and figs. Grapes were grown mostly for wine, although some were eaten fresh at harvest time, or dried as raisins for storage, while olives were grown exclusively for their oil, until the Roman period. Other fruits that were eaten were the date, pomegranate, and sycamore fig. [38] [39] 
 The ancient Israelites built terraces of leveled areas in the hill country for planting a variety of crops, including grains, vegetables, and  fruit trees . [40]  All the trees, with the exception of the olive, produced fruit that could be eaten fresh or juiced while in season. Fruit was also processed for later use in a variety of ways: fruit with high sugar content was fermented to make alcoholic beverages; grapes were most commonly used for this. Fruit was also boiled down into thick, sweet syrup, referred to in the Bible as  dvash  (honey). Grapes, figs, dates, and apricots were also dried and preserved individually, put on a string, or pressed into cakes. Since dried fruit is an efficient source of energy, such were prepared as provisions for journeys and long marches. [38] [41] 
 
 Olives and olive oil [ edit ] 
 The  olive  is one of the biblical  Seven Species  and one of the three elements of the " Mediterranean triad " in Israelite cuisine.  Olive oil  was used not only as food and for cooking, but also for lighting, sacrificial offerings, ointment, and  anointment  for priestly or royal office. [42] 
 
   Olives were one of ancient Israel’s most important natural resources 
 The olive tree was well suited to the climate and soil of the  Israelite highlands , and a significant part of the hill country was allocated to the cultivation of olive trees, which were one of ancient Israel’s most important natural resources. [38]  Olive oil was more versatile and longer-lasting than the oil from other plants, such as sesame, and was also considered to be the best-tasting. [30] 
 Although olives were used to produce oil from the Bronze Age, it was only by the Roman period that the techniques were introduced to  cure olives  in  lye  and then  brine  to remove their natural bitterness and make them edible. [43] [44] 
 Olives were harvested in the late summer and were processed for oil by crushing them, pressing the mash, and separating the oil from the flesh. In the early Iron Age period, this was done by treading the olives in basins cut into rock, or with a mortar or stone on a flat slab. In the later Iron Age period, the introduction of the beam press made large scale processing possible. [42] 
 The discovery of many ancient olive presses in various locations indicates that olive-oil production was highly developed in ancient Israel. The oil production center dating from the 7th century BC discovered at  Ekron , a Philistine city, has over one hundred large olive presses and is the most complete olive oil production center from ancient times yet discovered. It indicates that ancient Israel was a major producer of olive oil for its residents and other parts of the  ancient Near East , such as Egypt, and especially Mesopotamia. [30] [42]  In addition to the large-scale olive oil production for commerce and export, presses have been found in ordinary houses, indicating that this was also a cottage industry. [7] 
 Archaeological remains at  Masada  and other sites indicate that the most common  olive cultivar  was the indigenous  Nabali , followed by the  Souri . In Roman times, other olive cultivars were imported from  Syria  and Egypt. [44] 
 There is also some written information about olive oil. The Bible describes its use in relation to certain sacrifices in which olive oil is used (for example, ( Leviticus 6:13–14 ,  Leviticus 7:9–12 ). However, these sacrificial "recipes" can be assumed to represent some of the everyday uses of oil and methods for cooking and frying. [30]  Olive oil was mixed with flour to make bread in the story of  Elijah  and the  widow of Zarephath  ( 1 Kings 17:12–13 ) and is also noted as a valuable product for eating ( Ezekiel 16:13,19 ). Olive oil is also mentioned on the  Samaria  and  Arad   ostraca . [42] 
 The consumption of olive oil varied with social class: it was less available to the poor, but it may have become more available later in the Israelite period as the means of production improved and became more widespread. By early Roman times, the  Mishna  indicates that it was one of the four essential foods that a husband had to provide his wife, and it has been calculated that at a minimum, this represented about 11 percent of the overall calories supplied by the "food basket" described at that time. [42] 
 
 Grapes [ edit ] 
 Grapes  are another of the biblical  Seven Species  and were used mainly for the production of  wine , although they were also eaten fresh and dried. Grapes were dried in the sun to produce  raisins , which could then be stored for a long time. Raisins were also pressed into clusters and dried as cakes, which kept the interior raisins softer. [38] [45] 
 Grapes were also used to produce a thick, honey-like liquid, called grape honey ( dvash anavim ), that was used as a sweetener. Grape honey was made by treading the grapes in vats, but instead of fermenting the liquid produced, it was boiled to evaporate its water, leaving behind the thick, grape syrup. [36] 
 
 Figs [ edit ] 
   Dried  figs  were a significant source of winter food 
 Figs  were an important source of food. Figs were cultivated throughout the land of Israel, and fresh or dried figs were part of the daily diet. A common way of preparing dried figs was to chop them and press them into a cake. [46] 
 Figs are one of the biblical Seven Species and are frequently mentioned in the Bible (for example,  1 Samuel 25:18 ,  1 Samuel 30:12  and  1 Chronicles 12:41 ). [38]  The remains of dried figs have been discovered from as early as the Neolithic period in Gezer, Israel [46]  and Gilgal in the  Jordan Valley . [47] 
 The fig tree ( ficus carica ) grew well in the hill country and produced two crops a season. Early-ripening figs were regarded as delicacy because of their sweetness and were eaten fresh. Figs ripening in the later harvest were often dried and strung into a chain, or pressed into hard round or square-shaped cakes called  develah  and stored as a major source of winter food. The blocks of dried fig were sliced and eaten like bread. [21] [39]  The  Mishna  mentions figs as one of the components of the prescribed "wife’s food basket" and they are estimated to have constituted 16% of the overall calories of the basket. [38] 
 
 Dates [ edit ] 
 Dates  were eaten fresh or dried, but were mostly boiled into thick, long-lasting  syrup  called "date honey" ( dvash temarim ) for use as a sweetener. This syrup was prepared by soaking the dates in water for some time until they disintegrated and then boiling the resulting liquid down into thick syrup. The honey in the Biblical reference of "a land flowing with milk and honey" is probably  date honey . [39] [48] 
 Fresh, ripe dates were available from mid to late summer. Some were sun-dried and pressed into blocks to dry completely and then used throughout the year, especially as food for travelers. Dates were also fermented into one of the "strong drinks" referred to in the Bible as "shechar". [48] 
 The date palm required a hot and dry climate and mostly grew and produced fruit in the  Jordan Rift Valley  from Jericho to the  Sea of Galilee . [38]  In these arid areas, the date was sometimes the only plant-food available and was a primary component of the diet, but it was less important elsewhere. [48] 
 
 Pomegranates [ edit ] 
   Silver half- shekel  coins minted during the  First Jewish-Roman War  show three  pomegranates  on the reverse 
 Pomegranates  were usually eaten fresh, although occasionally they were used to make  juice  or wine, or sun-dried for use when the fresh fruit was out of season. They probably played a minor part in Israelite cuisine but were symbolically important as adornments on the hem of the robe of the  high priest  and the  Temple pillars  and embossed on coinage; they are also listed in the Bible as one of the Seven Species of the Land of Israel. [38] [49] 
 
 Other fruits and nuts [ edit ] 
 The sycamore fig, carob, mulberry, and possibly the apple were also eaten. [39]  Usually, these fruits were not cultivated but were picked in the wild when they were in season. [36]  The  sycamore fig  ( Ficus sycamorus ) was very common in the warmer parts of Israel and was grown primarily for its wood, but it provided a steady supply of small figs, eaten mainly by the poor. [38] 
 Other native trees producing fruits included the  carob , which was probably popular due to its sweet taste, and the  black mulberry . [41]  The  tapuah , which means "apple" in modern Hebrew, is mentioned in the Bible, but it is not clear if this referred to another fruit, such as the  apricot [50]  or  quince . [51] 
 Almonds ,  walnuts , and  pistachios  were eaten and are mentioned in the Bible. Almonds were widespread in the region from prehistoric times, and the Bible mentions almonds ( shaked ) and pistachios ( botnim ) as among the "choice fruits of the land" sent by Jacob as a gift to the ruler of Egypt ( Genesis 43:11 ). Almonds and pistachios were probably eaten primarily by the wealthy. The walnut reached Israel from Mesopotamia by at least 2000 BCE and is mentioned once in the Bible ( Song of Solomon 6:11 ). Walnuts became common during the Second Temple period and so widespread that the word for walnut,  egoz , became the generic Hebrew word for nut at that time. [38] [52] 
 
 Wine and other drinks [ edit ] 
 The Israelites usually drank water drawn from  wells ,  cisterns , or rivers. They also drank  milk  (for example, as mentioned in the Bible in  Judges 5:25 ), often in the form of  sour milk , thin  yogurt , or  whey , when it was available in the spring and summer. They drank fresh juices from fruits in season as well. [41]  The most strongly preferred beverage was wine, although some beer may have also been produced, [53]  and wine was an important part of the diet and a source of calories, sugar, and iron. [12]  Making wine was also a practical way to preserve fruit juices for long-term storage. Usually, wine was made from grapes for everyday use, as well as for rituals, such as sacrificial libations. Less often, wine was made from pomegranates and dates. [41] 
 
 Wine [ edit ] 
 The  Mediterranean climate  and soil of the mountainous areas of the area are well suited to  viticulture , and both archaeological evidence and written records indicate the significant cultivation of grapes in ancient Israel and the popularity of wine-drinking. The production capacity apparent from archaeological remains and the frequent biblical references to wine suggest that it was the principal  alcoholic beverage  of the ancient Israelites. Based on the remains of wine production facilities and storage rooms, it has been estimated that on average, people could have consumed one liter of wine per person per day. [54] 
 
   Ancient Israelite wine press at  Migdal HaEmek 
 Many rock-hewn  winepresses  and vats, dating to the biblical period, have been found. One typical example at  Gibeon  has a wide surface for treading the grapes and a series of collecting vats. Archaeological finds at  Ashkelon  and Gibeon indicate large-scale wine production in the 8th and 7th centuries BC, which most likely developed to supply the  Assyrian empire , and then the  Babylonians , as well as the local population. Vineyards are mentioned many times in the Bible, including in detailed descriptions of the method for establishing a  vineyard  ( Isaiah 5:1–2 ) and the types of  vines  ( Ezekiel 17:6–8 ). [54] [55]  The Bible refers to several types of wine, and one of the  Arad   ostraca  also mentions wine among the supplies being sent to a garrison of soldiers. [7] 
 Another indication of the importance of wine in ancient Israel is that Hebrew contains numerous terms for various stages and types of vines,  grape varieties , and  words for wine . The word  yayin  was used both as a generic word for wine and as a term for wine in its first year, once it had undergone sufficient  fermentation  from the initial stage, when it was called  tirosh . [55]  The type of wine was determined by the grapes, the time allowed for fermentation, and the  age of the wine . [36] 
 The often coarse and unrefined taste of  ancient wine  was adjusted to make it more drinkable. Spices were added directly to the wine to improve the  aroma , and other ingredients, such as honey, pepper, herbs, and even  lime ,  resin , or seawater were added to improve the flavor or disguise a poor-tasting wine. Wine was also  sweetened  by the addition of grape  juice syrup . [56]  Wine was also sometimes given an aroma by rubbing the winepress with wood resin. [36]  Wine could also be added to drinking water to improve the taste, especially towards the end of the summer when rainwater had been standing in a cistern for at least six months. This also had the  beneficial effect  of lowering the bacterial content of the water. [12] 
 
   Grapes were important for the production of wine in ancient Israel 
 After the  grape harvest  in mid-summer, most grapes were taken to wine presses to extract their juice for  winemaking . Once fermented, wine was transferred to  wineskins  or large  amphorae  for storage. Israelite amphorae were typically tall with large handles and little decoration, and the handles were often inscribed with the name of the city in which the wine had been produced, the winemaker’s stamp, and sometimes the year and the  vintage . Amphorae made long-term storage possible, especially in caves or cool cellars.  Glass bottles  were introduced only in the 1st century AD by the  Romans . [55] 
 The insides of amphorae were often coated with a preservative resin, such as from the  terebinth , and this imparted a pine flavor and aroma to the wine. Before the jars were sealed with  pitch , they were filled completely and often topped with a thin layer of olive oil to prevent  spoilage due to exposure to air . [55] 
 During the  Greek period , the style of winemaking changed.  Ripe grapes  were first  dried  to concentrate  the sugars , and these then produced a much sweeter and higher  alcohol content  wine that needed to be diluted with water to be drinkable. Before this, watered-down wine was disparaged, but by the time of the Talmud, wine that did not require dilution with water was considered unfit for consumption. [55] 
 
 Beer [ edit ] 
 Beer , produced by  brewing  barley, was another alcoholic beverage common in the ancient Near East. Beer was the primary beverage of ancient Egypt and Mesopotamia and it can be assumed that in Israel, which is located between the two, beer was also known. The biblical term  sekhar  may refer to beer or to alcoholic drinks in general. [54] [57] 
 The production of bread and beer were closely linked, since barley was the same key ingredient used for both, and most of the tools used in beer production, such as mortars, querns and winnowing baskets were also the same as for bread making. Archaeological evidence specific to beer making is thus uncommon, and earlier indications were that the ancient Israelites did not often drink beer. More recently, Iron-Age sites in Israel have produced remains such as beer jugs, bottles, strainers and stoppers, all of which provide evidence that the Israelites drank beer. [57]  Nonetheless, the widespread cultivation of grapes, used primarily for winemaking, indicates that wine drinking was probably far more common than beer drinking. [10] 
 
 Meat [ edit ] 
 The Israelites usually ate meat from  domesticated   goats  and  sheep . Goat’s meat was the most common.  Fat-tailed sheep  were the predominant variety of sheep in ancient Israel, but, as sheep were valued more than goats, they were eaten less often. The fat of the tail was considered a delicacy. [58] 
 Beef  and  venison  were eaten primarily by the elites, and fattened calves provided  veal  for the wealthy (for example, as mentioned in the Bible,  Amos 6:4 ). [59] 
 For most people, meat was eaten only a few times a year when animals were slaughtered for  the major festivals , or at tribal meetings, celebrations such as  weddings , and for the visits of important guests ( 1 Samuel 28:24 ). Only at the king's table was meat served daily, according to the Bible. [21]  Although most meat was obtained from domesticated animals,  meat from hunted animals  was also sometimes available, as the story of  Isaac  and Esau ( Genesis 27:3–4 ), certain Biblical lists (for example,  Deuteronomy 14:5 ), and archaeological evidence indicate. The remains of  gazelle ,  red deer , and  fallow deer  are the most commonly found in the archaeological record.
 Archaeological evidence from an Iron-Age market excavated at Ashkelon shows that  game  was also sold to those who could not hunt or trap them themselves. [60]  However, meat from wild animals was more common at times of economic distress and in the northern areas, where forests and open land provided a habitat for more wild animals. [61] 
 Meat was prepared in several different ways. The most common was to cook it with water as a broth or a  stew  (for example,  Ezekiel 24:4–5 ). Meat stewed with onions, garlic, and leeks and flavored with  cumin  and  coriander  is described on ancient  Babylonian cuneiform tablets , and it is most likely that it was prepared similarly in ancient Israel. Stewed meat was considered to be a dish worthy of serving to honored guests ( Judges 6:19–20 ). A less common way to prepare meat was to  roast  it over an open fire, but this was done particularly for the meat of the  Passover lamb . For long-term storage, meat was smoked, dried, or salted, according to indications in texts and ethnographic studies. [60] [61] 
 
 Poultry and eggs [ edit ] 
 The Israelites ate domesticated birds such as  pigeons ,  turtledoves ,  ducks , and  geese , and wild birds such as  quail , and  partridge . Remains from archaeological excavations at the  Ophel  in Jerusalem and other Iron-Age sites show that domestic birds were available, but consumption was small. The inclusion of pigeons and turtledoves in the Biblical sacrifice lists implies that they were raised domestically, and the remains of  dovecotes  discovered from the Greek and Roman periods confirm this. Biblical references and archaeological evidence also demonstrate that wild birds were hunted and eaten. [62] [63] 
 The  turtledove  was present from about April to October, while the  rock pigeon  was available throughout the year. The pigeon appears to have been domesticated in  Sumeria  and  Canaan  during the  second millennium BC , and remained the predominant  fowl  in ancient Israel until the end of the Second Temple period. Nonetheless, to avoid the spread of disease, pigeons could only be raised in small numbers and were thus fairly costly and not a regular part of the diet. [64] 
 Geese , originally domesticated in ancient Egypt, were raised in ancient Israel. They are most likely the "fattened fowl" on  King Solomon’s  table ( 1 Kings 5:3 ).  Goose breeding is also discussed in the Mishna. [64]  Like other animals, birds were fattened for consumption on special occasions, and for the wealthy. [63] 
 It is unclear when  chicken  became part of the diet. There are some archaeological remains from Iron-Age sites, but these were likely from  roosters  as a  fighting bird , which are also pictured on seals from the period as a symbol of ferocity, such as on the 6th-century BC onyx seal of  Jaazaniah . [62] [65]  Chicken became common around the 2nd century BC, and during the Roman period, chickens emerged as an important feature of the cuisine, with the Talmud describing it as "the choicest of birds." [66]  By Roman times, pigeons and chickens were the principal poultry. [64] 
 Until the domestication of the chicken,  eggs  were available in limited quantities and were considered a delicacy, as in ancient Egypt. [67]  The most common birds—turtledoves and pigeons—were reared for their meat and not for their very small eggs. Biblical references to eggs are only in reference to gathering them from the wild (for example,  Deuteronomy 22:6–7  and  Isaiah 10:14 ). [63] [64]  Eggs seem to have increased in use for food only with the introduction of chickens as food and were commonly used as food by Roman times. [68] 
 
 Fish [ edit ] 
 The Israelites ate a variety of fresh and saltwater fish, according to both archaeological and textual evidence. [69]  Remains of freshwater fish from the  Yarkon  and  Jordan rivers  and the  Sea of Galilee  have been found in excavations, and include  St. Peter’s fish  and  mouthbreeders . Saltwater fish discovered in excavations include  sea bream ,  grouper ,  meager , and  gray mullet . Most of these come from the  Mediterranean Sea , but in the later Iron Age period, some are from the  Red Sea . [70]  Although the  Torah  prohibits the consumption of fish without fins or scales, archeological evidence indicates that many Israelites flouted or were unaware of these restrictions and ate non-kosher seafood, mostly  catfish  but also  shark ,  eel , and  ray , and that religious restrictions on seafood began to be observed more strictly starting in the first century CE. [71] [72] 
 Fishermen supplied fish to inland communities, as remains of fish, including bones and scales, have been discovered at many inland sites. To preserve them for transport, the fish were first smoked or dried and salted. [69]  Merchants also imported fish, sometimes from as far as from Egypt, where pickled  roe  was an export article. [21]  Remains of  Nile Perch  from Egypt have been found, and these must have been smoked or dried before being imported through the trade network that connected ancient Near Eastern societies. [70]  Merchants shipped fish to Jerusalem, and there was evidently a significant trade in fish; one of the gates of Jerusalem was called the Fish Gate, named for a fish market nearby ( Zephaniah 1:10 ,  Nehemiah 3:3 ,  Nehemiah 12:39 ,  Nehemiah 13:16 ,  2 Chronicles 33:14 ). [69] [70] [73] 
 It is unclear to what extent fish played a role in the cuisine, but it is apparent that fish became steadily more available during the Israelite and Judean monarchies. Fish products were salted and dried and sent great distances. However, even in the later Persian, Greek, and Roman periods, the cost of preserving and transporting fish must have meant that only wealthier inhabitants of the highland towns and cities could afford it, or those who lived close to the sources, where it was less expensive. [70]  In the Galilee, small-scale fishing was a fundamental component of the  agrarian  economy. [74] 
 
 Dairy foods [ edit ] 
 Goats, and, to a lesser extent, sheep, provided  milk  for part of the year, and milk and  dairy products  were a significant source of food. Dairy products are mentioned in the Bible (for example,  Genesis 18:8 ,  Judges 4:19 , and  2 Samuel 17:29 , and a repeated description of the Land of Israel in the Bible is "a land flowing with milk and honey" (for example,  Exodus 3:8 ,  Exodus 33:3 , and  Joel 4:18 )). [75] [76] 
 Fresh milk could not be stored for long without spoiling. Typically, thick  sour milk  called  laban  was drunk because the Israelites stored the milk in skin containers, in which it curdled quickly. [21] [76] [77] 
 Milk had to be processed to preserve it. This was done by first  churning  it, using a goatskin or clay container to separate the  butterfat  from the  whey . The butterfat was processed by boiling and then cooling it to make  clarified butter , which could then be stored for a long time. [75] [78]  Clarified butter was used principally for cooking and frying.  Butter churns  have been excavated at  Beersheba , dating from the 4th century BC, and other ancient Israelite sites. [36] [76] 
 Goat milk  and sheep’s milk  cheeses  were the most prevalent types of cheese. Soft cheese was made using cloth bags filled with soured milk. The thin liquid was drained through the cloth until a soft cheese remained in the bag. A hard cheese was made from fermented soured milk: milk was poured into special moulds in which it curdled and was then hardened by drying in the sun or by heating numerous, small, cheese molds with holes for draining the whey. Cheese is not mentioned often in the Bible, but in one case, David is sent to take a gift of cheese to the commander of the army ( 1 Samuel 17:18 ). [36] [76] [79]  The Mishna and Talmud mention using the sap of fruit trees, such as figs, to harden cheese (a method still used by nomadic herders of the region until modern times). Using fig sap instead of  animal enzymes  to make cheese also conformed to the  prohibition on mixing meat and milk . [2] 
 
 Honey [ edit ] 
 Fruit syrup called  dvash  served as the primary sweetener and was most often made from dates. It was not until Talmudic times that the word " dvash " now translated as "honey", generally meant  bee honey . The Biblical term  dvash  usually did not mean bee honey, but thick  syrup  obtained from grapes, figs, or dates. This syrup was similar to the date syrup, or  halek , that many Jews continue to use in modern times. [76] [80] [81] 
 The Biblical references to "honey from the crag" ( Deuteronomy 32:13 ) or "honey from the rock" ( Psalms 81:17 ) could refer either to fig honey, as fig trees commonly grew in rocky outcrops, or to honey collected from wild bees, which made their nests in these places, as they still do in the region until today. The Bible refers to honey from bees in only a few instances, for example, when  Samson  eats honey which bees made in the carcass of a lion ( Judges 14:8–9 ) and when  Jonathan  eats honey from a  honeycomb  ( 1 Samuel 14:25–27 ), and these references are to honey obtained from the wild. [76] 
 Nonetheless, the oldest archaeological find relating to  beekeeping  discovered to date is an  apiary  dating from about 900 BC at  Rehov , a Bronze-Age and Iron-Age site in the  Jordan Valley . The hives, made of straw and unbaked clay, could have housed more than a million bees, and indicate that honey was produced on a large scale. [82]  It is most likely that the inhabitants of Tel Rehov imported the bees from  Anatolia , because they were less aggressive than the local bees and produced a higher yield of honey. [83]  It is also possible that the domestication of bees for honey production was introduced from Egypt during the Iron Age, and honey was being obtained from  domesticated bees  from late in the Iron Age period. [76] [84] 
 
 Seasonings [ edit ] 
   Hyssop, called  ezov , was used as a seasoning. 
 The most common and important seasoning was  salt  ( Job 6:6 ), demonstrated by how it is referenced throughout the Bible, and by how its use was mandated with most sacrifices ( Leviticus 2:13 ). Salt was obtained from the Mediterranean or the  Dead Sea . It was produced by evaporating seawater from both natural and artificially created drying pans along the Mediterranean coast. It was also obtained by mining  salt deposits , such as at Sodom near the Dead Sea. Salt had to be transported to other locations, so most communities had to purchase it. [21] [36] [84] [85] 
 Food was also flavored by plants, most native to the region and either cultivated, or gathered in the wild, although a few spices were imported. Garlic, onions, and possibly  fenugreek  were used to season cooked foods, as well as being eaten as vegetables. Herbs and spices included  capers ,  coriander ,  cumin ,  black cumin ,  dill , dwarf  chicory ,  hyssop ,  marjoram ,  mint ,  black mustard ,  reichardia ,  saffron , and  thyme . Some seasonings were imported, such as  myrrh ,  galbanum , saffron, and  cinnamon , but their high cost limited their widespread use. Spices for special feasts were imported by the wealthy and royalty from  Arabia  and  India  and were highly valued. These included various types of  pepper , and  ginger . [21] [36] [85] 
 Another seasoning was  vinegar , which was produced by extra fermentation of new wine. It was used for seasoning foods,  pickling  vegetables, and medicinal purposes. [36] [86] 
 
 Storage and preparation of food [ edit ] 
   Storage jars from Iron-Age Megiddo 
 Storing water and food was critical for survival, and particularly, being able to store enough food for use from one harvest to the next. To protect grain from damp and vermin, underground  granaries  were used for the bulk storage of grain. Families also stored grain, wine and oil in large pottery jars in their houses. When well protected, wheat, barley, legumes and nuts could be kept for long periods. Rainwater from roofs and courtyards was collected in cisterns to supplement natural sources like springs and wells. [87] [88] 
 Fermentation , oil extraction and  drying  were all ways of converting food into products that could be stored. Feeding crops to animals was also a means of "storage on the hoof" with the animals converting the fodder into meat or milk. [87] [88] 
 Food was cooked in pots made of clay and placed on earthenware stands built in a horseshoe shape, so that the fire could be lit through the opening, under the pot, or pots were suspended above the fire from tripods. [8] 
 Cooked food included soups and stews that were a mixture of meat and vegetables. Beans and lentils were likely to have been cooked several times a week. However, vegetables, such as melons, garlic, leek and onions were also eaten uncooked. [36] 
 
 Meals [ edit ] 
 Meals  eaten by the Israelites fell into two categories: daily meals, and festive or ritual meals.
 
 Daily meals [ edit ] 
   Pottery serving jugs from Iron-Age Megiddo 
 Daily meals were prepared by women. Two daily meals were usually eaten by the family, either in the home or in the field. The first meal was eaten in the late morning, as a break in the workday, and could include roasted grain, olives, figs or some other fruit, bread dipped in olive oil or vinegar, or bread eaten with garlic, onions, or black radishes for flavor, and water or wine. [89]  A description in the  Book of Ruth  provides an example of this kind of meal: the harvest workers eat bread dipped in vinegar and parched or roasted grain ( Ruth 2:14 ). Agricultural workers, who comprised the largest part of the population, also ate a light meal in the early morning before leaving for their work in the fields ( Proverbs 31:15 ). [2] [90] 
 The second meal was the main meal of the day and was eaten in the evening. In addition to bread, it typically included soup or a stew of vegetables or legumes, served in a common pot into which everyone dipped their bread. Also served from time to time were cheese and fruits such as fresh figs and melon when in season, as well as dried fruits. Water, wine, and milk could also accompany the meal. [2] [89] [91] [92] 
 Small bowls were used for both eating and drinking. Small jugs contained condiments like olive oil, vinegar, and sweeteners. Wide-mouthed  pitchers  held water and milk, while spouted  decanters  with narrow, ridged necks with built-in strainers held wine. [92] 
 
 Festive meals and feasts [ edit ] 
 Festive meals were held to mark significant occasions, entertain important guests, or as sacrificial or ritual meals. The meal was prepared by both men and women. Meat was always served at these meals and many people participated so that there would be no leftovers that would go to waste.
 Ritual feasts and banquets in ancient Israel, and the ancient Near East in general, were important for building social relationships and demonstrating status, transacting business and concluding agreements, enlisting divine help, or showing thanks, devotion or propitiation to a deity, and for conveying social instruction. These meals were imbued with significance by the occasion and were a time for entertainment and enjoyment. [36] [93] 
 
   Food dishes, bowls and serving jugs shown in a reconstructed  Israelite house 
 Festive meals were held only from time to time, but they are the ones recorded by biblical and extra-biblical sources. Many biblical stories are set within the context of a meal, such as the accounts of the food  Abraham  prepares for his visitors ( Genesis 18:1–8 ), the stew which Jacob prepares for his father, Isaac, and the Passover meal ( Exodus 12 ). [93] [94] 
 In the story of Abraham hosting the three visitors, Abraham offers cakes, a well prepared young calf, curds, and milk. This meal has similar elements to an earlier meal described in the  story of Sinuhe , an Egyptian nobleman who lived for a time in Canaan around 1900 BCE, at which bread, wine, cooked meat, roast fowl, and dairy products were served. [91] 
 One of the distinguishing features of the meals of the wealthier social class, as illustrated in the stories of Abraham and Sinuhe, was the more frequent consumption of meat. A description of the provisions for Solomon's kitchen also illustrates this: "Solomon's daily provisions consisted of 30  kor  of fine flour and 60 kor of flour, 10 fat oxen, 20 pasture-fed oxen, and 100 sheep and goats, in addition to deer and gazelles, roebucks and fattened geese" ( 1 Kings 5:2–3 ). This account describes the provisions that were possible to obtain for those with the resources to purchase them and indicates they were sufficient to provide sumptuous meals for thousands of people. [89] [91] 
 Another example of a lavish meal celebrating an important occasion is the inauguration of the Temple by Solomon ( 1 Kings 8:65 ,  2 Chronicles 7:8 ). Similar meals are described regarding  Hezekiah's  temple consecration ( 2 Chronicles 29:31–35 ) and Passover celebration ( 2 Chronicles 30:23–24 ). [91] 
 In contrast to the simplicity of the daily fare of ordinary people, the cuisine of the royal courts of the ancient Near East was sophisticated, and it is assumed that the dishes served at the table of King Solomon and other Israelite kings were also elaborate. King David had officials who were in charge of wine cellars, olive stores, cattle, olive and fig trees ( 1 Chronicles 27:27–31 ) and the royal kitchen was a complex organization. [15] 
 The kings of Israel are recorded as having displayed an extraordinary measure of royal hospitality, like other kings of the ancient Near East who held elaborate banquets. Solomon’s royal table is described as providing such a variety of foods that the  Queen of Sheba  is said to have been amazed that the reports of Solomon’s wealth did not exceed what she had seen ( 1 Kings 10:4–7 ). Royal entertainment in Israel included music ( Ecclesiastes 2:8 ), large numbers of guests ( 1 Kings 18:19 ), and presumably many servers and cupbearers, though these are not expressly mentioned in the Bible. [3] 
 Feasts and banquets were important social and political tools throughout Israel’s history, especially in the early years of the Israelite monarchy, when an invitation to the king’s table was important for creating and maintaining political support and was also an important marker of social status and influence. [93] 
 Regular meals too, developed as expressions of common identity, social unity and communal celebration. By the Roman period, Jewish communities came together at banquets for both food and company and the weekly Sabbath meal was an occasion for families to gather and enjoy both food and company. [93] 
 
 Hospitality [ edit ] 
   Depiction of Abraham hosting his guests 
 The practice of  hospitality  was a fundamental custom of Israelite society and serving food was integral to the hosting of guests.  Additionally, in ancient Israel, the belief that God had delivered Israel from slavery resulted in the social imperative and religious  commandment  to look after guests and strangers as an act of recognition and gratitude. [3] 
 The importance of hospitality to the Israelites can be inferred from the texts of the Bible, in numerous instances, including the stories of Abraham hosting the messengers,  Gideon’s  call to leadership ( Judges 6:19 ), the hospitality of the woman from Zarephath towards the Prophet Elijah ( 1 Kings 17:8–16 ) and the Shunammite woman towards Elisha ( 2 Kings 4:8–11 ), David’s hosting of Mephiboshet, son of Jonathan ( 2 Samuel 9:6–7 ) and Hezekiah’s invitation to the people of the northern kingdom of Israel to celebrate the Passover in Jerusalem ( 2 Chronicles 30 ). [94] 
 Meals at which important guests were present were viewed as special occasions, and as such, meat was served. The order in which the guests were served indicated the recognition of the social status of the guest. The choice of meat and dishes indicated the importance of the occasion. The Bible illustrates this in relating how  Samuel  hosted  Saul , who, seated at the head of the hall is served first with a portion of meat that has been especially reserved for him ( 1 Samuel 9:22–24 ).
 Certain parts of the animal, such as the breast and the right thigh, were considered to be the best portions and were reserved for the most honored participants in the meal. Guests were always served before family members. The host would also sit with the guests to encourage them to eat and see to all their needs, as related in the story of Abraham, who waited on his visitors while they ate. [60] 
 
 Sacrificial meals [ edit ] 
 Sacrificial meals were eaten when a portion of a  sacrifice  was reserved for the  priest  ( kohen ) or the ordinary Israelite who brought the offering was permitted to eat a portion with his family at a festive meal. The offerings considered "most holy" were eaten by the males of the priests in the court of the Temple sanctuary ( Leviticus 7:9–10 ). The meal was considered to be a part of the priest’s duties. Other offerings could be eaten by the priests with their families in any ritually clean place ( Leviticus 10:14 ). The ordinary Israelite had to eat his share within a fixed time, with his family, guests, and any  Levites  and strangers that he invited. [95] [96] 
 Depending on the type of sacrifice, the animals that were brought as sacrifices could be a lamb, kid, goat, ram, calf, bull or cow; bird offerings were doves and turtledoves (pigeons). [97]  Of these, the  guilt offering  ( asham ) ( Leviticus 5 ) and the communal  peace offering  ( shalmei tzibur ) ( Leviticus 23:19–29 ) were eaten only by the male priests ( kohanim ). Other offerings, such as the Firstborn offering ( Numbers 18:17–18 ), could be eaten by the priests and other members of their households, while for the personal peace offering ( shalmei yachid ) ( Leviticus 3 ) and Thanksgiving offering ( Leviticus 7:31–34 ), the breast and thigh meat were eaten by the priests and other members of their households and the remainder by ordinary Israelites. The Tithe offering ( Leviticus 27:32 ) could be eaten by anyone and the  Passover offering  ( Exodus 12 ) was eaten by all who had purchased a share in the sacrifice. [95] [98] 
 Meal offerings called  mincha  all consisted primarily of flour and were either completely or partially burned on the  altar . Those not entirely burned on the altar were eaten by the priests. Some  mincha  offerings were fried or baked before being offered. Types of  mincha  included fine flour ( solet ) mixed with oil and of which a portion was given to the kohen; flour mixed with oil and fried on a griddle or on a pan; bread called  challot  mixed with oil and baked in an oven; and wafers ( rekikim ) smeared with oil baked in an oven. [98] 
 There were also baked goods, all made of wheat flour and baked in an oven, which were not burned on the altar. These were the twelve unleavened and specially shaped  showbreads , eaten by the priests after they had been displayed; two loaves of leavened bread prepared for the festival of  Shavuot  and eaten by the priests; thanksgiving breads, which included leavened bread, unleavened bread, unleavened wafers and scalded loaves, with one of each kind given to the priests and the remainder eaten by the owner and guests; and the unleavened loaves and wafers accompanying the  Nazirite’s  sacrificial ram, one of each kind given to the priests and the remainder eaten by the Nazirite and guests. [98] 
 Whole extended families or clans also participated in a sacrifice that was offered on occasions such as the  New Moon , and it is referred to as both the "sacrifice of days" and a kinship sacrifice. In the early Israelite period, before the centralization of sacrificial offerings as an exclusive part of the Temple services, these sacrifices were offered at various locations. David is described as leaving Saul’s table to participate with his family in  Bethlehem  ( 1 Samuel 20:6 ) and  Elkanah  goes to  Shiloh  to participate with his household in the annual sacrifice ( 1 Samuel 1:21 ). [96] 
 Perhaps the oldest and most important feast celebrated by the Jews is the Passover. The original feast, with its origins in the story of the Exodus, consisted of a sacrificial lamb, bitter herbs and unleavened bread eaten by each family at home. Under the Israelite monarchy, and with the establishment of the  Temple in Jerusalem , the sacrifice and celebration of Passover became centralized as one of the  three pilgrimage festivals . Families who were able to travel to Jerusalem ate the Passover meal together in Jerusalem. Those who could not make the pilgrimage celebrated the holiday by holding a special meal and observing the Feast of  Unleavened Bread . [93] 
 
 Forbidden foods [ edit ] 
 In addition to requiring that certain foods be eaten for sacred purposes, the Israelite diet was shaped by religious practices which prohibited the consumption of certain foods, both in terms of the  animals permissible for eating , and the manner of their preparation. The cuisine of the Israelites thus differed from that of their neighbors in significant ways. For example, ancient Mesopotamian recipes describe foods cooked with animal blood and milk added to meat stews; this would have been avoided by the ancient Israelites. [11] [15] 
 Only animals specifically slaughtered for food or for use in the sacrificial service could be eaten. [36]  Detailed lists of which animals, birds, and fish could be eaten and which were prohibited appear in the Bible ( Leviticus 11  and  Deuteronomy 14:3–21 ), and animal bones found in the archaeological record tend to support this, with some exceptions. For the Israelites, food was one way for self-definition. While it is impossible to know to what extent  dietary laws  were observed, self-definition is most likely the basis for certain biblical lists of different kinds of animals permitted or forbidden for consumption. [11]  The  taboo against eating  certain animals, particularly the pig, may have developed from the early Iron Age. [61] [99] 
 Archaeological evidence from various sites shows that the consumption of  pork , while limited, was higher in the early Iron Age but had mostly disappeared during the later Iron Age. Sites in the highlands and the coastal plains show low levels of pig utilization in the early Iron Age, but on the coastal plain, excavations such as Ekron show a higher consumption of pig; this is usually associated with the arrival of the Philistines. However, even at Philistine sites, pig remains were a small proportion of the bones discovered, and these decline after the initial period of settlement. This may have been due to unsuitable environmental factors for raising pigs. [100] 
 At archaeological excavations at  Mount Ebal  in  Samaria , from the period immediately after the Israelite conquest, animal bones discovered were only from animals considered permissible, such as cattle, sheep, goats, and deer. [101] 
 In addition, some taboos did not relate to the source of the food but to the way in which they were prepared, as in the prohibition against boiling a young goat in its mother’s milk (and mentioned in the Bible in three separate instances:  Exodus 23:19 ,  Exodus 34:26 ,  Deuteronomy 14:21 ). Milk and its by-products served as offerings in Near-Eastern pagan worship to gods and kings. Milk was used in connection with the phenomenon of reproduction, and a goat kid would be cooked in its mother's milk. [36]  Thus, the Israelite practice was to avoid an act similar to that carried out by the Canaanites as part of their  cult worship  ( Ezra 9:1 ). [101] 
 The Israelites believed that since an animal’s blood represented its life, its blood should not be consumed ( Deuteronomy 12:23–24 ). The blood of a slaughtered animal was thus drained before the meat was used and the blood itself was not used as a cooking liquid or drink. [15] 
 There are no biblical lists containing forbidden plants, so it can be assumed that any plant or fruit was permissible as food, with their use limited only by taste, or toxicity (for example,  2 Kings 4:39–40 ) and the fulfillment of religious requirements such as  the tithes . [11] 
 
 See also [ edit ] 
 Biblical archaeology 
 Jewish cuisine 
 Israeli cuisine 
 Kosher 
 Manna 
 List of ancient dishes 
 What Did the Ancient Israelites Eat? 
 References [ edit ] 
 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   Macdonald, Nathan (2008).  What Did the Ancient Israelites Eat? . pp. 10–15. 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   e   "Food in the Bible".  Neot Kedumim News . Summer–Fall 2002. 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   Stallman, Robert C. (1999).  "Dissertation: Divine Hospitality in the Pentateuch: A Metaphorical Perspective on God as Host" : 159–160. Archived from  the original  on 20 July 2011.   {{ cite journal }} :  Cite journal requires  |journal=  ( help ) 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   e   f   g   h   i   Cooper, John (1993).  Eat and Be Satisfied . pp. 4–9. 
 
 ^   Diamond, Jared  (1999).  Guns, Germs, and Steel: The Fate of Human Societies . New York: W.W. Norton and Co. pp. 145–6.  ISBN   0-393-31755-2 . 
 
 ^  a   b   Marks, Gil  (2010).  Encyclopedia of Jewish Food . p. 236. 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   e   f   g   h   i   Feinberg Vamosh, Miriam (2007).  Food at the Time of the Bible . pp. 12–13. 
 
 ^  a   b   c   Cooper, John (1993).  Eat and Be Satisfied . pp. 9–11. 
 
 ^  a   b   Miller, J. Maxwell ; Hayes, John H (1986).  A History of Ancient Israel and Judah . pp.  51–53 . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   e   f   g   h   Macdonald, Nathan (2008).  What Did the Ancient Israelites Eat? . pp. 19–21. 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   Borowski, Oded (2003).  Daily Life in Biblical Times . pp. 63–64. 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   Hareuveni, Nogah (1980).  Nature in Our Biblical Heritage . Israel: Neot Kedumim.  ISBN   965-233-002-7 . 
 
 ^  a   b   Roden, Claudia  (1997).  The Book of Jewish Food .  ISBN   9780394532585 . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   e   f   g   h   i   Marks, Gil  (2010).  Encyclopedia of Jewish Food . pp. 70–71. 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   e   Cooper, John (1993).  Eat and Be Satisfied . pp. 15–16. 
 
 ^   Rubin, Shira.  "Israel's millennia-old 'biblical diet' " .  www.bbc.com . 
 
 ^   "ANE TODAY - 201607 - The Daily Stew? Everyday Meals in Ancient Israel - American Society of Overseas Research (ASOR)" . 
 
 ^   "Eating in Historical Jerusalem" .  www.jewishvirtuallibrary.org . 
 
 ^   The text also mentions five sheep, but ordinarily, meat was reserved for special occasions. 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   Borowski, Oded (2003).  Daily Life in Biblical Times . pp. 65–66. 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   e   f   g   h   i   Singer, Isidore; Adler, Cyrus;  et al., eds. (1901–1906).  "Food – Biblical Data" .  The Jewish Encyclopedia . Vol. 5. New York: Funk and Wagnalls. pp. 430–431. 
 
 ^   Marks, Gil  (2010).  Encyclopedia of Jewish Food . p. 501. 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   e   Marks, Gil  (2010).  Encyclopedia of Jewish Food . pp. 40–41. 
 
 ^   Marks, Gil  (2010).  Encyclopedia of Jewish Food . pp. 176, 542. 
 
 ^   Marks, Gil  (2010).  Encyclopedia of Jewish Food . p. 613. 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   e   Macdonald, Nathan (2008).  What Did the Ancient Israelites Eat? . pp. 25–28. 
 
 ^   Marks, Gil  (2010).  Encyclopedia of Jewish Food . p. 363. 
 
 ^   "FEATURE-Biblical cuisine inspires Bible learning in Israel" .  TheMarker . 22 July 2002. 
 
 ^   Zohary, Daniel; Hopf, Maria (2000).  Domestication of Plants in the Old World . p. 181. 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   e   f   Borowski, Oded (2003).  Daily Life in Biblical Times . pp. 71–72. 
 
 ^  a   b   c   Cooper, John (1993).  Eat and Be Satisfied . pp. 11–12. 
 
 ^  a   b   Marks, Gil  (2010).  Encyclopedia of Jewish Food . pp. 358, 428, 494. 
 
 ^   Marks, Gil  (2010).  Encyclopedia of Jewish Food . pp. 122–123. 
 
 ^   Marks, Gil  (2010).  Encyclopedia of Jewish Food . p. 390. 
 
 ^   Marks, Gil  (2010).  Encyclopedia of Jewish Food . p. 413. 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   e   f   g   h   i   j   k   l   m   n   Yeivin, Z (1966).  Journal of the Israel Department of Antiquities . Jerusalem: Israel Department of Antiquities.  3 : 52–62. {{ cite journal }} :  CS1 maint: untitled periodical ( link ) 
 
 ^   Marks, Gil  (2010).  Encyclopedia of Jewish Food . p. 543. 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   e   f   g   h   i   j   Macdonald, Nathan (2008).  What Did the Ancient Israelites Eat? . pp. 28–31. 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   Cooper, John (1993).  Eat and Be Satisfied . p. 12. 
 
 ^   Edelstein, Gershon; Shimon Gibson (July–August 1982). "Ancient Jerusalem's Rural Food Basket".  Biblical Archaeology Review .  8  (4). 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   Borowski, Oded (2003).  Daily Life in Biblical Times . pp. 70–71. 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   e   Macdonald, Nathan (2008).  What Did the Ancient Israelites Eat? . pp. 23–24. 
 
 ^   Borowski, Oded (2002).  Agriculture in Iron Age Israel . p. 123. 
 
 ^  a   b   Marks, Gil  (2010).  Encyclopedia of Jewish Food . pp. 425–427. 
 
 ^   Marks, Gil  (2010).  Encyclopedia of Jewish Food . p. 237. 
 
 ^  a   b   Marks, Gil  (2010).  Encyclopedia of Jewish Food . p. 196. 
 
 ^   Kislev, Mordechai E.; Hartmann, Anat; Bar-Yosef, Ofer (June 2006). "Early Domesticated Fig in the Jordan Valley".  Science .  312  (5778): 1372–1374.  Bibcode : 2006Sci...312.1372K .  doi : 10.1126/science.1125910 .  PMID   16741119 .  S2CID   42150441 . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   Marks, Gil  (2010).  Encyclopedia of Jewish Food . pp. 153–154. 
 
 ^   Marks, Gil  (2010).  Encyclopedia of Jewish Food . pp. 479–480. 
 
 ^   DLC.  "tapuach" . Retrieved  24 January  2021 . 
 
 ^   Marks, Gil  (2010).  Encyclopedia of Jewish Food . p. 19. 
 
 ^   Marks, Gil  (2010).  Encyclopedia of Jewish Food . pp. 12–13, 466, 604. 
 
 ^   Marks, Gil  (2010).  Encyclopedia of Jewish Food . p. 45. 
 
 ^  a   b   c   Macdonald, Nathan (2008).  What Did the Ancient Israelites Eat? . pp. 22–23. 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   e   Marks, Gil  (2010).  Encyclopedia of Jewish Food . pp. 616–618. 
 
 ^   Rogov, Daniel  (October 2009).  Rogov's Guide to Israeli Wines . Jerusalem, Israel: The Toby Press. p. 3.  ISBN   978-1-59264-262-5 . 
 
 ^  a   b   Homan, Michael M. (September–October 2010).  "Did the Ancient Israelites Drink Beer?" .  Biblical Archaeology Review .  36  (5). Archived from  the original  on 3 November 2010 . Retrieved  30 October  2010 . 
 
 ^   Marks, Gil  (2010).  Encyclopedia of Jewish Food . p. 350. 
 
 ^   Cooper, John (1993).  Eat and Be Satisfied . pp. 3–4. 
 
 ^  a   b   c   Borowski, Oded (2003).  Daily Life in Biblical Times . pp. 67–68. 
 
 ^  a   b   c   Macdonald, Nathan (2008).  What Did the Ancient Israelites Eat? . pp. 32–34. 
 
 ^  a   b   Macdonald, Nathan (2008).  What Did the Ancient Israelites Eat? . pp. 36–37. 
 
 ^  a   b   c   Borowski, Oded (2003).  Daily Life in Biblical Times . pp. 69–70. 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   Marks, Gil  (2010).  Encyclopedia of Jewish Food . pp. 169, 233, 460–461. 
 
 ^   Taran, Mikhael (January 1975). "Early Records of the Domestic Fowl in Ancient Judea".  Ibis .  117  (1): 109–110.  doi : 10.1111/j.1474-919X.1975.tb04192.x . 
 
 ^   Marks, Gil  (2010).  Encyclopedia of Jewish Food . pp. 117–118. 
 
 ^   Brothwell (1997).  Food in Antiquity: A Survey of the Diet of Early People . p. 54 and fig. 18. 
 
 ^   Marks, Gil (2006).  The World of Jewish Cooking . New York: Simon and Schuster. p. 382.  ISBN   0-684-83559-2 . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   Borowski, Oded (2003).  Daily Life in Biblical Times . pp. 68–69. 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   Macdonald, Nathan (2008).  What Did the Ancient Israelites Eat? . pp. 37–38. 
 
 ^   "Did King David eat shrimp?" .  Haaretz . Retrieved  25 May  2021 . 
 
 ^   Bad Judeans? Despite biblical ban, non-kosher fish were eaten in ancient Israel 
 
 ^   Marks, Gil  (2010).  Encyclopedia of Jewish Food . p. 198. 
 
 ^   Batten, Alicia.  "Fishing Economy in the Sea of Galilee" .  Bible Odyssey . Retrieved  10 January  2016 .  Fishing was a fundamental part of the embedded agrarian economy of first-century Galilee. This region was ruled by Herod Antipas; a client king of the Romans. An "embedded" economy was one in which questions of production, processing, trade, and their regulation could not be separated from politics, religion, and family or village life. There was no free market that functioned independently from other dimensions of society, and little if any upward mobility. Most peasant fishing families were poor and lived at subsistence level, while a small minority of elites held the bulk of wealth and power. 
 
 ^  a   b   Macdonald, Nathan (2008).  What Did the Ancient Israelites Eat? . p. 36. 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   e   f   g   Cooper, John (1993).  Eat and Be Satisfied . pp. 13–15. 
 
 ^   DailyLife, pg. 68: However, the meal that Abraham is described as serving to his guests (Gen 18:8) shows that fresh milk was an important part of a sumptuous meal. Fresh milk was also a thirst-quenching drink, as described in the story of Yael and Sisera (Judges 4:19). 
 
 ^   Borowski, Oded (2003).  Daily Life in Biblical Times . p. 66. 
 
 ^   Marks, Gil  (2010).  Encyclopedia of Jewish Food . pp. 107–108. 
 
 ^   Roden pg. 627 
 
 ^   Marks, Gil  (2010).  Encyclopedia of Jewish Food . pp. 264–265. 
 
 ^   Mazar, Amihai; Panitz-Cohen, Nava (December 2007).  "It Is the Land of Honey: Beekeeping at Tel Rehov"   (PDF) .  Near Eastern Archaeology .  70  (4).  doi : 10.1086/NEA20361335 .  ISSN   1094-2076 .  S2CID   158044206 . Archived from  the original   (PDF)  on 2 July 2010 . Retrieved  13 March  2011 . 
 
 ^   Bloch, Guy;  et al. (June 2010).  "Industrial apiculture in the Jordan valley during Biblical times with Anatolian honeybees" .  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences .  107  (25): 11240–11244.  Bibcode : 2010PNAS..10711240B .  doi : 10.1073/pnas.1003265107 .  PMC   2895135 .  PMID   20534519 . 
 
 ^  a   b   Macdonald, Nathan (2008).  What Did the Ancient Israelites Eat? . p. 40. 
 
 ^  a   b   Borowski, Oded (2003).  Daily Life in Biblical Times . p. 72. 
 
 ^   Marks, Gil  (2010).  Encyclopedia of Jewish Food . p. 604. 
 
 ^  a   b   "Storage in Canaan & Ancient Israel" . University of Pennsylvania Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology. 1999 . Retrieved  5 March  2011 . 
 
 ^  a   b   "The Houses of Ancient Israel – Storage" . Semitic Museum at Harvard University. 2011 . Retrieved  5 March  2011 . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   "Eating in Jerusalem of the First Temple Period" . Archived from  the original  on 27 September 2002 . Retrieved  1 October  2010 . 
 
 ^   Borowski, Oded (2003).  Daily Life in Biblical Times . pp. 73–74. 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   Borowski, Oded (2003).  Daily Life in Biblical Times . p. 65. 
 
 ^  a   b   Semitic Museum at Harvard University.  "Food" . Harvard University . Retrieved  15 February  2011 . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   e   Resig, Dorothy D. (November 2009).  "A Feast for the Senses...and the Soul" .  Biblical Archaeology Review . Archived from  the original  on 24 December 2010 . Retrieved  30 October  2010 . 
 
 ^  a   b   Borowski, Oded (2003).  Daily Life in Biblical Times . pp. 22–24. 
 
 ^  a   b   Singer, Isidore; Adler, Cyrus;  et al., eds. (1901–1906).  "Sacrifice" .  The Jewish Encyclopedia . Vol. 10. New York: Funk and Wagnalls. pp. 615–618. Archived from  the original  on 28 June 2011. 
 
 ^  a   b   King, Philip J. ;  Stager, Lawrence E.  (2001).  Life in Biblical Israel . pp.  353–357 . 
 
 ^   Borowski, Oded (1999).  Every Living Thing: Daily Use of Animals in Ancient Israel . p. 214. 
 
 ^  a   b   c   Scherman, Nosson, ed. (2002).  The Torah, Haftoros and Five Megillos with a Commentary Anthologized from the Rabbinic Writings  (Stone ed.). Brooklyn, NY: Mesorah Publications Ltd. pp. 1291–1295.  ISBN   0-89906-014-5 . 
 
 ^   Borowski, Every Living Thing, 140–44 
 
 ^   Macdonald, Nathan (2008).  What Did the Ancient Israelites Eat? . pp. 67–68. 
 
 ^  a   b   Feinberg Vamosh, Miriam (2007).  Food at the Time of the Bible . p. 10. 
 
 
 References cited [ edit ] 
 Borowski, Oded (2003).  Daily Life in Biblical Times . Atlanta, GA: Society of Biblical Literature.  ISBN   1-58983-042-3 . 
 Borowski, Oded (2002).  Agriculture in Iron Age Israel . American Schools of Oriental Research.  ISBN   0-89757-054-5 . 
 Borowski, Oded (1999).  Every Living Thing: Daily Use of Animals in Ancient Israel  (1st ed.). Walnut Creek, CA: Alta Mira Press.  ISBN   0-7619-8918-8 . 
 Brothwell, Don R. ; Brothwell, Patricia (1997).  Food in Antiquity: A Survey of the Diet of Early People  (Expanded ed.). Johns Hopkins University Press.  ISBN   0-8018-5740-6 . 
 Cooper, John (1993).  Eat and Be Satisfied: A Social History of Jewish Food . New Jersey: Jason Aronson Inc.  ISBN   0-87668-316-2 . 
 Feinberg Vamosh, Miriam (2007).  Food at the Time of the Bible: From Adam's Apple to the Last Supper . Israel: Palphot.  ISBN   978-965-280-115-9 . 
 Hareuveni, Nogah (1980).  Nature in Our Biblical Heritage . Israel: Neot Kedumim.  ISBN   965-233-002-7 . 
 King, Philip J. ;  Stager, Lawrence E.  (2001).  Life in Biblical Israel . Louisville, KY: Westminster John Knox Press.  ISBN   0-664-22148-3 . 
 Macdonald, Nathan (2008).  What Did the Ancient Israelites Eat? Diet in Biblical Times . W. B. Eerdmans Publishing Company.  ISBN   978-0-8028-6298-3 . 
 Marks, Gil  (2010).  Encyclopedia of Jewish Food . New Jersey: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.  ISBN   978-0-470-39130-3 . 
 Miller, J. Maxwell; Hayes, John H (1986).  A History of Ancient Israel and Judah . Louisville, KY: Westminster John Knox Press. pp.  51–53 .  ISBN   0-664-21262-X . 
 Roden, Claudia  (1997).  The Book of Jewish Food: An Odyssey from Samarkand to New York . New York: Knopf.  ISBN   0-394-53258-9 . 
 Zohary, Daniel; Hopf, Maria (2000).  Domestication of Plants in the Old World: The Origin and Spread of Cultivated Plants in West Asia, Europe, and the Nile Valley  (3rd ed.). Oxford University Press.  ISBN   0-19-850356-3 . 
 Further reading [ edit ] 
 Frank, Raphael; Avitsur, Shmuel; Ayalon, Etan (1994).  History and Technology of Olive Oil in the Holy Land . Tel Aviv: Oléarius Editions.  ISBN   0-917526-06-6 . 
 Matthews, Victor H. (2006).  Manners & Customs in the Bible: An Illustrated Guide to Daily Life in Bible Times  (3rd ed.). Hendrickson Publishers.  ISBN   1-59856-059-X . 
 External links [ edit ] 
 Bread – the Daily Grind  in “Canaan and Ancient Israel” -  University of Pennsylvania Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology 
 Biblical meals  –  Neot Kedumim  Biblical Landscape Reserve 
 v t e Israeli cuisine List of dishes History 
 Ancient Israelite cuisine 
 Jewish cuisine 
 Ashkenazi 
 Bukharan 
 Ethiopian 
 Sephardi 
 Mizrahi 
 Fruits and vegetables 
 Apple 
 Artichoke 
 Beet 
 Cherry tomato 
 Cabbage 
 Cucumber 
 Eggplant 
 Garlic 
 Horseradish 
 Mango 
 Onion 
 Pomegranate 
 Potato 
 Radish 
 Red cabbage 
 Red onion 
 Sabra 
 Spinach 
 Squash blossom 
 Tomato 
 Other ingredients 
 Aleppo pepper 
 Parsley 
 Dill 
 Honey 
 Tahini 
 Silan 
 Dates 
 Garbanzo beans 
 Cowpea 
 Common bean 
 Za'atar 
 Sumac 
 Hawaij 
 Olive oil 
 Olives 
 Oregano 
 Baharat 
 Raisin 
 Sachlav 
 Semolina 
 Thyme 
 Cilantro 
 Sesame 
 Poppy seed 
 Saffron 
 Cardamom 
 Cheeses 
 Cottage cheese 
 Cream cheese 
 Tzfat cheese 
 Halloumi 
 Israeli Feta 
 Labneh 
 Quark 
 Breads 
 Babka 
 Challah 
 Jachnun 
 Krantz cake 
 Kubaneh 
 Lachooh 
 Laffa 
 Malawach 
 Rye bread 
 Bagel 
 Pain petri 
 Pita 
 Pumpernickel bread 
 Salads 
 Israeli salad 
 Moroccan carrots 
 Red cabbage salad 
 Turkish salad 
 Watermelon and feta salad 
 Pasta 
 Hilopites 
 Lokshen 
 Lokshen kugel 
 Kugel 
 Kugel Yerushalmi 
 Pastitsio 
 Ptitim 
 Trahanas 
 Fish 
 Tuna salad 
 Tuna salad sandwich 
 Tilapia 
 Chraime 
 Gavroi 
 Sardines 
 Tunafish 
 Barbuniya 
 Soups 
 Avgolemono 
 Chicken soup 
 Cholent 
 Chamin 
 Kubbe 
 Yemenite chicken soup 
 Yemenite beef soup 
 Yemenite bean soup 
 Maraq Shu'it lebana 
 Maraq Shu'it yerooqa 
 Meat 
 Shawarma 
 Chicken or Turkey schnitzel 
 Kofta 
 Shish kebab 
 Shish taouk 
 Jerusalem mixed grill 
 Sofrito 
 Skewered goose liver 
 Stuffed peppers 
 Sandwiches 
 Falafel 
 Sabich 
 Shawarma  sandwich 
 Tehina and silan sandwich 
 Boureka  sandwich 
 Dips and mezze 
 Fried Kubbeh 
 Amba 
 Baba ghanoush 
 Bourekas 
 Dolma 
 Fried cauliflower 
 Ful medames 
 Harissa 
 Hummus 
 Ikra 
 Kibbeh nayyeh 
 Matboucha 
 Muhammara 
 Yogurt 
 Zhoug 
 Grains and side dishes 
 Bulgur 
 Couscous 
 Farro 
 Freekeh 
 Latke 
 Rice 
 Rice pilaf 
 Scorched rice 
 Mujadara 
 Fried foods 
 Atayef 
 Cigarim 
 Corn schnitzel 
 Falafel 
 Fried chicken 
 Fried eggplant 
 Israeli schnitzel 
 Keftes de prasa 
 Kibbeh 
 Latkes 
 Zalabia 
 Desserts 
 Halva 
 Baklava 
 Basbousa 
 Halva ice cream 
 Duvshaniot 
 Sufganiyot 
 Rugelach 
 Hamantashen 
 Malabi 
 Ma'amoul 
 Tahini cookie 
 Alcohol 
 Israeli beer 
 Israeli wine 
 Kosher wine 
 Arak 
 Tubi 60 
 Other drinks 
 Mint lemonade 
 Rimonana 
 Sahlab 
 Mint tea 
 Kafe shahor 
 Ayran 
 Israeli restaurants domestically and abroad 
 List of restaurants in Israel 
 Bavel 
 Taïm 
 Zahav 
 
 v t e Jewish cuisine History 
 Ancient Israelite cuisine 
 1902 kosher meat boycott 
 Jewish-American patronage of Chinese restaurants 
 Types 
 American Jewish 
 Ashkenazi 
 Bukharan 
 Ethiopian 
 Israeli 
 Mizrahi 
 Sephardi 
 Syrian Jewish 
 Yemenite 
 Religious dietary laws and related terms 
 Fleishig 
 Kashrut 
 Kitniyot 
 Kosher 
 Kosher airline meal 
 Kosher for Passover 
 Kosher restaurant 
 Kosher-style 
 Mashgiach 
 Milchig 
 Pareve 
 Shechita 
 Treif 
 Chefs 
 Ron Ben-Israel 
 Laura Frankel 
 Ina Garten 
 Gil Marks 
 Joan Nathan 
 Ruth Reichl 
 Eyal Shani 
 Michael Solomonov 
 Yotam Ottolenghi 
 Molly Yeh 
 Religious foods 
 Apples and honey 
 Brisket 
 Challah 
 Charoset 
 Dabo kolo 
 Etrog 
 Hanukkah gelt 
 Maror 
 Matzo 
 Mishloach manot 
 Mouna 
 Pain petri 
 Pekalach 
 Showbread 
 Teiglach 
 Zeroa 
 Ashkenazi breads 
 Babka 
 Challah 
 Onion roll 
 Pletzel 
 Pumpernickel 
 Rye Bread 
 Sephardi and Mizrahi breads 
 Bolo 
 Challah 
 Jachnun 
 Kubaneh 
 Lachooh 
 Laffa 
 Lahmacun 
 Lavash 
 Malawach 
 Manakish 
 Markook 
 Mouna 
 Pain petri 
 Pita 
 Pitot 
 Taboon bread 
 Water challah 
 Ethiopian Jewish breads 
 Injera 
 Bagels and similar breads 
 Bagel 
 Bagel Bites 
 Bagel toast 
 Bagel with cream cheese 
 Bialy 
 Everything bagel 
 Montreal-style bagel 
 New York-style bagel 
 Pizza bagel 
 Pancakes 
 Pesaha Appam 
 Atayef 
 Blintz 
 Chremslach 
 Keftes 
 Keftes de prasa 
 Latke 
 Mofletta 
 Noodle latkes 
 Cakes and other desserts 
 Apple strudel 
 Ashure 
 Atayef 
 Babka 
 Bambalouni 
 Basbousa 
 Bolo 
 Carrot pudding 
 Cheesecake 
 Coffee cake 
 Crumb cake 
 Dobosh 
 Flourless chocolate cake 
 Halva 
 Halvah 
 Halvah ice cream 
 Jewish apple cake 
 Jordan almonds 
 Kogel mogel 
 Krantz cake 
 Krembo 
 Kugelhopf 
 Lekach 
 Linzer torte 
 Lokum 
 Malabi 
 Marzipan 
 Milky 
 Mofletta 
 New York cheesecake 
 Plum cake 
 Poppy seed roll 
 Sesame seed candy 
 Sfinj 
 Sfinz 
 Sponge cake 
 Sufganiyot 
 Strudel 
 Streuselkuchen 
 Cookies 
 Alfajores 
 Biscochos 
 Black and white cookie 
 Chinese cookie 
 Egg kichel 
 Duvshaniot 
 Hamantaschen 
 Honey buttons 
 Jewish almond cookie 
 Jødekager 
 Kichel 
 Kipfel 
 Linzer cookie 
 Ma'amoul 
 Macaroons 
 Mandelbread 
 Rainbow cookie 
 Rugelach 
 Tahini cookie 
 Pastries 
 Baklava 
 Bichak 
 Bourekas 
 Boyoz 
 Chebureki 
 Hojaldre 
 Knish 
 Nunt 
 Pastelitos de hoja 
 Pastilla 
 Pirozhki 
 Rugelach 
 Sambusak 
 Ziva 
 Fried foods 
 Blintz 
 Buñuelo 
 Brik 
 Carciofi alla giudia 
 Churro 
 Corn schnitzel 
 Falafel 
 Fatoot 
 Fatoot samneh 
 Fazuelos 
 Fish and chips 
 Fried cauliflower 
 Fritas de prasa 
 Gribenes 
 Jelly doughnut 
 Keftes 
 Keftes de prasa 
 Kibbeh 
 Ktzitzot Khubeza 
 Latke 
 Matzah brei 
 Noodle latkes 
 Potatonik 
 Sfinj 
 Sufganiyot 
 Teiglach 
 Torrija 
 Tulumba 
 Dumplings, pastas and grain dishes 
 Bsisa 
 Bulgur 
 Couscous 
 Dampfnudel 
 Egg noodles 
 Dolma 
 Farfel 
 Fideos 
 Freekeh 
 Gefilte fish 
 Germknödel 
 Gondi 
 Kasha 
 Kasha varnishkes 
 Kneidlach 
 Kreplach 
 Kibbeh 
 Kubbeh 
 Lokshen kugel 
 Macaroni hamin 
 Manti 
 Matzo ball 
 Orez Shu'it 
 Pelmeni 
 Pierogi 
 Pilaf 
 Ptitim 
 Shirin polo 
 Shlishkes 
 Soup mandels 
 Tabbouleh 
 Tahdig 
 Vareniki 
 Casseroles and savory baked dishes 
 Almadrote 
 Brisket 
 Cholent 
 Hamin 
 Holishkes 
 Jerusalem kugel 
 Karniyarik 
 Kishka 
 Knish 
 Ktzitzot Khubeza 
 Kugel 
 Lokshen kugel 
 Matzo lasagna 
 Pom 
 Potato kugel 
 Potatonik 
 Sólet 
 Stuffed artichoke 
 Stuffed cabbage 
 Stuffed peppers 
 Tagine 
 Yakhna 
 Yapchik 
 Snacks and other baked goods 
 Bamba 
 Bissli 
 Khachapuri 
 Pitzuchim 
 Pretzel 
 Shkedei marak 
 Stuffed dates 
 Sandwiches 
 Corned beef sandwich 
 Hillel sandwich 
 Pastrami on rye 
 Rachel 
 Reuben 
 Sabich 
 Sailor sandwich 
 Shawarma 
 Tuna sandwich 
 Egg dishes 
 Beitzah 
 Fatoot samneh 
 Haminados 
 Hardboiled egg 
 Matzah brei 
 Matzoquiles 
 Shakshouka 
 Meat dishes 
 Brisket 
 Cholent 
 Chopped liver 
 Corned beef 
 Gribenes 
 Gondi 
 Hamin 
 Helzel 
 Hot dog 
 Jerusalem mixed grill 
 Kebab 
 Kibbeh 
 Kishka 
 Kofta 
 Merguez 
 Miltz 
 Montreal smoked meat 
 Pargiyot 
 Pastilla 
 Pastirma 
 Pastrami 
 Plov 
 Sanbat wat 
 Shawarma 
 Skewered goose liver 
 Schmaltz 
 Shish kebab 
 Shish taouk 
 Sujuk 
 Tagine 
 Fish dishes 
 Abudaraho 
 Chraime 
 Dressed herring 
 Fish and chips 
 Gefilte fish 
 Gravlax 
 Herring 
 Ikra 
 Kipper 
 Lakerda 
 Lox 
 Pescado frito 
 Pickled herring 
 Schmaltz herring 
 Smoked salmon 
 Smoked whitefish 
 Tarama 
 Tunafish 
 Tuna salad 
 Tuna salad sandwich 
 Vorschmack 
 Whitefish salad 
 Salads and pickles 
 Apio 
 Eggplant salad 
 Israeli salad 
 Kosher dill pickle 
 Matbucha 
 Pickled cucumber 
 Tabbouleh 
 Torshi 
 Vegetable dishes 
 Bamia 
 Dolma 
 Stuffed cabbage 
 Tzimmes 
 Soups and stews 
 Adom kubbeh 
 Avgolemono 
 Borscht 
 Chamo kubbe 
 Chicken noodle soup 
 Chamin 
 Chamo kubbeh 
 Cholent 
 Ghormeh sabzi 
 Gondi 
 Hamusta kubbeh 
 Matzo ball soup 
 Msoki 
 Poike 
 Sanbat wat 
 Schav 
 Sofrito 
 Tarator 
 Cheeses and other dairy products 
 Akkawi 
 Ayran 
 Clarified butter 
 Cottage cheese 
 Cream cheese 
 Farmer's cheese 
 Feta 
 Kashkaval 
 Kefir 
 Labneh 
 Quark 
 Sirene 
 Smen 
 Smetana 
 Sour cream 
 Strained yogurt 
 Tzfat cheese 
 Condiments, dips and sauces 
 Applesauce 
 Amba 
 Baba ghanoush 
 Charoset 
 Chrain 
 Filfel chuma 
 Harissa 
 Hilbeh 
 Hummus 
 Horseradish 
 Muhammara 
 Mustard 
 Resek avganiyot 
 Spicy brown mustard 
 Tahini 
 Zhoug 
 Beverages 
 Arak 
 Beer 
 Boukha 
 Boza 
 Cel-Ray 
 Dr. Brown's 
 Egg cream 
 Grape juice 
 Kedem 
 Linden flower tea 
 Mint lemonade 
 Manischewitz 
 Mint tea 
 Pomegranate juice 
 Salep 
 Seltzer 
 Tallah 
 Vodka Perfect 
 Wine 
 Herbs, spices and seasonings 
 Anise 
 Baharat 
 Cardamom 
 Cinnamon 
 Consommé 
 Dried onion 
 Everything bagel seasoning 
 Hawaij 
 Montreal steak seasoning 
 Licorice root 
 Nigella seeds 
 Poppy seed 
 Sesame seeds 
 Za'atar 
 Related lists 
 List of foods with religious symbolism 
 List of Jewish cuisine dishes 
 List of kosher restaurants 
 List of restaurants in Israel 
 
   Category 
     Food portal 
   The Israel Portal 
 
 v t e Cuisines Continental 
 African 
 North 
 West 
 list 
 Americas 
 Caribbean 
 North 
 South 
 list 
 Asian 
 Caucasian 
 Central 
 Indian subcontinent 
 Levantine 
 list 
 European 
 Balkan 
 Central 
 Eastern 
 list 
 Oceanic 
 Intercontinental
 Global 
 Latin American 
 Mediterranean 
 Middle Eastern 
 National  and regional 
 Afghan 
 Albanian 
 Algerian 
 American 
 Californian 
 Floribbean 
 Hawaiian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Lowcountry (South Carolina) 
 New England 
 New Mexico 
 Pacific Northwest 
 Pennsylvania Dutch 
 Puerto Rican 
 Southern US 
 Southwest US 
 Texas 
 Angolan 
 Argentine 
 Armenian 
 Australian 
 Austrian 
 Azerbaijani 
 Bahraini 
 Bangladeshi 
 Barbadian 
 Belarusian 
 Belgian 
 Belizean 
 Beninese 
 Bhutanese 
 Bolivian 
 Bosnian-Herzegovinian 
 Botswana 
 Brazilian 
 British 
 Channel Islands 
 English 
 Gibraltarian 
 Northern Irish 
 Saint Helena 
 Scottish 
 Welsh 
 Bruneian 
 Bulgarian 
 Burkinabé 
 Burmese 
 Burundian 
 Cambodian 
 Cameroonian 
 Canadian 
 Acadian 
 Québécois 
 Central African Republic 
 Chadian 
 Chilean 
 Chinese 
 Cantonese 
 Hong Kong 
 Macanese 
 Tibetan 
 Xinjiang 
 Colombian 
 Congolese 
 Corsican 
 Croatian 
 Cuban 
 Cypriot 
 Czech 
 Danish 
 Faroese 
 Greenlandic 
 Djiboutian 
 Dominican 
 Dominican Republic 
 Dutch 
 East Timorese 
 Ecuadorian 
 Egyptian 
 Emirati 
 Equatorial Guinean 
 Eritrean 
 Estonian 
 Ethiopian 
 Fijian 
 Filipino 
 Finnish 
 French 
 Occitan 
 French Guianan 
 Gabonese 
 Gambian 
 Georgian 
 German 
 Ghanaian 
 Greek 
 Cretan 
 Epirotic 
 Greek Macedonian 
 Heptanesean 
 Guatemalan 
 Guinea-Bissauan 
 Guinean 
 Haitian 
 Honduran 
 Hungarian 
 Icelandic 
 Indian 
 Arunachalese 
 Assamese 
 Bengali 
 Bihari 
 Goan 
 Gujarati 
 Himachal Pradesh 
 Kashmiri 
 Jharkhandi 
 Karnataka 
 Kerala 
 Maharashtrian 
 Manipuri 
 Meghalayan 
 Mizo 
 Naga 
 Odia 
 Punjabi 
 Rajasthani 
 Sikkimese 
 Sindhi 
 Tamil 
 Telangana 
 Telugu 
 Indonesian 
 Acehnese 
 Balinese 
 Banjar 
 Batak 
 Betawi 
 Indo 
 Javanese 
 Madurese 
 Makassar 
 Minahasan 
 Minangkabau 
 Palembangese 
 Sundanese 
 Iranian 
 Iraqi 
 Irish 
 Israeli 
 Italian 
 Abruzzese 
 Ligurian 
 Lombard 
 Lucanian 
 Neapolitan 
 Roman 
 Sardinian 
 Sicilian 
 Venetian 
 Ivorian 
 Jamaican 
 Japanese 
 Okinawan 
 Jordanian 
 Kazakh 
 Kenyan 
 Korean 
 North Korean 
 South Korean 
 Kosovan 
 Kuwaiti 
 Kyrgyz 
 Lao 
 Latvian 
 Lebanese 
 Lesotho 
 Liberian 
 Libyan 
 Liechtensteiner 
 Lithuanian 
 Luxembourg 
 Macedonian 
 Malagasy 
 Malawian 
 Malaysian 
 Sabahan 
 Sarawakian 
 Maldivian 
 Malian 
 Maltese 
 Mauritanian 
 Mauritian 
 Mexican 
 Moldovan 
 Monégasque 
 Mongolian 
 Montenegrin 
 Moroccan 
 Mozambican 
 Namibian 
 Nauruan 
 Nepalese 
 New Zealand 
 Nicaraguan 
 Niger 
 Nigerian 
 Niuean 
 Norwegian 
 Omani 
 Pakistani 
 Palestinian 
 Panamanian 
 Peruvian 
 Polish 
 Portuguese 
 Qatari 
 Romanian  (incl.  Transylvanian Saxon ) 
 Russian 
 Bashkir 
 Chechen 
 Circassian 
 Komi 
 Mordovian 
 Sakha 
 Tatar 
 Udmurt 
 Yamal 
 Rwandan 
 Saint Lucian 
 Salvadoran 
 Sammarinese 
 São Tomé and Príncipe 
 Saudi Arabian 
 Senegalese 
 Serbian 
 Seychellois 
 Sierra Leonean 
 Singaporean 
 Slovak 
 Slovenian 
 Somali 
 South African 
 Spanish 
 Andalusian 
 Asturian 
 Balearic 
 Basque 
 Canarian 
 Cantabrian 
 Catalan 
 Extremaduran 
 Galician 
 Manchegan 
 Valencian 
 Sri Lankan 
 Sudanese 
 Swazi 
 Swedish 
 Swiss 
 Syrian 
 Taiwanese 
 Tajik 
 Tanzanian 
 Zanzibari 
 Thai 
 Togolese 
 Tunisian 
 Turkish 
 Turkmen 
 Trinidadian and Tobagonian 
 Ugandan 
 Ukrainian 
 Uruguayan 
 Uzbek 
 Venezuelan 
 Vietnamese 
 Western Saharan 
 Yemeni 
 Zambian 
 Zimbabwean 
 Ethnic 
 Ainu 
 Arab 
 Indonesian 
 Aromanian 
 Assyrian 
 Balochi 
 Berber 
 Cajun 
 Chinese 
 American 
 Canadian 
 Chifa 
 Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Crimean Tatar 
 Greek American 
 Hazaragi 
 Indian 
 Anglo-Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Indigenous American 
 Inuit 
 Italian American 
 Kurdish 
 Livonian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Malay 
 Ossetian 
 Parsi 
 Pashtun 
 Peranakan 
 Romani 
 Sámi 
 Soul food 
 Sylheti 
 Transylvanian Saxon 
 Yup'ik 
 Religious 
 Buddhist 
 Christian 
 Goan Catholic 
 Mangalorean Catholic 
 Mennonite 
 Hindu 
 Islamic 
 Chinese 
 Ital 
 Jain 
 Jewish 
 American 
 Ashkenazi 
 Bukharan 
 Ethiopian 
 Mizrahi 
 Sephardic 
 Syrian 
 Ritual slaughter 
 Sikh 
 Historical 
 Ancient Egyptian 
 Ancient Greek 
 Ancient Israelite 
 Ancient Roman 
 Antebellum America 
 Aztec 
 Byzantine 
 Early modern European 
 Historical Chinese 
 Historical Indian subcontinent 
 Historical North Indian and Pakistani 
 History of agriculture 
 History of alcoholic drinks 
 History of bread 
 History of seafood 
 History of vegetarianism 
 Historical Argentine 
 Historical Japanese 
 Inca 
 Mayan 
 Muisca 
 Mughal 
 Medieval 
 Ottoman 
 Peasant 
 Soviet 
 Thirteen Colonies 
 Styles 
 Classique 
 Fast food 
 Fusion 
 New American 
 Eurasian 
 Haute 
 Molecular gastronomy 
 Note by Note 
 Nouvelle 
 Lists 
 List of cuisines 
 List of historical cuisines 
 Lists of prepared foods 
 Related 
 Cookbook 
 Cooking 
 Culinary arts 
 Drink 
 Food 
 history 
 Diet 
 Meal preparation 
 
   Food portal 
   Drink portal 
   Category 
   Commons 
   Cookbook 
   WikiProject 
   Outline 
 
 Portals :   Food   History   Israel   Judaism 
  
NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw2274
Cached time: 20230311165954
Cache expiry: 1814400
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc, no‐toc‐conversion]
CPU time usage: 1.907 seconds
Real time usage: 2.181 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 8929/1000000
Post‐expand include size: 371568/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2338/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 16/100
Expensive parser function count: 7/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 391041/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.949/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 27015714/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/400
 
 
Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1498.835      1 -total
 43.84%  657.127      1 Template:Reflist
 33.25%  498.316     88 Template:Cite_book
 15.36%  230.203      1 Template:Jews
 15.05%  225.542      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 12.62%  189.225      6 Template:Sidebar
  8.05%  120.614    102 Template:Bibleverse
  6.96%  104.390      3 Template:Transl
  6.40%   95.854      3 Template:Navbox
  4.59%   68.844     11 Template:Cite_journal
 
  Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:idhash:31167189-0!canonical and timestamp 20230311165952 and revision id 1143196103. Rendering was triggered because: page-view
  
 esi <esi:include src="/esitest-fa8a495983347898/content" />  
 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ancient_Israelite_cuisine&oldid=1143196103 " 
 Categories :  Ancient Israel and Judah Historical foods Israeli cuisine Jewish cuisine Hebrew Bible content Ancient dishes Ancient Jewish history Hidden categories:  Pages using the Graph extension CS1 errors: missing periodical CS1 maint: untitled periodical Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from December 2021 Use Oxford spelling from December 2021 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  This page was last edited on 6 March 2023, at 11:39  (UTC) . 
 Text is available under the  Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0 ;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the  Terms of Use  and  Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the  Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. 
 
 
 Privacy policy 
 About Wikipedia 
 Disclaimers 
 Contact Wikipedia 
 Mobile view 
 Developers 
 Statistics 
 Cookie statement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
