
 
 
 Jump to content 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle sidebar 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Create account Log in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Personal tools 
 
 
 
 
   Create account   Log in 
 
 
 
 
		Pages for logged out editors  learn more 
 
 
 Contributions Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Navigation 
 
 
 Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate 
 
 
 
 
 Contribute 
 
 
 Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file 
 
 
 
 
 Tools 
 
 
 What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item 
 
 
 
 
 Print/export 
 
 
 Download as PDF Printable version 
 
 
 
 
 In other projects 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons 
 
 
 
 
 Languages 
 
 On this Wikipedia the language links are at the top of the page across from the article title.  Go to top . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CentralNotice  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Contents 
 move to sidebar 
 hide 
 
 
 
 
 (Top) 
 
 
 
 
 
 1 Archaeology 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 Meals 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 Foods and ingredients 
 
 
				Toggle Foods and ingredients subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 3.1 Breads and grains 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.2 Meat 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.3 Fish and seafood 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.4 Fruit 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.5 Vegetables 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.6 Legumes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.7 Nuts 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.8 Dairy 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.9 Condiments 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4 Cooking 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5 Alcoholic drinks 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6 Desserts 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 7 See also 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8 Notes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 9 References 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 10 Further reading 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 11 External links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
						Toggle the table of contents
					 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle the table of contents 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ancient Roman cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 24 languages 
 
 
 
 Azərbaycanca Català Deutsch Español Euskara Français Հայերեն Italiano Latina Lingua Franca Nova Македонски Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Português Română Русский Shqip Simple English Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 
 Edit links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Article Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 English 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 More 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
 
 
 This article is about the cuisine of the ancient Roman civilization. For the modern Italian cuisine of the city of Rome, see  Roman cuisine . 
 Food preparation styles of the civilization 
   Ancient Rome painting  depicting eggs, birds and bronze dishes found in the Roman  House of Julia Felix 
 The  cuisine  of  ancient Rome  changed greatly over the duration of the civilization's existence. Dietary  habits  were affected by the political changes from  kingdom  to  republic  to  empire , and  Roman trading with foreigners  along with the empire's enormous expansion exposed Romans to many new foods, provincial culinary habits and cooking methods.
 In the beginning, dietary differences between  Roman social classes  were not great, but disparities developed with the empire's growth.
 
 
 Archaeology [ edit ] 
 Most organic foods decay under ordinary conditions, but ashes and animal bones offer some archaeological details about the Ancient Roman diet.  Phytoliths  have been found at a cemetery in  Tarragona, Spain . Imported figs were among the charred foods preserved when  Boudica  and her army burned down a Roman shop in  Colchester .  Chickpeas  and bowls of fruit are known from  Herculaneum , preserved since  Vesuvius  destroyed the town in 79 AD. Remains of small fish bones,  sea urchin  spines and  mineralized plants  have survived in the city's  sewers ; the plants  archaeologists  have identified include  dill ,  coriander ,  flax ,  lentil ,  cabbage ,  opium poppy  and various other  nuts , fruits and  legumes , as well as a diverse variety of fish and shellfish. At  Pompeii , grapes, bread and  pastry  were burned and buried in  peristyle  courtyard gardens as offerings to household  Lares . [1] 
 
 Meals [ edit ] 
 Further information:  Food and dining in the Roman Empire 
 Traditionally, a  breakfast  called  ientaculum [2]  was served at dawn. At mid-day to early afternoon, Romans ate  cena , [2]  the main meal of the day, and at nightfall a light supper called  vesperna . [3]  With the increased importation of foreign foods, the  cena  grew larger in size and included a wider range of foods. Thus, it gradually shifted to the evening, while the  vesperna [3]  was abandoned completely over the course of the years. The mid-day meal  prandium  became a light meal to hold one over until  cena . [2]  Among the lower classes of the Roman society, these changes were less pronounced as the traditional routines corresponded closely to the daily rhythms of manual labour.
 
   Roman spoons with duck or swan handles 
 However, among the upper classes, who normally did not engage in manual labour, it became customary to schedule all business obligations in the morning. After the  prandium , the last responsibilities would be discharged, and a visit would be made to the  baths . Around 2 p.m., [4]  the  cena  would begin. This meal could last until late in the night, especially if guests were invited, and would often be followed by  comissatio , a round of alcoholic beverages (usually  wine ).
 In the period of the kings and the early  Republic , but also in later periods (for the working classes), the  cena  essentially consisted of a kind of  porridge , the  puls . [5]  The simplest kind would be made from  emmer , water, salt and fat. A more sophisticated variation was made with  olive oil , and consumed with an accompaniment of assorted  vegetables  when available. The wealthy commonly ate their  puls  with  eggs ,  cheese , and  honey  and it was also occasionally served with  meat  or  fish .
 Over the course of the Republican period, the  cena  developed into two courses: the main course and a dessert with fruit and seafood (e.g.  molluscs ,  shrimp ). By the end of the Republic, it was usual for the meal to be served in three parts: an appetiser ( gustatio ), main course ( primae mensae ), and dessert ( secundae mensae ).
 The Roman legions' staple ration of food was wheat. In the 4th century, most legionaries ate as well as anyone in Rome. They were supplied with rations of bread and vegetables along with meats such as beef, mutton, or pork. Rations also depended on where the legions were stationed or were campaigning. Mutton was popular in Northern Gaul and Britannia, but pork was the main meat ration of the legions. [6] 
 
 Foods and ingredients [ edit ] 
 The Roman colonies provided many foods to Rome; the city received  ham  from  Belgium , oysters from  Brittany ,  garum  from  Mauretania , wild game from  Tunisia ,  silphium  (laser) from  Cyrenaica , flowers from  Egypt , lettuce from  Cappadocia , and fish from  Pontus . [7] 
 The ancient Roman diet included many items that are staples of  modern Italian cooking .  Pliny the Elder  discussed more than 30 varieties of  olive , 40 kinds of  pear ,  figs  (native and imported from Africa and the eastern provinces), and a wide variety of  vegetables . [a] [9]  Some of these vegetables are no longer present in the modern world, while others have undergone significant changes.  Carrots  of different colours were consumed, but not in orange. [10]  Many kinds of vegetables were cultivated and consumed. [11]  These included celery, garlic, some flower bulbs,  cabbage  and other  brassicas  (such as  kale  and  broccoli ),  lettuce ,  endive ,  onion ,  leek ,  asparagus ,  radishes ,  turnips ,  parsnips ,  carrots ,  beets , green peas, chard, French beans [ citation needed ] ,  cardoons , olives, and  cucumber . [11]  Some vegetables were illustrated in  reliefs . [12] 
 However, some foods considered characteristic of modern Italian cuisine were not used. [13]  In particular,  spinach  and  eggplant  (aubergine) were introduced later from the  Arab world , and  tomatoes ,  potatoes ,  capsicum  peppers, and  maize  (the modern source of  polenta ) [12]  only appeared in Europe following the discovery of the  New World  and the  Columbian Exchange . [13]  The Romans knew of rice, but it was very rarely available to them. There were also few  citrus  fruits. [13]  Lemons were known in Italy from the second century AD but were not widely cultivated. [14] 
 
 Breads and grains [ edit ] 
   Fresco showing a piece of bread and two figs, from Pompeii, Naples National Archaeological Museum.  Bread was a staple food in the Roman world. 
 From 123 BC, a ration of unmilled wheat (as much as 33 kg), known as the  frumentatio , was distributed to as many as 200,000 people every month by the Roman state. [15]  There was originally a charge for this but from 58 BC this charge was abolished by the plebeian tribune  Publius Clodius Pulcher . Individuals had to be citizens and domiciled in Rome to receive the  frumentatio . [15] 
 Originally flat, round loaves made of  emmer  (a  cereal  grain closely related to wheat) with a bit of  salt  were eaten; among the upper classes,  eggs ,  cheese , and  honey , along with  milk  and  fruit  were also consumed. In the  Imperial  period, around 1 AD, bread made of  wheat  was introduced; with time, more and more wheaten foods began to replace emmer loaves. There were many kinds of bread of differing quality. Typically white bread was baked for the elite, with darker bread baked for the middle class, and the darkest bread for the poor peasants. [16]  The bread was sometimes dipped in  wine  and eaten with olives, cheese, and grapes. At the time of  the destruction of Pompeii in AD 79 , there were at least 33 bakeries in that city. [17]  Roman chefs made sweet buns flavored with blackcurrants and cheese cakes made with flour, honey, eggs, ricotta-like cheese and poppy seed. Sweet wine cakes were made with honey, reduced red wine and cinnamon. Fruit tarts were popular with the upper class, but the lower classes couldn't afford to personally make them or purchase them from markets and vendors. [ citation needed ] 
 Juscellum  was a broth with grated bread, eggs, sage and saffron, described in  Apicius , a Roman recipe book of the late 4th or early 5th century. [18] 
 
 Meat [ edit ] 
 Butcher's meat was an uncommon luxury. The most popular meat was  pork , especially  sausages . [19]   Beef  was uncommon in ancient Rome, being more common in  ancient Greece  – it is not mentioned by  Juvenal  or  Horace . [19]   Seafood ,  game , and  poultry , including ducks and geese, were more usual. For instance, on his  triumph , Caesar gave a public feast to 260,000 humiliores (poorer people) which featured all three of these foods, but no butcher's meat. [19]  John E. Stambaugh writes that meat "was scarce except at sacrifices and the dinner parties of the rich". [20]  Cows were prized for their milk; bulls as plough and draft  animals . Meat of working animals was tough and unappetizing. Veal was eaten occasionally. Apicius gives only four recipes for beef but the same recipes call for lamb or pork as options. There is only one recipe for beef stew and another for veal scallopini. [21] 
 Dormice  were eaten and considered a  delicacy . [22]  It was a status symbol among wealthy Romans, and some even had dormice weighed in front of dinner guests. [23]  A  sumptuary law  enacted under  Marcus Aemilius Scaurus  forbade the eating of dormice, but failed to stop the practice. [24] 
 
 Fish and seafood [ edit ] 
 Fish was more common than meat. [20]   Aquaculture  was sophisticated, with large-scale industries devoted to  oyster farming . [20]  The Romans also engaged in  snail farming  and oak grub farming. [20]  Some fish were greatly esteemed and fetched high prices, such as mullet raised in the fishery at  Cosa , and "elaborate means were invented to assure its freshness". [20] 
 
 Fruit [ edit ] 
   A  still life  with fruit basket and vases ( Pompeii , c. AD 70) 
   The  thermopolium  (eatery) of  Pompeii , Italy, 1st century AD. 
 Fruit was eaten fresh when in season, and  dried  or preserved over winter. Popular fruits included  apples ,  pears ,  figs ,  grapes ,  quinces , citron,  strawberries ,  blackberries , elderberries,  currants ,  damson plums , dates,  melons ,  rose hips  and  pomegranates . [20]  Less common fruits were the more exotic  azeroles  and  medlars .  Cherries  and  apricots , both introduced in the 1st century BC, were popular. Peaches were introduced in the 1st century AD from Persia.  Oranges  and  lemons  were known but used more for medicinal purposes than in cookery. [20]  Although known to the ancient Romans, lemons were not cultivated in Italy until the  Principate . [20] [25]  At least 35  cultivars  of pear were grown in Rome, along with three types of apples. Cato described pear culture methods similar to modern techniques. [26]  There are recipes for pear and peach creams and milk puddings flavored with honey, pepper and a little  garum .
 Columella  offers advice on the preservation of figs by crushing them into a paste with anise, fennel seed, cumin and toasted sesame to be wrapped in fig leaves. [27] 
 
 Vegetables [ edit ] 
 While the precursors of  Brussels sprouts ,  artichokes ,  peas ,  rutabaga , and possibly  cauliflower  probably existed in Roman times, the modern cultivated forms we think of were not developed until the late Middle Ages and early Renaissance times. Cabbage was eaten both raw (sometimes dipped in vinegar) and cooked. [12]   Cato  greatly esteemed cabbage, believing it to be good for the digestion, and also believed that if a sick person ate a great deal of cabbage and bathed in his own  urine , he would recover. [28] 
 
 Legumes [ edit ] 
 Legumes  were limited to  dried peas ,  fava beans (broad beans) ,  chickpeas ,  lentils , and  lupins . The Romans knew several varieties of  chickpea , such as venus, ram, and punic. They were either cooked down into a broth or roasted as a snack. The Roman cookbook  Apicius  gives several recipes for chickpeas. [29] 
 
 Nuts [ edit ] 
 The ancient Romans ate  walnuts ,  almonds ,  pistachios ,  chestnuts ,  hazelnuts (filberts) ,  pine nuts , and  sesame  seeds, which they sometimes pulverized to thicken spiced, sweet wine sauces for roast meat and fowl to serve on the side or over the meat as a glaze. Nuts were also used in savoury pesto-like sauces for cold cuts. Nuts were used in pastries, tarts and puddings sweetened with honey.
 
 Dairy [ edit ] 
   A re-creation of  moretum , a herb and cheese spread eaten with bread 
 Cheese  was eaten and its manufacture was well-established by the Roman Empire period. [30]  It was part of the standard rations for Roman soldiers and was popular among civilians as well. The Emperor  Diocletian  (284–305 CE) fixed  maximum prices  for cheese. [30]  The manufacture of cheese and its quality and culinary uses are mentioned by a number of Roman authors:  Pliny the Elder  described cheese's dietary and medicinal uses in Book 28 of  Historia Naturalis , and  Varro  in  De Agricultura  described the Roman cheesemaking season (spring and summer) and compared soft, new cheeses with drier, aged cheeses. The most extensive description of Roman cheese-making comes from  Columella , from his treatise on  Roman agriculture ,  De Re Rustica . [31] 
 
 Condiments [ edit ] 
 Garum  was the distinctive fish sauce of ancient Rome. [32]  It was used as a  seasoning , in place of salt; as a table  condiment ; and as a  sauce . There were four major fish sauce types:  garum ,  liquamen ,  muria , and  allec . [32]  It was made in different qualities, from fish such as  tuna ,  mullet , and  sea bass . [32]  It could be flavoured, for example mixed with wine, or diluted with water ( hydrogarum ), a form popular among Roman soldiers, although the emperor  Elagabalus  asserted that he was the first to serve it at public  banquets  in Rome. [32]  The most costly garum was  garum sociorum , made from  mackerel  ( scomber ) at the  New Carthage  fisheries in Spain, and widely traded. [32]  Pliny wrote in his  Natural History  that two  congii  (7 litres) of this sauce cost 1,000  sesterces . [33]  One thousand sesterces in the Early Empire was equal to 110 g of gold. [ citation needed ] 
 
 Cooking [ edit ] 
   A boy holding a platter of fruits and what may be a bucket of crabs, in a kitchen with fish and  squid , on the June panel from a mosaic depicting the months (3rd century) [34] 
 One of many modes of cooking in ancient Rome was the  focus , a  hearth  that was placed in front of the  lararium , the household altar which contained small sculptures of the  household deity  (the  lares , or guardian ancestor-spirits, and the  penates , who were believed to protect the  floor , the larder). [35]  In homes where the  lararium  was built into the wall, the  focus  was sometimes built of raised brick into four sides, constructed against a  baseboard  on which a fire was lit. More common was a  focus  that was rectangular and portable, consisting simply of a moveable hearth with stone or  bronze  feet. [36]  After the development of separate kitchens, the  focus  began to be used only for religious offerings and for warmth, rather than for cooking. [36] 
 Portable stoves and ovens were used by the Romans, and some had water pots and  grills  laid onto them. At  Pompeii , most houses had separate kitchens, most fairly small, but a few large; the  Villa of the Mysteries  covers a nine-by-twelve meter area. [37]  A number of kitchens at Pompeii had no roofs, resembling  courtyards  more than ordinary rooms; this allowed smoke to ventilate. [37]  Kitchens that did have roofs must have been extremely smokey, since the only ventilation would come from high windows or holes in the ceiling; while the Romans built  chimneys  for their bakeries and smithies, they were unknown in private dwellings until about the 12th century A.D, well after the collapse of Roman civilization. [38] [39] 
 Many Roman kitchens had an oven ( furnus  or  fornax ), and some (such as the kitchen of the Villa of the Mysteries) had two. [40]  A square or dome-shaped construction of brick or stone, these ovens had a flat floor, often of  granite  and sometimes  lava , which were filled with dry twigs and then lit. [40]  On the walls of kitchens were hooks and chains for hanging cooking equipment, including various pots and pans,  knives , meat  forks ,  sieves ,  graters ,  spits ,  tongs ,  cheese-slicers ,  nutcrackers ,  jugs  for measuring, and  pâté  moulds. [40] 
 
 Alcoholic drinks [ edit ] 
 See also:  Ancient Rome and wine 
   Roman fresco with a banquet scene from the Casa dei Casti Amanti,  Pompeii 
 In Ancient Rome, wine  was normally mixed with water immediately before drinking, since the fermentation was not controlled and the  alcohol proof  was high. Wine was sometimes adjusted and "improved" by its makers: instructions survive for making  white wine  from  red  and vice versa, as well as for rescuing wine that is turning to  vinegar . [41]  Those instructions as well as detailed descriptions of Roman viticulture date back to 160 BC in the first known text written in Latin prose. [42] 
 Wine was also variously flavored. For example, there was  passum , a strong and sweet raisin wine, for which the earliest known recipe is of  Carthaginian  origin;  mulsum , a freshly made mixture of wine and honey (called a pyment today); and  conditum , a mixture of wine, honey and spices made in advance and matured. One specific recipe,  Conditum Paradoxum , is for a mixture of wine, honey,  pepper ,  laurel ,  dates ,  mastic , and  saffron , cooked and stored for later use. Another recipe called for the addition of seawater,  pitch  and  rosin  to the wine. A Greek traveler reported that the beverage was apparently an acquired taste. [41]  Sour wine mixed with water and herbs ( posca ) was a popular drink for the lower classes and a staple part of the Roman soldier's ration. [43] 
 Beer  ( cerevisia ) was known but considered vulgar, and was associated with  barbarians . [44] [45] 
 
 Desserts [ edit ] 
 While lacking necessary ingredients commonly used in the modern era for sweets such as refined  sugar  or properly churned  butter , ancient Rome had an abundance of desserts to serve after they had completed their meals served with  wine . [41]  The most renowned were large platters of various fruits picked fresh; some of the more exotic fruits that were not able to grow in Rome were even shipped in from distant continents for the wealthy. Due to the lack of a  sweetener  such as sugar there was always a desire for the sweetest fruits that were available. Sprias were a type of sweet pastry that were readily available during this time; that were always made with a thin, cake-like crust, and sometimes contained fruit. Enkythoi is another common type of  Roman  pastry that was softer, like a modern  sponge cake .
 
 See also [ edit ] 
 
 Food portal History portal 
 Ancient Greek cuisine 
 Byzantine cuisine , Eastern Roman Empire 
 Italian cuisine 
 List of ancient dishes 
 Spice use in Antiquity 
 Notes [ edit ] 
 
 
 ^   Jacques André listed 54 cultivated and 43 wild vegetables in ancient Rome. [8] 
 
 
 References [ edit ] 
 
 
 ^   Wilkins, John.  A Companion to Food in the Ancient World . Wiley Blackwell. pp. 105–109. 
 
 ^  a   b   c   Artman, John:"Ancient Rome- Independent Learning Unit", page 26, Good Apple, 1991. 
 
 ^  a   b   Artman, John::"Ancient Rome- Independent Learning Unit", page 26, Good Apple,1991. 
 
 ^   Guy, John:"Roman Life", page 8, Ticktock Publishing LTD,1998. 
 
 ^   Greg Woolf (2007).  Ancient civilizations: the illustrated guide to belief, mythology, and art . Barnes & Noble. p. 388.  ISBN   978-1-4351-0121-0 . 
 
 ^   Giacosa, Ilaria Gozzini (1992).  A taste of Ancient Rome . chicago: University of Chicago. 
 
 ^   Patrick Faas,  Around the Roman Table: Food and Feasting in Ancient Rome , University of Chicago Press (2005), p. 27. 
 
 ^   André, Jacques.  L'alimentation et la cuisine à Rome . Paris: Les Belles Lettres, 1981. 
 
 ^   Phyllis Pray Bober,  Art, Culture, and Cuisine: Ancient and Medieval Gastronomy , University of Chicago Press (2001), pp. 187–188. 
 
 ^   Phyllis Pray Bober,  Art, Culture, and Cuisine: Ancient and Medieval Gastronomy , University of Chicago Press (2001), p. 188. 
 
 ^  a   b   Patrick Faas,  Around the Roman Table: Food and Feasting in Ancient Rome , University of Chicago Press (2005), p. 209. 
 
 ^  a   b   c   Patrick Faas,  Around the Roman Table: Food and Feasting in Ancient Rome , University of Chicago Press (2005), pp. 209, 210–239, 362–371 
 
 ^  a   b   c   Phyllis Pray Bober,  Art, Culture, and Cuisine: Ancient and Medieval Gastronomy , University of Chicago Press (2001), p. 187. 
 
 ^   Julia F. Morton,  Lemon in Fruits of Warm Climates , 1987 pp. 160–168|url= http://www.hort.purdue.edu/newcrop/morton/lemon.html#Description%7Cpublisher=Purdue  University} 
 
 ^  a   b   Garnsey, Peter (1998).  Scheidel, Walter (ed.).  Cities, Peasants and Food in Classical Antiquity: Essays in Social and Economic History . Cambridge University Press. pp. 237–238.  doi : 10.1017/cbo9780511585395 .  ISBN   9780521591478 . 
 
 ^   Feldman, Charles (2005-03-01). "Roman Taste".  Food, Culture & Society .  8  (1): 7–30.  doi : 10.2752/155280105778055407 .  ISSN   1552-8014 .  S2CID   218839911 . 
 
 ^   Berry, Joanne (17 February 2011).  "Bakery" .  Pompeii Art and Architecture Gallery .  BBC . Retrieved  23 September  2016 . 
 
 ^   Way, A. (1843).  Promptorium parvulorum sive clericorum, lexicon Anglo-Latinum princeps, recens. A. Way . Camden Society. p. 268 . Retrieved  May 18,  2016 . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   Maguelonne Toussaint-Samat,  A History of Food , John Wiley & Sons (2009), p. 93. 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   e   f   g   h   John E. Stambaugh,  The Ancient Roman City , JHU Press (1988), p. 148. 
 
 ^   Ilaria Gozzini Giacosa, A Taste of Rome, 1992, pp. 91–92,  ISBN   0-226-29032-8 
 
 ^   John E. Stambaugh,  The Ancient Roman City , JHU Press (1988), p. 148; George A. Feldhamer,  Mammalogy: Adaptation, Diversity, Ecology , JHU Press (2007), p. 359. 
 
 ^   Maurice Burton & Robert Burton,  International Wildlife Encyclopedia  (2002), p. 701. 
 
 ^   Patrick Faas,  Around the Roman Table: Food and Feasting in Ancient Rome , University of Chicago Press (2005), p. 289-90. 
 
 ^   Wilhelmina F. Jashernski, Frederick G. Meyer, & Massumino Ricciardi,  Plants: Evidence from Wall Paintings, Mosaics, Sculpture, Plant Remains, Graffiti, Inscriptions, and Ancient Authors , in  The Natural History of Pompeii  (Wilhelmina Feemster Jashemski & Frederick G. Meyer, eds), Cambridge University Press, (2002), p. 102. 
 
 ^   J.F. Hancock & G.A. Lobos,  Pears , in  The Future of Drylands: International Scientific Conference on Desertification and Drylands Research, Tunis, Tunisia  (2006), Springer (2008), p. 304. 
 
 ^   Shephard, Sue (2000).  Pickled, Potted, and Canned: How the Art and Science of Food Preserving Changed the World . Simon & Schuster. p. 41. 
 
 ^   Patrick Faas,  Around the Roman Table: Food and Feasting in Ancient Rome , University of Chicago Press (2005), p. 233. 
 
 ^   Wikipedia entry for chickpea 
 
 ^  a   b   P.F. Fox and P.L.H. McSweeney, Cheese: An Overview, in Cheese: Chemistry, Physics, and Microbiology Vol. 1 (3d ed.), p. 2-3. 
 
 ^   P.F. Fox and P.L.H. McSweeney, Cheese: An Overview, in Cheese: Chemistry, Physics, and Microbiology Vol. 1 (3d ed.), p. 2-3 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   e   Harlan Walker,  Fish: Food from the Waters, Proceedings of the Oxford Symposium on Food and Cookery , 105-06 (1998). 
 
 ^   Harlan Walker,  Fish: Food from the Waters, Proceedings of the Oxford Symposium on Food and Cookery , 106 (1998). 
 
 ^   J. Carson Webster,  The Labors of the Months in Antique and Mediaeval Art to the End of the Twelfth Century,  Studies in the Humanities 4 (Northwestern University Press, 1938), p. 128. In the collections of the  Hermitage Museum . 
 
 ^   Faas, p. 50-52. 
 
 ^  a   b   Faas, p. 52. 
 
 ^  a   b   Faas, p. 130. 
 
 ^   Faas, p. 140. 
 
 ^   James Burke ,  Connections  (Little, Brown and Co.) 1978/1995,  ISBN   0-316-11672-6 , p. 159 
 
 ^  a   b   c   Faas, p. 132. 
 
 ^  a   b   c   Erdoes, Richard (1981),  1000 Remarkable Facts about Booze , New York: The Rutledge Press, p.  88 ,  ISBN   978-0831709587 
 
 ^   Stilo, Aelius.  "Wine and Rome" . University of Chicago . Retrieved  11 December  2014 . 
 
 ^   Dalby, Andrew (2003).  Posca .  Food in the Ancient World from A to Z . Routledge. p. 270.  ISBN   978-0-415-23259-3 . 
 
 ^   Stambaugh, John E. (1988),  The Ancient Roman City , Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, p. 149,  ISBN   978-0801835742 
 
 ^   Bonfante, Larissa (2011),  The Barbarians of Ancient Europe: Realities and Interactions , New York: Cambridge University Press, p. 23,  ISBN   9780521194044 
 
 
 Further reading [ edit ] 
 Gold, Barbara K.; Donahue, John F. (2005).  Roman Dining: A Special Issue of American Journal of Philology . JHU Press.  ISBN   978-0-8018-8202-9 . 
 Faas, Patrick; Whiteside, Shaun (2005).  Around the Roman Table: Food and Feasting in Ancient Rome . University of Chicago Press.  ISBN   978-0-226-23347-5 . 
 Dalby, Andrew  (2003).  Food in the ancient world from A to Z . London, New York: Routledge.  ISBN   978-0-415-23259-3 . 
 Dalby, Andrew (2000).  Empire of Pleasures . London, New York: Routledge.  ISBN   978-0-415-18624-7 . 
 Grocock, Christopher; Grainger, Sally (2006).  Apicius. A critical edition with an introduction and an English translation . Totnes: Prospect Books.  ISBN   978-1-903018-13-2 .  [includes Vinidarius] 
 Ricotti, Eugenia Salza Prina (1995).  Dining as a Roman emperor: how to cook ancient Roman recipes today . Rome: L'Erma di Bretschneider. 
 Villegas Becerril, Almudena (2001).  Culinary Aspects of Ancient Rome. Ars Cibaria . Newcastle upon Tyne: Cambridge Scholars Publishing. 
 External links [ edit ] 
 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons has media related to  Food in ancient Rome . 
 
 Pass the Garum:  Recreations of Roman recipes 
 Eight recipes  for an ancient Roman dinner 
 resourcesforhistory.com: Food in Roman Britain 
 v t e Ancient Rome  topics 
 Outline 
 Timeline 
 History 
 Foundation 
 Kingdom 
 overthrow 
 Republic 
 Empire 
 History 
 Pax Romana 
 Principate 
 Dominate 
 Western Empire 
 fall 
 historiography of the fall 
 Byzantine Empire 
 decline 
 fall 
 Later Roman Empire 
 History 
 Constitution 
 History 
 Kingdom 
 Republic 
 Empire 
 Late Empire 
 Senate 
 Legislative assemblies 
 Curiate 
 Centuriate 
 Tribal 
 Plebeian 
 Executive magistrates 
 SPQR 
 Law 
 Twelve Tables 
 Mos maiorum 
 Citizenship 
 Auctoritas 
 Imperium 
 Status 
 Litigation 
 Government 
 Curia 
 Forum 
 Cursus honorum 
 Collegiality 
 Emperor 
 Legatus 
 Dux 
 Officium 
 Praefectus 
 Vicarius 
 Vigintisexviri 
 Lictor 
 Magister militum 
 Imperator 
 Princeps senatus 
 Pontifex maximus 
 Augustus 
 Caesar 
 Tetrarch 
 Optimates and populares 
 Province 
 Magistrates Ordinary 
 Consul 
 Censor 
 Praetor 
 Tribune 
 Tribune of the plebs 
 Military tribune 
 Quaestor 
 Aedile 
 Promagistrate 
 Governor 
 Extraordinary 
 Rex 
 Interrex 
 Dictator 
 Magister equitum 
 Decemviri 
 Consular tribune 
 Triumvir 
 Military 
 History 
 Borders 
 Establishment 
 Structure 
 Campaigns 
 Political control 
 Strategy 
 Engineering 
 Frontiers and fortifications 
 castra 
 Technology 
 Army 
 Legion 
 Infantry tactics 
 Personal equipment 
 Siege engines 
 Navy 
 Auxiliaries 
 Decorations and punishments 
 Hippika gymnasia 
 Economy 
 Agriculture 
 Deforestation 
 Commerce 
 Finance 
 Currency 
 Republican currency 
 Imperial currency 
 Culture 
 Architecture 
 Art 
 Bathing 
 Calendar 
 Clothing 
 Cosmetics 
 Cuisine 
 Education 
 Folklore 
 Hairstyles 
 Literature 
 Music 
 Mythology 
 Religion 
 Deities 
 Romanization 
 Romans 
 Sexuality 
 Theatre 
 Toys and games 
 Wine 
 Society 
 Patricians 
 Plebs 
 Conflict of the Orders 
 Secessio plebis 
 Equites 
 Gens 
 Tribes 
 Assembly 
 Naming conventions 
 Demography 
 Women 
 Marriage 
 Adoption 
 Slavery 
 Bagaudae 
 Technology 
 Amphitheatres 
 Aqueducts 
 Bridges 
 Circuses 
 Civil engineering 
 Concrete 
 Domes 
 Metallurgy 
 Numerals 
 Roads 
 Temples 
 Theatres 
 Sanitation 
 Thermae 
 Latin 
 History 
 Alphabet 
 Versions
 Old 
 Classical 
 Vulgar 
 Late 
 Medieval 
 Renaissance 
 New 
 Contemporary 
 Ecclesiastical 
 Romance languages 
 Writers Latin 
 Aelius Donatus 
 Ammianus Marcellinus 
 Appuleius 
 Asconius Pedianus 
 Augustine 
 Aurelius Victor 
 Ausonius 
 Boëthius 
 Caesar 
 Catullus 
 Cassiodorus 
 Censorinus 
 Cicero 
 Claudian 
 Columella 
 Cornelius Nepos 
 Ennius 
 Eutropius 
 Fabius Pictor 
 Sextus Pompeius Festus 
 Rufus Festus 
 Florus 
 Frontinus 
 Fronto 
 Fulgentius 
 Gellius 
 Horace 
 Hydatius 
 Hyginus 
 Jerome 
 Jordanes 
 Julius Paulus 
 Justin 
 Juvenal 
 Lactantius 
 Livy 
 Lucan 
 Lucretius 
 Macrobius 
 Marcellus Empiricus 
 Marcus Aurelius 
 Manilius 
 Martial 
 Nicolaus Damascenus 
 Nonius Marcellus 
 Obsequens 
 Orosius 
 Ovid 
 Petronius 
 Phaedrus 
 Plautus 
 Pliny the Elder 
 Pliny the Younger 
 Pomponius Mela 
 Priscian 
 Propertius 
 Quadrigarius 
 Quintilian 
 Quintus Curtius Rufus 
 Sallust 
 Seneca the Elder 
 Seneca the Younger 
 Servius 
 Sidonius Apollinaris 
 Silius Italicus 
 Statius 
 Suetonius 
 Symmachus 
 Tacitus 
 Terence 
 Tertullian 
 Tibullus 
 Valerius Antias 
 Valerius Maximus 
 Varro 
 Velleius Paterculus 
 Verrius Flaccus 
 Vergil 
 Vitruvius 
 Greek 
 Aelian 
 Aëtius of Amida 
 Appian 
 Arrian 
 Cassius Dio 
 Diodorus Siculus 
 Diogenes Laërtius 
 Dionysius of Halicarnassus 
 Dioscorides 
 Eusebius of Caesaria 
 Galen 
 Herodian 
 Josephus 
 Julian 
 Libanius 
 Lucian 
 Pausanias 
 Philostratus 
 Phlegon of Tralles 
 Photius 
 Plutarch 
 Polyaenus 
 Polybius 
 Porphyrius 
 Priscus 
 Procopius 
 Simplicius of Cilicia 
 Sozomen 
 Stephanus Byzantinus 
 Strabo 
 Themistius 
 Theodoret 
 Zonaras 
 Zosimus 
 Major cities 
 Alexandria 
 Antioch 
 Aquileia 
 Berytus 
 Bononia 
 Carthage 
 Constantinopolis 
 Eboracum 
 Leptis Magna 
 Londinium 
 Lugdunum 
 Lutetia 
 Mediolanum 
 Pompeii 
 Ravenna 
 Roma 
 Smyrna 
 Vindobona 
 Volubilis 
 Lists  and other topics 
 Cities and towns 
 Climate 
 Consuls 
 Dictators 
 Distinguished women 
 Dynasties 
 Emperors 
 Empresses 
 Generals 
 Gentes 
 Geographers 
 Institutions 
 Laws 
 Legacy 
 Legions 
 Magistri equitum 
 Nomina 
 Pontifices maximi 
 Praetors 
 Quaestors 
 Tribunes 
 Roman–Iranian relations 
 Wars and battles 
 Civil wars and revolts 
 Fiction 
 Films 
 
 v t e Cuisines Continental 
 African 
 North 
 West 
 list 
 Americas 
 Caribbean 
 North 
 South 
 list 
 Asian 
 Caucasian 
 Central 
 Indian subcontinent 
 Levantine 
 list 
 European 
 Balkan 
 Central 
 Eastern 
 list 
 Oceanic 
 Intercontinental
 Global 
 Latin American 
 Mediterranean 
 Middle Eastern 
 National  and regional 
 Afghan 
 Albanian 
 Algerian 
 American 
 Californian 
 Floribbean 
 Hawaiian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Lowcountry (South Carolina) 
 New England 
 New Mexico 
 Pacific Northwest 
 Pennsylvania Dutch 
 Puerto Rican 
 Southern US 
 Southwest US 
 Texas 
 Angolan 
 Argentine 
 Armenian 
 Australian 
 Austrian 
 Azerbaijani 
 Bahraini 
 Bangladeshi 
 Barbadian 
 Belarusian 
 Belgian 
 Belizean 
 Beninese 
 Bhutanese 
 Bolivian 
 Bosnian-Herzegovinian 
 Botswana 
 Brazilian 
 British 
 Channel Islands 
 English 
 Gibraltarian 
 Northern Irish 
 Saint Helena 
 Scottish 
 Welsh 
 Bruneian 
 Bulgarian 
 Burkinabé 
 Burmese 
 Burundian 
 Cambodian 
 Cameroonian 
 Canadian 
 Acadian 
 Québécois 
 Central African Republic 
 Chadian 
 Chilean 
 Chinese 
 Cantonese 
 Hong Kong 
 Macanese 
 Tibetan 
 Xinjiang 
 Colombian 
 Congolese 
 Corsican 
 Croatian 
 Cuban 
 Cypriot 
 Czech 
 Danish 
 Faroese 
 Greenlandic 
 Djiboutian 
 Dominican 
 Dominican Republic 
 Dutch 
 East Timorese 
 Ecuadorian 
 Egyptian 
 Emirati 
 Equatorial Guinean 
 Eritrean 
 Estonian 
 Ethiopian 
 Fijian 
 Filipino 
 Finnish 
 French 
 Occitan 
 French Guianan 
 Gabonese 
 Gambian 
 Georgian 
 German 
 Ghanaian 
 Greek 
 Cretan 
 Epirotic 
 Greek Macedonian 
 Heptanesean 
 Guatemalan 
 Guinea-Bissauan 
 Guinean 
 Haitian 
 Honduran 
 Hungarian 
 Icelandic 
 Indian 
 Arunachalese 
 Assamese 
 Bengali 
 Bihari 
 Goan 
 Gujarati 
 Himachal Pradesh 
 Kashmiri 
 Jharkhandi 
 Karnataka 
 Kerala 
 Maharashtrian 
 Manipuri 
 Meghalayan 
 Mizo 
 Naga 
 Odia 
 Punjabi 
 Rajasthani 
 Sikkimese 
 Sindhi 
 Tamil 
 Telangana 
 Telugu 
 Indonesian 
 Acehnese 
 Balinese 
 Banjar 
 Batak 
 Betawi 
 Indo 
 Javanese 
 Madurese 
 Makassar 
 Minahasan 
 Minangkabau 
 Palembangese 
 Sundanese 
 Iranian 
 Iraqi 
 Irish 
 Israeli 
 Italian 
 Abruzzese 
 Ligurian 
 Lombard 
 Lucanian 
 Neapolitan 
 Roman 
 Sardinian 
 Sicilian 
 Venetian 
 Ivorian 
 Jamaican 
 Japanese 
 Okinawan 
 Jordanian 
 Kazakh 
 Kenyan 
 Korean 
 North Korean 
 South Korean 
 Kosovan 
 Kuwaiti 
 Kyrgyz 
 Lao 
 Latvian 
 Lebanese 
 Lesotho 
 Liberian 
 Libyan 
 Liechtensteiner 
 Lithuanian 
 Luxembourg 
 Macedonian 
 Malagasy 
 Malawian 
 Malaysian 
 Sabahan 
 Sarawakian 
 Maldivian 
 Malian 
 Maltese 
 Mauritanian 
 Mauritian 
 Mexican 
 Moldovan 
 Monégasque 
 Mongolian 
 Montenegrin 
 Moroccan 
 Mozambican 
 Namibian 
 Nauruan 
 Nepalese 
 New Zealand 
 Nicaraguan 
 Niger 
 Nigerian 
 Niuean 
 Norwegian 
 Omani 
 Pakistani 
 Palestinian 
 Panamanian 
 Peruvian 
 Polish 
 Portuguese 
 Qatari 
 Romanian  (incl.  Transylvanian Saxon ) 
 Russian 
 Bashkir 
 Chechen 
 Circassian 
 Komi 
 Mordovian 
 Sakha 
 Tatar 
 Udmurt 
 Yamal 
 Rwandan 
 Saint Lucian 
 Salvadoran 
 Sammarinese 
 São Tomé and Príncipe 
 Saudi Arabian 
 Senegalese 
 Serbian 
 Seychellois 
 Sierra Leonean 
 Singaporean 
 Slovak 
 Slovenian 
 Somali 
 South African 
 Spanish 
 Andalusian 
 Asturian 
 Balearic 
 Basque 
 Canarian 
 Cantabrian 
 Catalan 
 Extremaduran 
 Galician 
 Manchegan 
 Valencian 
 Sri Lankan 
 Sudanese 
 Swazi 
 Swedish 
 Swiss 
 Syrian 
 Taiwanese 
 Tajik 
 Tanzanian 
 Zanzibari 
 Thai 
 Togolese 
 Tunisian 
 Turkish 
 Turkmen 
 Trinidadian and Tobagonian 
 Ugandan 
 Ukrainian 
 Uruguayan 
 Uzbek 
 Venezuelan 
 Vietnamese 
 Western Saharan 
 Yemeni 
 Zambian 
 Zimbabwean 
 Ethnic 
 Ainu 
 Arab 
 Indonesian 
 Aromanian 
 Assyrian 
 Balochi 
 Berber 
 Cajun 
 Chinese 
 American 
 Canadian 
 Chifa 
 Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Crimean Tatar 
 Greek American 
 Hazaragi 
 Indian 
 Anglo-Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Indigenous American 
 Inuit 
 Italian American 
 Kurdish 
 Livonian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Malay 
 Ossetian 
 Parsi 
 Pashtun 
 Peranakan 
 Romani 
 Sámi 
 Soul food 
 Sylheti 
 Transylvanian Saxon 
 Yup'ik 
 Religious 
 Buddhist 
 Christian 
 Goan Catholic 
 Mangalorean Catholic 
 Mennonite 
 Hindu 
 Islamic 
 Chinese 
 Ital 
 Jain 
 Jewish 
 American 
 Ashkenazi 
 Bukharan 
 Ethiopian 
 Mizrahi 
 Sephardic 
 Syrian 
 Ritual slaughter 
 Sikh 
 Historical 
 Ancient Egyptian 
 Ancient Greek 
 Ancient Israelite 
 Ancient Roman 
 Antebellum America 
 Aztec 
 Byzantine 
 Early modern European 
 Historical Chinese 
 Historical Indian subcontinent 
 Historical North Indian and Pakistani 
 History of agriculture 
 History of alcoholic drinks 
 History of bread 
 History of seafood 
 History of vegetarianism 
 Historical Argentine 
 Historical Japanese 
 Inca 
 Mayan 
 Muisca 
 Mughal 
 Medieval 
 Ottoman 
 Peasant 
 Soviet 
 Thirteen Colonies 
 Styles 
 Classique 
 Fast food 
 Fusion 
 New American 
 Eurasian 
 Haute 
 Molecular gastronomy 
 Note by Note 
 Nouvelle 
 Lists 
 List of cuisines 
 List of historical cuisines 
 Lists of prepared foods 
 Related 
 Cookbook 
 Cooking 
 Culinary arts 
 Drink 
 Food 
 history 
 Diet 
 Meal preparation 
 
   Food portal 
   Drink portal 
   Category 
   Commons 
   Cookbook 
   WikiProject 
   Outline 
 
 Authority control : National libraries  
 Israel 
 United States 
 
  
NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw2375
Cached time: 20230311123513
Cache expiry: 1814400
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc, no‐toc‐conversion]
CPU time usage: 0.709 seconds
Real time usage: 1.692 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3340/1000000
Post‐expand include size: 160639/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 3458/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 16/100
Expensive parser function count: 10/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 92583/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.310/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 8682862/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/400
 
 
Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  567.911      1 -total
 28.65%  162.688      2 Template:Reflist
 20.85%  118.394     14 Template:Cite_book
 19.06%  108.232      5 Template:Navbox
 13.92%   79.066      1 Template:Ancient_Rome_topics
  9.30%   52.794      1 Template:About
  8.55%   48.553      3 Template:Citation_needed
  7.55%   42.892      1 Template:Commons_category
  7.20%   40.893      1 Template:Sister_project
  6.98%   39.654      3 Template:Fix
 
  Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:idhash:214980-0!canonical and timestamp 20230311123512 and revision id 1143084041. Rendering was triggered because: page-view
  
 esi <esi:include src="/esitest-fa8a495983347898/content" />  
 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ancient_Roman_cuisine&oldid=1143084041 " 
 Categories :  Cuisine by culture Roman cuisine Historical foods Ancient dishes Society of ancient Rome Hidden categories:  Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2020 Articles with unsourced statements from April 2021 Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with J9U identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  This page was last edited on 5 March 2023, at 21:15  (UTC) . 
 Text is available under the  Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0 ;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the  Terms of Use  and  Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the  Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. 
 
 
 Privacy policy 
 About Wikipedia 
 Disclaimers 
 Contact Wikipedia 
 Mobile view 
 Developers 
 Statistics 
 Cookie statement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
