
 
 
 Jump to content 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle sidebar 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Create account Log in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Personal tools 
 
 
 
 
   Create account   Log in 
 
 
 
 
		Pages for logged out editors  learn more 
 
 
 Contributions Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Navigation 
 
 
 Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate 
 
 
 
 
 Contribute 
 
 
 Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file 
 
 
 
 
 Tools 
 
 
 What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item 
 
 
 
 
 Print/export 
 
 
 Download as PDF Printable version 
 
 
 
 
 In other projects 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons 
 
 
 
 
 Languages 
 
 On this Wikipedia the language links are at the top of the page across from the article title.  Go to top . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CentralNotice  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Contents 
 move to sidebar 
 hide 
 
 
 
 
 (Top) 
 
 
 
 
 
 1 Medieval cuisine 
 
 
				Toggle Medieval cuisine subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 1.1 Breads 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.2 Sauces 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.3 Sweets 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.4 Vegetables 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 Diet and foods 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 Structure of meals 
 
 
				Toggle Structure of meals subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 3.1 Year-round 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.1.1 Breakfast 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.1.2 Lunch 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.1.3 Dinner 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.2 Ramadan 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.2.1 Iftar 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.2.2 Suhur 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.3 Sweets 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4 Arab hospitality 
 
 
				Toggle Arab hospitality subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 4.1 Khaleej 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.1.1 Coffee ceremony 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.1.2 Guests dinner 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.2 Maghreb 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.2.1 Tea/coffee ceremony 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.2.2 Dinner guests 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.3 Levantine 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.3.1 Coffee/tea ceremony 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.3.2 Dinner guests 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.4 Regional differences 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5 Regional Arab cuisines 
 
 
				Toggle Regional Arab cuisines subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 5.1 Arabian Peninsula 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5.2 Mashriq 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5.3 Bedouin cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5.4 Levant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5.5 Iraq/Mesopotamia 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5.6 Egypt 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5.7 Africa 
 
 
 
 
 
 5.7.1 Sudan 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5.7.2 Maghreb 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6 Gallery 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 7 See also 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8 References 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 9 External links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
						Toggle the table of contents
					 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle the table of contents 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Arab cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 35 languages 
 
 
 
 العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Български Català Čeština Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Jawa ქართული Kurdî Македонски მარგალური مصرى Bahasa Melayu Nederlands Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پنجابی Polski Português Română Русский Suomi Türkçe Українська اردو 
 Edit links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Article Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 English 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 More 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
 
 
 Cuisine of Arab people 
 This article  needs additional citations for  verification .  Please help  improve this article  by  adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources:   "Arab cuisine"  –  news   ·   newspapers   ·   books   ·   scholar   ·   JSTOR   ( March 2021 )  ( Learn how and when to remove this template message ) 
 Part of a series on Arab cuisine 
 Regional cuisines 
 Eastern Arabian 
 Bahraini 
 Emirati 
 Kuwaiti 
 Omani 
 Qatari 
 Saudi Arabian 
 Yemeni 
 Maghrebi 
 Algerian 
 Libyan 
 Mauritanian 
 Moroccan 
 Tunisian 
 Western Saharan 
 Levant/Mashriq 
 Iraqi 
 Jordanian 
 Lebanese 
 Palestinian 
 Syrian 
 Mizrahi 
 Nile Valley 
 Egyptian 
 Sudanese 
 Horn of Africa 
 Djiboutian 
 Somali 
 Indian Ocean 
 Comorian 
 Overseas 
 Arab Brazilian 
 Arab Indonesian 
 
 Ingredients 
 Vegetables 
 Bean 
 Bell pepper 
 Cabbage 
 Chickpea 
 Cowpea 
 Eggplant 
 Lentil 
 Pomegranate 
 Spinach 
 Split pea 
 Tomato 
 Herbs & spices 
 Barberry 
 Black pepper 
 Cayenne pepper 
 Chestnut 
 Cinnamon 
 Cumin 
 Garlic 
 Hawaij 
 Hazelnut 
 Leek 
 Mint 
 Nut 
 Onion 
 Oregano 
 Paprika 
 Parsley 
 Pistachio 
 Saffron 
 Sahawiq 
 Walnut 
 
 Breads 
 Bataw 
 Bazin 
 Bint al-sahn 
 Eish merahrah 
 Fatoot 
 Khmer 
 Khobz 
 Khubz tannur 
 Lahoh 
 Malooga 
 Markook 
 Mulawah 
 M'semen 
 Pita 
 
 Beverages 
 Arabic coffee 
 Arabic tea 
 Arak 
 Araqi 
 Ayran 
 Date honey 
 Hibiscus tea 
 Jallab 
 Naqe'e Al Zabib 
 Qishr 
 Salep 
 Shahi haleeb 
 Sharbat 
 
 Salads 
 List of Arab salads 
 Arab 
 Baba ghanoush 
 Blunkett 
 Fattoush 
 Ful medames 
 Hummus 
 Malfouf 
 Masmouta 
 Matbukha 
 Mechouia 
 Palestinian 
 Raheb 
 Rubiyan 
 Sweet potato 
 Tabbouleh 
 Tzatziki 
 Ummak huriyya 
 Wheat salad 
 Zaalouk 
 
 Cheeses 
 Akkawi 
 Areesh 
 Caravane 
 Domiati 
 Egyptian 
 Halloumi 
 Jameed 
 Jibneh Arabieh 
 Laban rayeb 
 Labneh 
 Libba 
 Mish 
 Nabulsi 
 Rumi 
 Shanklish 
 Syrian 
 Testouri 
 Yemeni 
 
 Dishes 
 Balila 
 Batata harra 
 Kabsa 
 Mahmous 
 Mandi 
 Mansaf 
 Quzi 
 
 Appetizers 
 Hilbah 
 Shafoot 
 
 Holidays and festivals 
 Islamic New Year 
 Ramadan 
 Eid al-Fitr 
 Eid al-Adha 
 Sham el-Nessim 
 Mawlid 
 Christmas 
 
 
   Food portal v t e 
   Couscous  is prevalent in the  Magreb  (west), while  rice  is prevalent in the  Mashreq  (east) 
 Arab cuisine  ( Arabic :  المطبخ العربي ) is the cuisine of the  Arabs , defined as the various  regional cuisines  spanning the  Arab world , from the  Maghreb  to the  Fertile Crescent  and the  Arabian Peninsula . [1]  These cuisines are centuries old and reflect the culture of trading in  baharat  ( spices ), herbs, and foods. The regions have many similarities, but also unique traditions. They have also been influenced by climate, cultivation, and mutual commerce.
 
 
 Medieval cuisine [ edit ] 
 Breads [ edit ] 
 The  white bread   barazidhaj  was made with high-quality wheat flour, similar to  raqaq  bread but thicker, the  fermented  dough was leavened usually with yeast and "baker's  borax " ( buraq ) and baked in a  tandoor . One poetic verse describing this bread: [2] 
 
 
 "In the farthest end of Karkh of  Baghdad , a baker I saw offering bread, wondrous fair. 
From purest essence of wheat contrived. Radiant and absolute, you may see your image reflected, crystal clear. 
 Barazij  rounds glowing with lovely whiteness, more playful than gorgeous singing girls, 
They look like crystal trays, and were they indeed so, they would have served us as plates.
 
 
 Raqaq  bread was made in two varieties,  labiq  (soft, thin flatbreads) and  jarmazaj  (dry, thin bread flavored with  tamarisk  seeds).
 
 Sauces [ edit ] 
 Numerous recipes for sauces ( sibagh ) have survived from historic  Arabic cookbooks . The 10th-century  Kitab al-Tabikh  written by  Ibn Sayyar al-Warraq  gives several recipes to be served with roasted fish, attributed to the various sources.
 To  Ibrahim ibn al-Mahdi  are credited two  sibagh  recipes, one prepared by adding  rue ,  caraway , thyme,  asafetida  and  cassia  to the mustard sauce, and another made by mashing vinegar-soaked raisins with garlic, walnut, mustard, vinegar, and seasonings like  asafetida  and  anise .
 From the seventh  Abbasid  caliph  Al-Ma'mun 's recipe collection comes a  sibagh  made with  whey , walnut, garlic, olive oil and  murri .
 There are similar recipes meant for poultry dishes prepared with seasonings like ginger, pomegranate,  spikenard , and cloves.
 A surviving poem about  sibagh  is attributed to Caliph  Al-Mu'tamid : [3] 
 
 
 The concept of  sibagh  is so subtle that none but the wise its depths may sound. 
Walnut and garlic with yogurt whey are the most you may need for it. 
Or make it with vinegar,  mahrut , and coriander. But with  anjudhan  it will be even better. 
If not, then mustard and garlic mixed with  anjudhan  and onion, equal parts, will make your relish. 
Or with just vinegar and onion eat your fish and it will still be a tasty dish.
 
 
 Sweets [ edit ] 
 Described as the "food of kings" and "supreme judge of all sweets",  lauzinaj  was an almond-based  confection  that had entered  medieval European cuisine  by the 13th-century from  Andalusian  influence, returning  Crusaders  and Latin translations of cookery books. There are two versions of the dish known from medieval texts: [4] 
 
 Lauzinaj mugharraq  or "drenched  lauzinaj ", this dish is believed to be an earlier version of the  Ottoman  dish  baklava . It was made by filling thin pastry dough with a mixture of ground almond (and sometimes other nuts like  pistachio  or  walnut ),  rose water , and sometimes luxury flavorings like  mastic ,  ambergris , or  musk . 
 Lauzinaj yabis  was made with ground almonds cooked in boiling honey or sugar until reaching a  taffy -like consistency. The raw version, closer to  marzipan  in consistency, was made by blending the almonds with sugar and flavoring with  camphor , musk, and rose water. The finished confection was molded into animal or other shapes, or cut into squares and triangles. 
 Vegetables [ edit ] 
 Vegetables include  leeks ,  endive ,  melilot ,  fenugreek , onions,  purslane ,  Jew's mallow  and  radish. [5]  Boiled  asparagus  is served with  olive oil  and  murri . The cooking water may be sweetened with  honey  and seasoned with  cilantro ,  rue ,  anise  and  black pepper , and used as a beverage either by itself with honey, or added to wine. [6] 
 Some vegetables are consumed raw, but the following are usually boiled: asparagus,  cauliflower ,  white soy beans ,  leeks ,  orach , a variety of mushroom known as  ghushina [ clarification needed ] ,  chard ,  cabbage ,  carrot ,  turnip , fresh  fennel  and  eggplant . [7] 
 Some vegetable dishes are served cold. One example of such a dish is eggplant with fried onion, fresh herbs and olive oil dressed with fermented sauces, vinegar and caraway. There are several cold eggplant dishes that are similar, some made with smoked eggplant, adding nuts like ground walnuts or almonds, and sometimes different seasonings like  saffron ,  cassia , and  galangal .
 A dish for fried carrots with fresh herbs, dressing and spices was described by the poet Kushajim: [8] [9] 
 
 
 Dinars of carnelian and gold in a vessel so delicate, it may almost melt and flow. 
All radiating with luster like carnelian shimmering on pearls. 
In the vessel harmoniously combined, here together and there disperse. 
The spices emitting fragrance like wine mingled with sweet breeze. 
On top are pearls and silver decked with gems, 
Which the cook delicately fashioned, a gorgeous dish with flavor and perfume. 
The scattered rue is flowers of turquoise gems, vibrantly green, 
Jiggling with murri and olive oil, ebbing and flowing with sheen.
 
 
 Diet and foods [ edit ] 
   An Arab  appetizer 
   Arab salads :  Arab salad ,  fattoush ,  matbucha ,   tabbouleh  and  raheb 
 Arab cuisine uses specific and unique foods and spices. Some of those foods are:
 
 Meat — lamb  and  chicken  are the most used, followed by  beef  and  goat . Other  poultry  is used in some regions, and  fish  is used in coastal areas including the  Mediterranean Sea ,  Atlantic Ocean  and the  Red Sea . Some  Christian Arabs  eat  pork . [10] 
 Dairy products —widely used, especially  yogurt ,  buttermilk  and white cheese.  Butter  and  cream  are also used extensively. 
 Herbs  and  spices —amounts and types used generally varies from region to region. 
   
 Herbs and spices include:  sesame ,  saffron ,  black pepper ,  allspice ,  turmeric ,  garlic ,  cumin ,  cinnamon ,  parsley ,  coriander  and  sumac . 
   
 Spice mixtures include  baharat ,   ras el hanout ,  za'atar , and  harissa . 
 Beverages —hot beverages are served more often than cold,  coffee  being at the top of the list in Middle-Eastern countries and tea at top in Maghreb countries. 
   
 In  Jordan ,  Palestine ,  Egypt , some parts of  Syria ,  Morocco , and  Algeria , tea is much more prevalent as a beverage. Other Arabic drinks include Andalucian  horchata  and Maghrebi avocado smoothie. 
 Grains — rice  is the staple and is used for most dishes;  wheat  is the main source for  bread .  Bulgur  and  semolina  are also used extensively. 
   
 According to historic recipes known from  Arabic cookbooks , grains were primarily used to make  porridge  and  pasta  type dishes in Arab cuisine until the 12th century. Two types of pasta were known:  itriya , a short dry noodle of Greek origin similar to  orzo , and  rishta , a hand-cut fresh noodle of Persian origin. 
   
 By the 13th century, the  Turkic  style  tutmaj  and  salma  noodles had entered the cuisine. [11] 
 Legumes — lentils  are widely used in all colours, as well as  fava beans ,  peanuts ,  chickpeas  (garbanzo beans),  scarlet runner beans ,  green peas ,  lupini beans ,  white beans , and  brown beans . 
 Vegetables —popular vegetables in Arab cuisine include  carrots ,  eggplant  (aubergine),  zucchini  (courgette),  artichokes ,  okra ,  onions , and  olives .  Potatoes  are also eaten as vegetables in Arab culture. 
 Fruits — pomegranate ,  dates ,  figs ,  oranges ,  citruses ,  watermelons ,  cantaloupe ,  honeydew melon ,  grapes ,  peaches, and nectarines  are favored in Arab cuisine. 
 Nuts — almonds ,  pine nuts ,  pistachios , and  walnuts  are often included in dishes or eaten as snacks. 
 Greens — parsley ,  coriander  and  mint  are popular as seasonings in many dishes, while  spinach  and  mulukhiyah  (leaves from the plant of the  Corchorus  genus) are used in cooked dishes. 
 Dressings and sauces—the most popular dressings include various combinations of  olive oil ,  lemon juice ,  parsley , or  garlic , as well as  tahini  (sesame paste).  Labaneh  (strained yogurt) is often seasoned with mint, onion, or garlic, and served as a sauce with various dishes. 
 Structure of meals [ edit ] 
 There are two basic structures for meals in the  Arab World , one regular schedule during most of the year and a second one that is unique to the month of  Ramadan  in which observant Muslims fast during the day.
 
 Year-round [ edit ] 
 Breakfast [ edit ] 
 Cafés  often serve  croissants  for breakfast. Breakfast is often a quick meal, consisting of bread and dairy products, with tea and sometimes  jam . The most common breakfast items are  labneh  and  cream  ( kishta , made of  cow's milk ).
 
 Lunch [ edit ] 
   A selection of Jordanian  mezze —appetizers or small dishes—in  Petra ,  Jordan 
 Lunch is considered the main meal of the day, and is traditionally eaten between 1:30 pm and 2:30 pm. It is the meal for which the family comes together. Rarely do meals have different courses; however,  salads  and  mezze  are served as side dishes to the main meal.
 The platter usually consists of a portion of meat, poultry or fish, a portion of rice, lentils, bread and a portion of cooked vegetables, in addition to the fresh ones with the  mezze  and salad.
 The vegetables and meat are usually cooked together in a sauce (often  tomato , although others are also popular) to make  maraqa , which is served with rice. Most households add bread.
 
   Maraqa laga sameeyo khudaarta  (Somali: "vegetable soup") 
 Drinks are not necessarily served with the food; however, there is a very wide variety of drinks such as  shineena  (or  laban ),  karakaden ,  Naqe'e Al Zabib ,  Irq Soos ,  Tamr Hindi , and  fruit juice , as well as other traditional Arabic drinks.
 During the 20th century,  carbonated soda  and fruit-based drinks have also become very popular.
 
 Dinner [ edit ] 
 Dinner is traditionally the lightest meal, although in modern times, dinner has become more important with regards to entertaining guests due to the hours of the workday.
 
 Ramadan [ edit ] 
 Iftar [ edit ] 
 Iftar  (also called  Futuur ), or  fast-breaking , is the meal taken at  dusk  when the fast is over. The meal consists of three courses: first, diners eat a  date  due to  Islamic  tradition.
 This is followed by a soup or anything they would like, the most popular being  lentil soup , but a wide variety of soups such as  chicken ,  oats ,  freeka  (a soup made from  whole wheat  and  chicken broth ), potato,  maash , and others are also offered.
 
   Freekeh  with roasted vegetables 
 The third course is the main dish, usually eaten after an interval, when Maghreb prayer is conducted. The main dish is mostly similar to what is served in lunch year-round, except that cold drinks are served.
 
 Suhur [ edit ] 
 Suhur  is the meal eaten just before  dawn , when  fasting  must begin. It is eaten to help the person make it through the day with enough energy until  dusk .
 
 Sweets [ edit ] 
   Kanafeh   Nabulsieh  from Nablus 
 In addition to the two meals eaten during  Ramadan  (one for dinner and one for Suhur before dawn), sweets are consumed much more than usual during the month of Ramadan; sweets and fresh fruits are served between these two meals. Although most sweets are made all year-round such as  kanafeh , baklava, and  basbousa , some are made especially for Ramadan, such as  qatayef . [12] 
 
 Arab hospitality [ edit ] 
 Main articles:  Arabic coffee  and  Arabic tea 
 This section  needs additional citations for  verification .  Please help  improve this article  by  adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.   ( July 2020 )  ( Learn how and when to remove this template message ) 
   Coffeehouse in Cairo, 18th century 
 Essential to any cooking in the  Arab world  is the concept of hospitality and generosity. Meals are generally large family affairs, with much sharing and a great deal of warmth over the dinner table. Formal dinners and celebrations generally involve large quantities of  lamb , and every occasion entails large quantities of  Arabic coffee  or  Arabic tea .
 
   The different types of Arabic coffee with  Hejazi / Najdi  golden coffee seen on the left and the  Levantine  black  qahwah sādah  (plain coffee) on the right 
 Khaleej [ edit ] 
 Coffee ceremony [ edit ] 
 In the  Khaleej al-Arab  region, a visitor is greeted by a great table of  dried fruits , fresh fruits, nuts and cakes with syrup. Dried fruits include figs, dates,  apricots  and  plums . Fresh fruits include citruses, melons and pomegranate. Arabic coffee is most favored, but Arabic tea is also a great refresher. Spices are often added to the coffee and other drinks.
 
   Dried fruits 
 Guests dinner [ edit ] 
 In the Khaleej al-Arab region, a guest should expect a dinner consisting of a very large platter, shared commonly, with a large amount of spiced rice, with spicy lamb, chicken, or both, as separate dishes, with various stewed vegetables, heavily spiced, sometimes with a  tomato-based sauce .
 Different types of bread are served with toppings specific to the region. Tea would certainly accompany the meal, as it is almost constantly consumed. Coffee would also be served.
 
   Dallahs  for serving Arabic coffee 
 Maghreb [ edit ] 
 Tea/coffee ceremony [ edit ] 
 In the  Maghreb  region, a visitor will find a table full of bread-like snacks, including  m’semen ,  baghrir , and other stuffed breads. These are served with honey,  rosewater  or olive oil.
 
   M'semen , usually served with honey, mint tea or coffee, can also be stuffed with meat 
 There are also many different cookies and cakes included accompanied by plates with different kinds of nuts. Mint tea is often served with it in a traditional Maghrebian teapot.
 
 Dinner guests [ edit ] 
 In the Maghreb region, a guest may find a table with different kinds of  stews , called  marqas  or  tajines . Dishes such as  couscous  and other  semolina-based foods  are also to be found.
 These main dishes are accompanied by smaller  mezze -like plates with salads, sauces and dips. Breads such as  m'semen ,  khobz  and  baguette  are used to eat the stews.
 
   Tajine  with lamb and mango 
 Levantine [ edit ] 
 Coffee/tea ceremony [ edit ] 
 In an average Arab Levantine household, a visitor might expect a table full of  mezzes , breads topped with spices including  za'atar  and nuts. In the  Levant ,  Arabic coffee  is a much-loved beverage, but  Arabic tea  is also much enjoyed in Jordan and Palestine.
 
 Dinner guests [ edit ] 
 In the Levant, a guest will find a table with different kinds of  mezzes , nuts, dips and oils.  Mezzes  include  hummus ,  baba ghanoush ,  falafel ,  kibbeh ,  kafta , smoked vegetables and  tabouli  salads. The nuts can differ from almonds to walnuts, with different spice coatings. The dips and oils include hummus and olive oil.
 
   Hummus with chickpeas, sesame seeds, and oil 
 Regional differences [ edit ] 
 There are many regional differences in the Arab cuisine. For instance,  mujadara  in Syria and Lebanon is different from  mujadara  in  Jordan  and  Palestine . Some dishes, such as  mansaf  (the national dish of Jordan), are native to certain countries and rarely, if ever, make an appearance in other countries. 
 
   Traditional  mansaf  served on flatbread 
 Unlike most Western recipes,  cinnamon  is used in meat dishes, as well as in sweets such as  baklava . Dishes such as  tajine  and  couscous  can differ from Morocco to Libya, each having their own unique preparation. Other dishes, such as the Andalucian-Moorish  bastilla  and  albondigas  have different traditional spice mixes and fillings.
 
   Bastilla , Moroccan meat pie 
 Many Arabic food words are borrowed from  Aramaic , the language spoken by the Christian Nabataean inhabitants of Iraq and Syria. [11] 
 
 Regional Arab cuisines [ edit ] 
 Arabian Peninsula [ edit ] 
 See also:  Bahraini cuisine ,  Emirati cuisine ,  Kuwaiti cuisine ,  Omani cuisine ,  Qatari cuisine ,  Saudi Arabian cuisine , and  Yemeni cuisine 
   Camel meat  is popular in the Arabian Peninsula 
   Dates  are a  staple  in Arabian cuisine. 
   Kabsa 
 Eastern Arabian  cuisine today is the result of a combination of diverse influences, incorporating  Levantine  and  Yemeni  cuisines. [13] 
 Bukhari rice ( رز بخاري ) ( Ruz al Bukhari ) is a very popular dish eaten in the  Hejaz  district of Saudi Arabia. It is made with spicy tomato sauce, flavoured chicken and a fresh salad.
 
   Kabsa  is also known as  machbūs 
 Kabsa  ( كبسة‎ ) or  makbūs  ( مكبوس‎ ) is a traditional  mixed rice  originating from Saudi Arabia. It is made of rice (typically  basmati ), meat, vegetables, and a mixture of spices. Spices used in  kabsa  are generally  black pepper ,  cloves ,  cardamom ,  saffron ,  cinnamon ,  dried lime  (also known as black lime),  bay leaves  and  nutmeg . [14]  The meats used are usually  chicken ,  goat ,  lamb ,  camel ,  beef ,  fish  or  shrimp .  Kabsa  is popular in countries around the  Persian Gulf  and the  Khuzestan Province of Iran . [ citation needed ] 
 The cuisine of  Yemen  is in some ways distinct from other Arab cuisines. As in most Arab countries, chicken, goat, and lamb are eaten more often than beef, and fish is eaten mostly in coastal areas.
 However, cheese, butter, and other dairy products are less common, especially in the cities and other urban areas. As with other Arab cuisines, the most widespread beverages are tea and coffee; tea is usually flavored with  cardamom ,  clove , or  mint , and coffee with cardamom.  Karakaden ,  Naqe'e Al Zabib , and  diba'a  are the most widespread cold beverages.
 Although each region has their own variation,  saltah  ( سلتة ) is considered the national dish of Yemen. The base is a brown meat is called  maraq  ( مرق ), a dollop of  fenugreek  froth, and  sahawiq  ( سحاوق ) or  sahowqa  (a mixture of chili peppers, tomatoes, garlic, and herbs ground into a salsa.) 
 
   Bowl of  saltah 
 Rice, potatoes, scrambled eggs, and vegetables are common additions to  saltah . It is eaten with flat bread known as  mulawah , which serves as a utensil to scoop up the food.
 Other dishes widely known in Yemen include  aseed ,  fahsa ,  thareed ,  samak mafi ,  mandi ,  fattah ,  shakshouka ,  shafut ,  bint al-sahn ,  kabsa ,  jachnun ,  harees  and  Hyderabadi  haleem . [15] [16] [17] 
 
   Luqmat al-qadi 
 Mashriq [ edit ] 
   Typical popular traditional Arab meal 
 Levantine cuisine is the traditional cuisine of the  Fertile Crescent . Although now divided into  Syria ,  Lebanon ,  Jordan ,  Iraq ,  Egypt , and  Palestine , the region has historically been more united, and shares many culinary traditions. Although very similar, there is some variation within the Levantine area.
 Dishes include olive oil,  za'atar , and garlic, and common dishes include a wide array of  mezze  or bread dips, stuffings, and side dishes such as  hummus ,  falafel ,  ful ,  tabouleh ,  labaneh , and  baba ghanoush .
 
   Tabbouleh 
 It also includes copious amounts of garlic and olive oil, often seasoned with lemon juice—almost no meal goes by without including these ingredients. Most often foods are either grilled, baked, fried, or sautéed in olive oil; butter and cream are rarely used, other than in a few desserts.
 Vegetables are often eaten raw or pickled, as well as cooked. While the cuisine does not boast a multitude of sauces, it focuses on herbs, spices, and the freshness of ingredients.
 
 Bedouin cuisine [ edit ] 
 The  Bedouins  of the  Arabian Peninsula ,  Middle East  and  North Africa  rely on a diet of  dates ,  dried fruit , nuts, wheat, barley, rice, and meat. The meat comes from large animals such as cows, sheep, and lambs. They also eat dairy products: milk, cheese, yoghurt, and buttermilk ( labneh ).
 Bedouins also use many different dried beans including white beans, lentils, and chickpeas. Vegetables that are commonly used are those that could be dried, such as pumpkins, but also vegetables that are more heat-resistant, such as aubergines.
 They drink a lot of fresh  verbena  tea,  Arabic tea ,  Maghrebi mint tea , or  Arabic coffee . A daily break to freshen up with drinks is a much-loved tradition.
 Common breads in the Maghreb are  khobz  and  khaleej . Traditional dishes such as  marqa  and  tajines  ( stews ) are also regularly prepared.
 Breakfast consists of baked beans, bread, nuts, dried fruits, milk, yoghurt, and cheese with tea or coffee. Snacks also include nuts and dried fruits.
 
 Levant [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Levantine cuisine 
 See also:  Lebanese cuisine ,  Syrian cuisine ,  Jordanian cuisine , and  Palestinian cuisine 
   Maqluba , a rice and  eggplant  or  cauliflower   casserole , often with lamb 
   Sfiha  comes from  Baalbek , flatbread with a minced meat topping, often lamb 
   Musakhan , a Palestinian dish—chicken with onions, spices and pine nuts on  taboon  bread 
   Mujaddara 
   Mansaf , traditional lamb dish in yogurt sauce, served with rice or  bulgur 
 In  Palestine  and  Jordan , the population has a cooking style of their own, involved in roasting various meats, baking  flatbreads , and cooking thick yogurt-like pastes from goat's milk.
 Musakhan  is a common main dish, famous in northern  Jordan , the city of  Jerusalem , and northern West Bank. The main component is  taboon  bread , which is topped with pieces of cooked  sweet onions ,  sumac ,  saffron , and  allspice . For large dinners, it can be topped by one or two roasted chickens on a single large  taboon  bread.
 The primary cheese of the Palestinian  mezze  is  Ackawi cheese , which is a semi-hard cheese with a mild, salty taste and sparsely filled with roasted sesame seeds. It is primarily used in  kenafah .
 Maqluba  is another popular meal in Jordan and central Palestine.  Mujaddara , another food of the West Bank, as well as in the Levant in general, consists of cooked green lentils, with  bulghur  sauteed in olive oil.
 Mansaf  is a traditional meal, and the national dish of Jordan, having roots in the Bedouin population of the country. It is mostly cooked on special occasions such as  Ramadan ,  Eid ul-Fitr , a birth, or a large dinner gathering.
 
   A variant of  mansaf  in Amman, Jordan 
 Mansaf  is a leg of lamb or large pieces of mutton, on top of a  markook  bread that has been topped with yellow rice. A type of thick dried yogurt made from goat's milk, called  jameed , is poured on top of the lamb and rice to give it its distinct flavor and taste. The dish is garnished with cooked pine nuts and almonds.
 Levantine cuisine is also famous for its wide range of cheeses, including  shanklish ,  halloumi , and  arisheh .
 Kishk  is a famous Syrian soup, alongside many soups made of lentils. Lebanese food also has a wide range of dips including  hummus ,  baba ganoush , and  labneh , and offers many raw-meat dishes.
 Syrian food can be either extremely vegetarian or a meat lover's paradise. Lemon,  oregano ,  za'atar , paprika, and various other Mediterranean spices and herbs are used in Syrian cuisine.
 Levantine cuisine  also incorporates wines made in Lebanon, Syria, Jordan and Palestine and the Levantine equivalent of the Greek  ouzo , known as  arak . 
 
 Iraq/Mesopotamia [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Iraqi cuisine 
 Iraq  is home to the first cookbook ever recorded in history, historically in  Baghdad  and  Mesopotamia . The  Kitab al-tabikh  is the oldest surviving Arabic cookbook, written by  al-Warraq  in the 10th century. It is compiled from the recipes of the 8th and 9th century courts of the  Abbasid Caliphate  in Baghdad. Due to its location, Iraq shares similarities in cooking and cuisines between both the surrounding regions of the  Arab world  as well as  Turkish  and  Persian  cuisine.  Iraqi cuisine  mainly consists of meat, rather than appetizers. In Iraqi cuisine, the most common meats are chicken and lamb. The national dish of Iraq is the  Masgouf  fish, usually enjoyed with grilled tomatoes and onions.
Iraqi cuisine uses more spices than most Arab cuisines. Iraq's main food crops include wheat, barley, rice, vegetables, and  dates . Vegetables include  eggplant ,  okra , potatoes, and tomatoes. Pulses such as chickpeas and lentils are also quite common. Common meats in Iraqi cuisine are lamb and beef; fish and poultry are also used.
 Soups and stews are often prepared and served with rice and vegetables.  Biryani , although influenced by  Indian cuisine , is milder with a different mixture of spices, and a wider variety of vegetables, including potatoes, peas, carrots, and onions.  Dolma  is also one of the most popular dishes.
 The Iraqi cuisine is famous for its extremely tender  kebab , as well as its  tikka . A wide variety of spices, pickles, and  amba  are also extensively used.
 
 Egypt [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Egyptian cuisine 
   Kushari , an Egyptian dish. 
   Falafel , deep-fried balls of ground chickpeas or fava beans, is a common dish in  Egypt [18]  and the  Levant . 
 Egypt has a very rich cuisine with many unique customs. These customs also vary within Egypt itself, for example, in the coastal areas, like the coast of the  Mediterranean Sea  and Canal, the diet relies heavily on fish. In the more rural areas, reliance on farm products is much heavier. Duck, geese, chicken, and river fish are the main animal protein sources. While Egyptians eat a lot of meat, Egyptian cuisine is rich in  vegetarian  dishes; three national dishes of Egypt;  ful medames ,  ta'miya  (also known in other countries as  falafel ), and  kushari , are generally vegetarian. Fruits are also greatly appreciated in Egypt:  mangos ,  grapes ,  bananas ,  apples , sycamore,  guavas , and  peaches  are very popular, especially because they are all domestically produced and are available at relatively low prices. A famous dessert from Egypt is called  om ali , which is similar to a bread and butter pudding made traditionally with puff pastry, milk and nuts. It is served all across the Middle East and is also made on special occasions such as Eid. [19]  Bread is a staple in Egypt; the most common breads are  eish baladi .
 
 Africa [ edit ] 
 Sudan [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Sudanese cuisine 
   Shahan ful  presented alongside  olive oil ,  berbere , various vegetables, and a roll of bread 
 In comparison to its  Maghreb  and  Levantine  neighbors, the cuisine of  Sudan  tends to be generous with spices. Sudanese cuisine has a rich variety in ingredients and creativity. Simple everyday vegetables are used to create stews and  omelettes  that are healthy yet nutritious, and full of energy and flair. These stews are called  mullah . One could have a zucchini  mullah , spinach ( riglah )  mullah , etc. Popular dishes include  ful medames ,  shahan ful ,  hummus ,  bamya  (a stew made from ground, sun-dried okra), and  gurasa  (pancake), as well as different types of salads and sweets.
 
 Maghreb [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Maghreb cuisine 
 See also:  Libyan cuisine ,  Algerian cuisine ,  Moroccan cuisine ,  Tunisian cuisine , and  Mauritanian cuisine 
   Couscous , a characteristic dish of the  Maghreb , is made of  steamed  balls of crushed  durum wheat   semolina  about 3 millimetres (0.12 in) across [20]  traditionally served with  stew  spooned on top. 
 Maghreb cuisine is the cooking of the  Maghreb  region, the northwesternmost part of the  Arab world  along the  Mediterranean Sea , consisting of the countries of  Algeria ,  Libya ,  Morocco ,  Tunisia , and  Mauritania . In Maghrebi cuisine, the most common  staple foods  are  wheat  (for  khobz  bread [21]  and  couscous [22] ), [23]  fish, seafood, goat, [24]  lamb, [24]  beef, [24]   dates ,  almonds ,  olives  and various vegetables and fruits. [25] 
 Moroccan cuisine has long been considered one of the most diverse in the world. This is because Morocco has interacted extensively with the outside world for centuries. Over the centuries, chefs in Moroccan cuisine in  Fes ,  Meknes ,  Marrakech ,  Rabat  and  Tetouan  have been the basis for what is known as Moroccan cuisine today. Moroccan cuisine also ranked first in the Arab world and Africa, and second in the world in 2012 after France.
 
   Tajine  is a  Maghrebi  dish which is named after the  earthenware  pot in which it is cooked. It is also called  maraq  or  marqa . 
 Tunisian cuisine  is the style of cooking used by the  Tunisian people  and is part of the Maghreb and  Mediterranean cuisine .  Assa  on mush [ clarification needed ] , spices,  olive oil ,  chili red pepper ,  kodaid ,  wheat flour , lamb,  garlic , fish and many other vegetables and spices are common. Tunisian cuisine offers what is known as a "solar kitchen" that relies heavily on olive oil, spices, tomatoes, fish species, and meat. Bread is an essential ingredient in Tunisian cuisine, as it accompanies almost all dishes and is usually used by dipping for broth.
 Libyan  cuisine derives much from the traditions of  Maghreb  and  Mediterranean  cuisines. One of the most popular Libyan dishes is  bazin , an  unleavened bread  prepared with  barley , water and salt. [26]   Bazin  is prepared by boiling  barley flour  in water and then beating it to create a dough using a  magraf , which is a unique stick designed for this purpose. [27]   Pork  consumption is forbidden, in accordance with  Sharia , the religious laws of  Islam . [28]   Tripoli  is Libya's capital, and the cuisine is particularly influenced by  Italian cuisine . [28]  Pasta is common, and many seafood dishes are available. [28]  Southern Libyan cuisine is more traditionally Arab and  Berber . Common fruits and vegetables include  figs ,  dates ,  oranges ,  apricots  and  olives . [28] 
 
   Rechta  is a  Maghrebi  dish of fine noodles, consumed particularly in  Algeria  and  Libya  and to a lesser extent in Tunisia and Morocco. 
 Libyan cooking, like Tunisian, includes hot spices. Typical foods are  bazin  (Libyan bread),  bsisa ,  couscous ,  harissa ,  hassaa ,  lebrak ( filled  grape leaves  with rice and minced meat), Libyan  boureek , Libyan summer salad,  marqa  or  tajine ,  madrouba , and  mbatten .  Mbekbka  is a unique Libyan soup with pasta or spaghetti—rather than draining off the water, pasta is boiled together with the sauce. It can be made with any type of pasta, and the simplest dish involves frying onions in oil, throwing in the tomato puree, chili powder, turmeric, then adding water and salt and leaving to boil before adding the pasta. Another way involves adding lamb chops, chickpeas and garlic to the sauce before serving hot with a sprinkle of extra virgin olive oil, lemon, fresh chili and optional crusty bread. Other vegetables such as pumpkin, potato and green pepper can be added. [ citation needed ]   Maglouba ,  shakshouka ,  sherba ,  usban ,  zumita  and  asida . Desserts and beverages include  makroudh ,  Libyan tea ,  ghoriba ,  maakroun ,  mafruka  and  mhalbiya .
 Algerian cuisine  is characterized by a wealth derived from land and sea production, a  Mediterranean - Maghreb cuisine . It offers a variety of dishes depending on the region and season, which gives a very varied plate. This cuisine is still based on vegetables and cereals that have always been produced in abundance in the country, which was formerly called  Roma bakery  and then  Bakery Europe . [ citation needed ]  In addition, Algeria's rich history has contributed to the abundance of food from different periods and regions of the world. Among all the culinary specialties available in  Algeria , couscous remains the most famous, recognized as a national dish, as well as the traditional pastry called Oriental pastry in Western countries. Despite its historical transmission from generation to generation, there are many books devoted to Algerian cuisine. Algerian cuisine combines a variety of ingredients including vegetables, fruits, spices, meat, fish, seafood, vegetables and  dried fruits . Vegetables are often used for salads, soups, casserole, couscous and sauces.  Carrots ,  pumpkins ,  potatoes ,  green beans ,  beans ,  kale ,  eggplant , and  truffles  are widely used.
 
 Gallery [ edit ] 
 
 Dishes 
 
 
 
 Kebbeh   كبة-كبيبة 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Baba Ghanoush   بابا غانوج 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hummus   حمص 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Labneh   لبنة 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ka'ak   كعك - كحك 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Coffee   قهوة 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Halva   حلاوة 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Shish taouk   شيش طاوك 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toum   تومية 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Awameh   عوامة / Zalabieh   زلابية 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sfouf 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Limonana   ليمون نعناع 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Harees   هريس 
 
 
 
 
 See also [ edit ] 
 List of Arab salads 
 Portal :   Food 
 References [ edit ] 
 
 
 ^   Flandrin, Jean-Louis; Montanari, Massimo; Sonnenfeld, Albert; Botsford, Clarissa (1999).  Food: A Culinary History from Antiquity to the Present . New York: Penguin Books.  ISBN   0-231-11154-1 . 
 
 ^   Nasrallah, Nawal (2007).  Annals of the Caliphs' Kitchens . Brill. pp. 121–122. 
 
 ^   Nasrallah, Nawal (2007).  Annals of the Caliphs' Kitchens . Brill. pp. 182–184. 
 
 ^   The Oxford Companion to Sugar and Sweets . Oxford University Press. April 2015.  ISBN   978-0-19-931361-7 .  Archived  from the original on 2022-10-31 . Retrieved  2020-06-06 . 
 
 ^   Nasrallah, Nawal (2007).  Annals of the Caliphs' Kitchens . Brill. p. 129. 
 
 ^   Nasrallah, Nawal (2007).  Annals of the Caliphs' Kitchens . Brill. p. 221. 
 
 ^   Nasrallah, Nawal (2007).  Annals of the Caliphs' Kitchens . Brill. p. 220. 
 
 ^   Nasrallah, Nawal (2007).  Annals of the Caliphs' Kitchens . Brill. p. 229. 
 
 ^   Mishan, Ligaya (12 February 2020).  "The Rise of Palestinian Food" .  The New York Times . 
 
 ^   Nabeel Y. Abraham.  "Arab Americans" ,  Encarta Encyclopedia  2007.  Archived  2009-10-31. 
 
 ^  a   b   Zaouali, Lilia (2007).  Medieval Cuisine of the Islamic World . University of California Press. 
 
 ^   "Desserts & Sweets in Arabia"   Archived  2019-03-28 at the  Wayback Machine . 
 
 ^   "Daily Traditional Gulf Cuisine food recipes" . Shahiya.com . Retrieved  2016-01-07 . 
 
 ^   "Al Kabsa - Traditional Rice dish" .  Food.com . Retrieved  23 June  2012 . 
 
 ^   "Hadhramaut continues to highlight Arabic presence in Malaysia - Culture & Art - 13/12/2013" . KUNA.net. 2013-12-13 . Retrieved  2016-01-07 . 
 
 ^   "KUNA : Hadhramaut continues to highlight Arabic presence in Malaysia - Culture & Art - 13/12/2013" . 158.50.10.7. 2013-12-13 . Retrieved  2016-01-07 . 
 
 ^   Grace Chen (2012-07-07).  "Middle Eastern restaurants thriving in Malaysia" .  The Star . Malaysia . Retrieved  2016-01-07 . 
 
 ^   National Dish of Egypt - Falafel 
 
 ^   "Umm Ali Recipe - Egyptian Bread Pudding" . 
 
 ^   Shulman, Martha Rose (23 February 2009).  "Couscous: Just Don't Call It Pasta" .  The New York Times . Retrieved  12 June  2017 . 
 
 ^   Qarooni, Jalal (1996).  Flat Bread Technology . Springer. pp. 84–.  ISBN   978-0-412-08111-8 . 
 
 ^   Smith, Andrew (2013).  The Oxford Encyclopedia of Food and Drink in America . Oxford University Press. pp. 567–.  ISBN   978-0-19-973496-2 . 
 
 ^   MacVeigh, Jeremy (2008).  International Cuisine . Cengage Learning. pp. 273–.  ISBN   978-1-111-79970-0 . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   "North African Cuisine."   Archived  2016-04-03 at the  Wayback Machine   Jamaica Observer   Archived  2011-02-22 at the  Wayback Machine . Accessed June 2011. 
 
 ^   Mourad, Mazouz.  "The Momo Cookbook."   Archived  2011-09-19 at the  Wayback Machine   The Globalist   Archived  2019-09-12 at the  Wayback Machine . Accessed June 2011. 
 
 ^   Rozario, P. (2004).  Libya . Countries of the world. Gareth Stevens Pub. p.  40 .  ISBN   978-0-8368-3111-5 . 
 
 ^   Davidson, A.; Jaine, T.; Davidson, J.; Saberi, H. (2006).  The Oxford Companion to Food . Oxford Companions. OUP Oxford. p. 1356.  ISBN   978-0-19-101825-1 . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   "Libya"   Archived  2014-12-18 at the  Wayback Machine .  Foodspring.com   Archived  2014-12-18 at the  Wayback Machine . Accessed June 2011. 
 
 
 External links [ edit ] 
  Media related to  Arabic cuisine  at Wikimedia Commons 
 v t e Cuisines Continental 
 African 
 North 
 West 
 list 
 Americas 
 Caribbean 
 North 
 South 
 list 
 Asian 
 Caucasian 
 Central 
 Indian subcontinent 
 Levantine 
 list 
 European 
 Balkan 
 Central 
 Eastern 
 list 
 Oceanic 
 Intercontinental
 Global 
 Latin American 
 Mediterranean 
 Middle Eastern 
 National  and regional 
 Afghan 
 Albanian 
 Algerian 
 American 
 Californian 
 Floribbean 
 Hawaiian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Lowcountry (South Carolina) 
 New England 
 New Mexico 
 Pacific Northwest 
 Pennsylvania Dutch 
 Puerto Rican 
 Southern US 
 Southwest US 
 Texas 
 Angolan 
 Argentine 
 Armenian 
 Australian 
 Austrian 
 Azerbaijani 
 Bahraini 
 Bangladeshi 
 Barbadian 
 Belarusian 
 Belgian 
 Belizean 
 Beninese 
 Bhutanese 
 Bolivian 
 Bosnian-Herzegovinian 
 Botswana 
 Brazilian 
 British 
 Channel Islands 
 English 
 Gibraltarian 
 Northern Irish 
 Saint Helena 
 Scottish 
 Welsh 
 Bruneian 
 Bulgarian 
 Burkinabé 
 Burmese 
 Burundian 
 Cambodian 
 Cameroonian 
 Canadian 
 Acadian 
 Québécois 
 Central African Republic 
 Chadian 
 Chilean 
 Chinese 
 Cantonese 
 Hong Kong 
 Macanese 
 Tibetan 
 Xinjiang 
 Colombian 
 Congolese 
 Corsican 
 Croatian 
 Cuban 
 Cypriot 
 Czech 
 Danish 
 Faroese 
 Greenlandic 
 Djiboutian 
 Dominican 
 Dominican Republic 
 Dutch 
 East Timorese 
 Ecuadorian 
 Egyptian 
 Emirati 
 Equatorial Guinean 
 Eritrean 
 Estonian 
 Ethiopian 
 Fijian 
 Filipino 
 Finnish 
 French 
 Occitan 
 French Guianan 
 Gabonese 
 Gambian 
 Georgian 
 German 
 Ghanaian 
 Greek 
 Cretan 
 Epirotic 
 Greek Macedonian 
 Heptanesean 
 Guatemalan 
 Guinea-Bissauan 
 Guinean 
 Haitian 
 Honduran 
 Hungarian 
 Icelandic 
 Indian 
 Arunachalese 
 Assamese 
 Bengali 
 Bihari 
 Goan 
 Gujarati 
 Himachal Pradesh 
 Kashmiri 
 Jharkhandi 
 Karnataka 
 Kerala 
 Maharashtrian 
 Manipuri 
 Meghalayan 
 Mizo 
 Naga 
 Odia 
 Punjabi 
 Rajasthani 
 Sikkimese 
 Sindhi 
 Tamil 
 Telangana 
 Telugu 
 Indonesian 
 Acehnese 
 Balinese 
 Banjar 
 Batak 
 Betawi 
 Indo 
 Javanese 
 Madurese 
 Makassar 
 Minahasan 
 Minangkabau 
 Palembangese 
 Sundanese 
 Iranian 
 Iraqi 
 Irish 
 Israeli 
 Italian 
 Abruzzese 
 Ligurian 
 Lombard 
 Lucanian 
 Neapolitan 
 Roman 
 Sardinian 
 Sicilian 
 Venetian 
 Ivorian 
 Jamaican 
 Japanese 
 Okinawan 
 Jordanian 
 Kazakh 
 Kenyan 
 Korean 
 North Korean 
 South Korean 
 Kosovan 
 Kuwaiti 
 Kyrgyz 
 Lao 
 Latvian 
 Lebanese 
 Lesotho 
 Liberian 
 Libyan 
 Liechtensteiner 
 Lithuanian 
 Luxembourg 
 Macedonian 
 Malagasy 
 Malawian 
 Malaysian 
 Sabahan 
 Sarawakian 
 Maldivian 
 Malian 
 Maltese 
 Mauritanian 
 Mauritian 
 Mexican 
 Moldovan 
 Monégasque 
 Mongolian 
 Montenegrin 
 Moroccan 
 Mozambican 
 Namibian 
 Nauruan 
 Nepalese 
 New Zealand 
 Nicaraguan 
 Niger 
 Nigerian 
 Niuean 
 Norwegian 
 Omani 
 Pakistani 
 Palestinian 
 Panamanian 
 Peruvian 
 Polish 
 Portuguese 
 Qatari 
 Romanian  (incl.  Transylvanian Saxon ) 
 Russian 
 Bashkir 
 Chechen 
 Circassian 
 Komi 
 Mordovian 
 Sakha 
 Tatar 
 Udmurt 
 Yamal 
 Rwandan 
 Saint Lucian 
 Salvadoran 
 Sammarinese 
 São Tomé and Príncipe 
 Saudi Arabian 
 Senegalese 
 Serbian 
 Seychellois 
 Sierra Leonean 
 Singaporean 
 Slovak 
 Slovenian 
 Somali 
 South African 
 Spanish 
 Andalusian 
 Asturian 
 Balearic 
 Basque 
 Canarian 
 Cantabrian 
 Catalan 
 Extremaduran 
 Galician 
 Manchegan 
 Valencian 
 Sri Lankan 
 Sudanese 
 Swazi 
 Swedish 
 Swiss 
 Syrian 
 Taiwanese 
 Tajik 
 Tanzanian 
 Zanzibari 
 Thai 
 Togolese 
 Tunisian 
 Turkish 
 Turkmen 
 Trinidadian and Tobagonian 
 Ugandan 
 Ukrainian 
 Uruguayan 
 Uzbek 
 Venezuelan 
 Vietnamese 
 Western Saharan 
 Yemeni 
 Zambian 
 Zimbabwean 
 Ethnic 
 Ainu 
 Arab 
 Indonesian 
 Aromanian 
 Assyrian 
 Balochi 
 Berber 
 Cajun 
 Chinese 
 American 
 Canadian 
 Chifa 
 Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Crimean Tatar 
 Greek American 
 Hazaragi 
 Indian 
 Anglo-Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Indigenous American 
 Inuit 
 Italian American 
 Kurdish 
 Livonian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Malay 
 Ossetian 
 Parsi 
 Pashtun 
 Peranakan 
 Romani 
 Sámi 
 Soul food 
 Sylheti 
 Transylvanian Saxon 
 Yup'ik 
 Religious 
 Buddhist 
 Christian 
 Goan Catholic 
 Mangalorean Catholic 
 Mennonite 
 Hindu 
 Islamic 
 Chinese 
 Ital 
 Jain 
 Jewish 
 American 
 Ashkenazi 
 Bukharan 
 Ethiopian 
 Mizrahi 
 Sephardic 
 Syrian 
 Ritual slaughter 
 Sikh 
 Historical 
 Ancient Egyptian 
 Ancient Greek 
 Ancient Israelite 
 Ancient Roman 
 Antebellum America 
 Aztec 
 Byzantine 
 Early modern European 
 Historical Chinese 
 Historical Indian subcontinent 
 Historical North Indian and Pakistani 
 History of agriculture 
 History of alcoholic drinks 
 History of bread 
 History of seafood 
 History of vegetarianism 
 Historical Argentine 
 Historical Japanese 
 Inca 
 Mayan 
 Muisca 
 Mughal 
 Medieval 
 Ottoman 
 Peasant 
 Soviet 
 Thirteen Colonies 
 Styles 
 Classique 
 Fast food 
 Fusion 
 New American 
 Eurasian 
 Haute 
 Molecular gastronomy 
 Note by Note 
 Nouvelle 
 Lists 
 List of cuisines 
 List of historical cuisines 
 Lists of prepared foods 
 Related 
 Cookbook 
 Cooking 
 Culinary arts 
 Drink 
 Food 
 history 
 Diet 
 Meal preparation 
 
   Food portal 
   Drink portal 
   Category 
   Commons 
   Cookbook 
   WikiProject 
   Outline 
 
 v t e African cuisine Sovereign states 
 Algeria 
 Angola 
 Benin 
 Botswana 
 Burkina Faso 
 Burundi 
 Cameroon 
 Cape Verde 
 Central African Republic 
 Chad 
 Comoros 
 Democratic Republic of the Congo 
 Republic of the Congo 
 Djibouti 
 Egypt 
 Equatorial Guinea 
 Eritrea 
 Eswatini 
 Ethiopia 
 Gabon 
 The Gambia 
 Ghana 
 Guinea 
 Guinea-Bissau 
 Ivory Coast 
 Kenya 
 Lesotho 
 Liberia 
 Libya 
 Madagascar 
 Malawi 
 Mali 
 Mauritania 
 Mauritius 
 Morocco 
 Mozambique 
 Namibia 
 Niger 
 Nigeria 
 Rwanda 
 São Tomé and Príncipe 
 Senegal 
 Seychelles 
 Sierra Leone 
 Somalia 
 South Africa 
 South Sudan 
 Sudan 
 Tanzania 
 Togo 
 Tunisia 
 Uganda 
 Zambia 
 Zimbabwe 
 States with limited recognition 
 Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic 
 Somaliland 
 Dependencies and other territories 
 Canary Islands  /  Ceuta  /  Melilla    (Spain) 
 Madeira   (Portugal) 
 Mayotte  /  Réunion   (France) 
 Saint Helena  /  Ascension Island  /  Tristan da Cunha   (United Kingdom) 
 
 v t e Middle Eastern cuisine 
 Bahrain 
 Cyprus 
 Egypt 
 Iran 
 Iraq 
 Israel 
 Jordan 
 Kuwait 
 Lebanon 
 Oman 
 Palestine 
 Qatar 
 Saudi Arabia 
 Syria 
 Turkey 
 United Arab Emirates 
 Yemen 
 
 v t e Mediterranean cuisine Regions Southern Maghrebi 
 Algerian 
 Chakhchoukha 
 Berber 
 Libyan 
 Bazin 
 Moroccan 
 Méchoui 
 Tajine 
 Tunisian 
 Shakshouka 
 Regional
 Couscous 
 Egyptian 
 Duqqa 
 Ful medames 
 Kushari 
 Mulukhiyah 
 Levant 
 Israeli 
 Hamin 
 Lebanese 
 Kibbeh 
 Palestinian 
 Musakhan 
 Syrian 
 Regional 
 Baba ghanoush 
 Hummus 
 Northern Turkish 
 Cheeses 
 Desserts 
 Kebabs 
 Rakı 
 Turkish tea 
 Greek 
 Gyros 
 Greek salad 
 Stifado 
 Feta 
 Skordalia 
 Loukaniko 
 Melomakarono 
 Ionian Islands 
 Bourdeto 
 Pastitsada 
 Crete 
 Dakos 
 Paximadi 
 Other Balkan 
 Albanian 
 Aromanian 
 Bosnia and Herzegovina 
 Croatian 
 Montenegrin 
 Slovenian 
 Regional
 Pita 
 Shish kebab 
 Yogurt 
 Baklava 
 Moussaka 
 Italian 
 Regional
 Pasta 
 Pizza 
 Abruzzese 
 Arrosticini 
 Mortadella di Campotosto 
 Maccheroni alla chitarra 
 Pizzelle 
 Timballo 
 Bocconotto 
 Parrozzo 
 Apulian 
 Arbëreshë 
 Ligurian 
 Ciuppin 
 Focaccia 
 Pesto 
 Ravioli 
 Lombard 
 Mantuan 
 Lucanian 
 Neapolitan 
 Neapolitan ragù 
 Pasta e fagioli 
 Roman 
 Carbonara 
 Sardinian 
 Pane carasau 
 Malloreddus 
 Mirto (liqueur) 
 Abbamele 
 Pecorino sardo 
 Culurgiònes 
 Bottarga 
 Seada 
 Sicilian 
 Cannoli 
 Caponata 
 Pasta alla Norma 
 Scaccia 
 Tuscan 
 Ribollita 
 Venetian 
 Carpaccio 
 Polenta 
 Risotto 
 French 
 Corsican 
 Brocciu 
 Occitan 
 Cassoulet 
 Brandade 
 Provencal 
 Bouillabaisse 
 Ratatouille 
 Salade niçoise 
 Spanish 
 Andalusian 
 Gazpacho 
 Sherry 
 Balearic 
 Caldereta 
 Tombet 
 Catalan 
 Escalivada 
 Escudella 
 Ollada 
 Valencian 
 Paella 
 Other 
 Gibraltarian 
 Monégasque 
 Islands 
 Cypriot 
 Afelia 
 Halloumi 
 Maltese 
 Staples 
 Wheat 
 Bread 
 Couscous 
 Pasta 
 Pizza 
 Semolina 
 Olive 
 Olive oil 
 Grape 
 Wine 
 Shared 
 Anise spirits 
 Bottarga 
 Lamb 
 Exemplars 
 Elizabeth David 
 A Book of Mediterranean Food 
 
 Category 
 
 v t e Lists of prepared foods Dishes by origin Africa 
 Angolan 
 Central African Republic 
 Chadian 
 Ethiopian and Eritrean 
 Gabonese 
 Libyan 
 Moroccan 
 Nigerian 
 Nigerien 
 Togolese 
 Tunisian 
 Western Saharan 
 São Tomé and Príncipe 
 Seychelles 
 North America 
 Mexican 
 United States 
 Italian-American 
 Jewish-American 
 New Orleans 
 Regional dishes 
 Regional beverages 
 Southern United States 
 South America 
 Argentine 
 Brazilian 
 Colombian 
 Ecuadorian 
 Paraguayan 
 Peruvian 
 Venezuelan 
 Asia 
 Arab 
 Bangladeshi 
 Burmese 
 Chinese 
 Beijing 
 Sichuan 
 Filipino 
 Indian 
 Iranian   (and Persian) 
 Indonesian 
 Israeli 
 Japanese 
 Jordan 
 Korean 
 North Korean 
 Malaysian 
 Nepalese 
 Pakistani 
 Palestinian 
 Singaporean 
 Thai 
 Tibetan 
 Turkish 
 Uzbek 
 Vietnamese 
 Peranakan 
 Europe 
 Caucasus 
 English 
 French 
 German 
 Greek 
 Hungarian 
 Typical Hungarian dishes 
 Irish 
 Italian 
 Sicilian 
 Liechtensteiner 
 Maltese 
 Norwegian 
 Polish 
 Portuguese 
 Romanian 
 Russian 
 Sami 
 Scottish 
 Spanish 
 Ukrainian 
 Oceania 
 Australian 
 Hawaiian 
 New Zealand 
 Caribbean 
 Anguillian 
 Cuban 
 Jamaican 
 Misc./Other 
 Azerbaijan 
 Crimean Tatar 
 Jewish 
 National dishes 
 By type and origin Breads 
 American 
 British 
 Indian 
 Pakistani 
 Swiss 
 Cheeses 
 American 
 British 
 Cornish 
 Dutch 
 English 
 French 
 German 
 Greek 
 Irish 
 Italian 
 Polish 
 Spanish 
 Swiss 
 Condiments 
 Filipino 
 French fry accompaniments 
 Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Japanese 
 Pakistani 
 Desserts  and sweets 
 American 
 Argentine 
 Bangladeshi 
 Brazilian 
 British 
 Chinese 
 Filipino 
 French 
 German 
 Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Italian 
 Japanese 
 Korean 
 Tteok 
 Pakistani 
 Polish 
 Romanian 
 Russian 
 Spanish 
 Sri Lankan 
 Taiwanese 
 Thai 
 Turkish 
 Soups and stews 
 Chinese 
 Filipino 
 French 
 German 
 Indonesian 
 Italian 
 Japanese 
 Pakistani 
 Spanish 
 Snack foods 
 Snack foods by country 
 Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Japanese 
 Pakistani 
 Misc. 
 American sandwiches 
 Foods with religious symbolism 
 Indonesian noodles 
 Vietnamese noodles 
 Puddings (savoury) 
 Vietnamese specialities 
 By type By cooking style 
 Baked goods 
 Twice-baked 
 Casseroles 
 Deep fried 
 Smoked 
 Steamed 
 By preparation  style 
 Dips 
 Dried 
 Fermented 
 Soy products 
 Food pastes 
 Garnishes 
 Gravies 
 Instant 
 Pickled 
 Pickled fruits 
 Rolled 
 Sauces 
 Dessert sauces 
 Fish sauces 
 Hot sauces 
 Instant sauces 
 Spreads 
 Stuffed dishes 
 Breads, grains  and seeds 
 Almond 
 Breads 
 bread dishes 
 Buns 
 Flatbreads 
 Quick breads 
 Rolls 
 Sourdough breads 
 Sweet breads 
 Buckwheat 
 Crackers 
 Dumplings 
 Fried dough 
 Legume 
 Chickpea 
 Peanut 
 Maize 
 Noodles 
 Noodle dishes 
 Fried noodle dishes 
 Ramen 
 Pancakes 
 Pasta 
 Pasta dishes 
 Rice 
 Fried rice 
 Rice cakes 
 Rice pudding 
 Rice and beans 
 Sesame seed 
 Toast 
 Dairy-based 
 Butter dishes 
 Cheese dishes 
 Fondues 
 Cheeses 
 Brined 
 Yogurt-based 
 Fruits  and  vegetables 
 Apple 
 Avocado 
 Banana 
 Cabbage 
 Carrot 
 Cassava 
 Cherry 
 Eggplant 
 Garlic 
 Grape 
 Lemon 
 Melon 
 Onion 
 Plum 
 Potato 
 French fry 
 Salads 
 Arab 
 Thai 
 Soy-based 
 Squash and pumpkin 
 Strawberry 
 Sweet potato 
 Tofu 
 Tomato 
 Fish  and  seafood 
 Clam 
 Cod 
 Crab 
 Fish head 
 Fish stews 
 Fried fish 
 Herring 
 Raw fish 
 Salmon 
 Shrimp 
 Sushi and sashimi 
 Tuna 
 Meat-based 
 Barbecue 
 Beef 
 Shredded beef 
 Steak 
 Veal 
 Chicken 
 Duck 
 Egg 
 Eggs Benedict 
 Scrambled eggs 
 Goat 
 Hamburgers 
 Hot dogs 
 Kebabs 
 Lamb 
 Meatball 
 Mixed grill 
 Pork 
 Bacon 
 Ham dishes 
 Hams 
 Sausages 
 Sausage dishes 
 Skewered foods 
 Soups  and  Stews 
 Bean 
 Blood 
 Cheese 
 Cream 
 Fish and seafood 
 Vegetable 
 Sweets 
 Cakes 
 Candies 
 Chocolate bars 
 Chocolate-covered 
 Cookies 
 Cookie sandwiches 
 Shortbread 
 Desserts 
 Custard 
 Doughnuts 
 Pastries 
 Choux pastry 
 Poppy seed 
 Pies, tarts and flans 
 Puddings 
 Misc. 
 Ancient 
 Bacon substitutes 
 Baozi 
 Brand name snacks 
 Breakfast 
 Beverages 
 Cereals 
 Brunch 
 Chifa 
 Christmas 
 Chutneys 
 Coconut 
 Coconut milk 
 Coffee 
 Comfort 
 Delicacies 
 Hangover foods 
 Hors d'oeuvre 
 Tapas 
 Made from maple 
 Military 
 Mushroom 
 Pastries 
 Pies, tarts and flans 
 Porridges 
 Relishes 
 Sandwiches 
 Soul 
 Spit-roasted 
 Street 
 Syrups 
 Tortilla-based 
 Traditional 
 
   Food portal 
   Category: Lists of foods 
 
 Authority control : National libraries  
 Israel 
 United States 
 
  
NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw2302
Cached time: 20230310194717
Cache expiry: 1814400
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc, no‐toc‐conversion]
CPU time usage: 1.171 seconds
Real time usage: 1.477 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 5552/1000000
Post‐expand include size: 342706/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 4529/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 34/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 140271/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.617/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 23192546/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/400
 
 
Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1021.639      1 -total
 21.42%  218.846      1 Template:Reflist
 14.31%  146.214     14 Template:Cite_book
  9.88%  100.939      1 Template:Lang-ar
  9.49%   96.978     11 Template:Navbox
  8.76%   89.488      1 Template:Arab_cuisine
  8.51%   86.901     90 Template:Transliteration
  8.48%   86.663      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  6.24%   63.729      2 Template:More_citations_needed
  5.60%   57.225      2 Template:Ambox
 
  Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:idhash:2053043-0!canonical and timestamp 20230310194716 and revision id 1142569819. Rendering was triggered because: api-parse
  
 esi <esi:include src="/esitest-fa8a495983347898/content" />  
 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Arab_cuisine&oldid=1142569819 " 
 Categories :  Arab cuisine Arab culture Arab pastries Cuisine by ethnicity Middle Eastern cuisine Mediterranean cuisine North African cuisine Hidden categories:  Articles containing Arabic-language text Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from March 2021 All articles needing additional references Wikipedia articles needing clarification from April 2021 Articles containing Somali-language text Articles needing additional references from July 2020 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2020 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from June 2021 Articles with unsourced statements from June 2021 Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with J9U identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  This page was last edited on 3 March 2023, at 04:38  (UTC) . 
 Text is available under the  Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0 ;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the  Terms of Use  and  Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the  Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. 
 
 
 Privacy policy 
 About Wikipedia 
 Disclaimers 
 Contact Wikipedia 
 Mobile view 
 Developers 
 Statistics 
 Cookie statement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
