
 
 
 Jump to content 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle sidebar 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Create account Log in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Personal tools 
 
 
 
 
   Create account   Log in 
 
 
 
 
		Pages for logged out editors  learn more 
 
 
 Contributions Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Navigation 
 
 
 Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate 
 
 
 
 
 Contribute 
 
 
 Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file 
 
 
 
 
 Tools 
 
 
 What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item 
 
 
 
 
 Print/export 
 
 
 Download as PDF Printable version 
 
 
 
 
 In other projects 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons Wikibooks Wikivoyage 
 
 
 
 
 Languages 
 
 On this Wikipedia the language links are at the top of the page across from the article title.  Go to top . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CentralNotice  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Contents 
 move to sidebar 
 hide 
 
 
 
 
 (Top) 
 
 
 
 
 
 1 History 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 Typical foods 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 Ingredients 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4 Regional differences 
 
 
				Toggle Regional differences subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 4.1 Central region and la Pampa 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.2 Northwest and Cuyo 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.3 Mesopotamia 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.4 Patagonia 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5 Alcoholic beverages 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6 Non-alcoholic specialties 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 7 Popular short-order dishes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8 Eating habits 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 9 See also 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 10 References 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 11 External links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
						Toggle the table of contents
					 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle the table of contents 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Argentine cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 27 languages 
 
 
 
 العربية Azərbaycanca Беларуская Čeština Cymraeg Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Jawa ქართული Bahasa Melayu 日本語 Português Română Русский Simple English Suomi Svenska Українська 中文 
 Edit links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Article Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 English 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 More 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
 
 
 Culinary traditions of Argentina 
 
 
 This article  needs additional citations for  verification .  Please help  improve this article  by  adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources:   "Argentine cuisine"  –  news   ·   newspapers   ·   books   ·   scholar   ·   JSTOR   ( August 2010 )  ( Learn how and when to remove this template message ) 
 Part of a series on Argentine cuisine 
Regional cuisines 
 Central Region 
 Northwest 
 Cuyo 
 Northeast 
 Patagonia 
 
Ingredients and types of food 
 Ingredients 
 Beef 
 Cheese 
 Main dishes 
 Desserts 
 Drinks 
 
See also 
 History 
 Etiquette 
 Argentine chefs 
 Cookbook: Cuisine of Argentina 
 
   Argentina portal v t e 
 Part of  a series  on the Culture of Argentina 
Society 
 Argentines 
 Ethnicity 
 History 
 Humor 
 Language 
 Immigration 
 Holidays 
 Religion 
 Viveza criolla 
 Women 
 
Topics 
 Art 
 Architecture 
 Cinema 
 Cuisine 
 Literature 
 Comics 
 Media 
 Radio 
 Television 
 Newspapers 
 Monuments 
 Music 
 Painting 
 Sport 
 
 Symbols 
 Flag 
 Coat of arms 
 Cockade 
 Motto 
 Anthem 
 Sun of May 
 World Heritage Sites 
 
   Argentina portal v t e 
   Typical Argentine  asado  (grill). 
 Argentine cuisine  is described as a cultural blending of  Mediterranean  influences brought by the  Spanish  during the colonial period and, later, by  Italian  and  Spanish immigrants  to Argentina during 19th and 20th centuries, with influences from a further cultural blending of  criollos  (due to Spanish colonizers) with the  Indigenous peoples of Argentina  (such as  mate  and  humitas ).
 Argentine annual consumption of beef has averaged 100 kg (220 lbs) per capita, [1]  approaching 180 kg (396 lbs) per capita during the 19th century; consumption averaged 67.7 kg (149 lbs) in 2007. [2] 
 Beyond  asado  (the Argentine  barbecue ), no other dish more genuinely matches the national identity. Nevertheless, the country's vast area, and its cultural diversity, have led to a local cuisine of various dishes. [3] [4] 
 The great immigratory waves consequently imprinted a large influence in the Argentine cuisine, after all Argentina was the second country in the world with the most immigrants with 6.6 million, only second to the United States with 27 million, and ahead of other immigratory receptor countries such as Canada, Brazil, Australia, etc. [5] [6] 
 Argentine people  have a reputation for their love of eating. [3]  Social gatherings are commonly centred on sharing a meal. Invitations to have dinner at home are generally viewed as a symbol of friendship, warmth, and integration. Sunday family lunch is considered the most significant meal of the week, whose highlights often include  asado  or pasta. [3] 
 Another feature of Argentine cuisine is the preparation of homemade food such as  french fries ,  patties , and pasta to celebrate a special occasion, to meet friends, or to honour someone. Homemade food is also seen as a way to show affection. [3] 
 Argentine restaurants include a great variety of cuisines, prices, and flavours. [3]  Large cities tend to host everything from high-end international cuisine, to  bodegones  (inexpensive traditional hidden taverns), less stylish restaurants, and bars and canteens offering a range of dishes at affordable prices. [3] 
 
 
 History [ edit ] 
 Main article:  History of Argentine cuisine 
 Amerindians  lived in Argentina thousands of years before European explorers arrived. Members of an Indian tribe in the northern part of Argentina were farmers who grew  squash , melons, and  sweet potatoes .
 Spanish settlers  came to Argentina in 1536. The arrival of Europeans brought Argentina into the  Columbian Exchange , with ingredients from the Old World being introduced to the country for the first time. It was during the Spanish colonial period that  cattle  were first introduced to Argentina, forming the foundation of the large  Argentine beef  industry.
 Between 1853 and 1955, 6.6  million immigrants came to live in Argentina from diverse sources such as Europe, the  Near  and Middle East, Russia and Japan, contributing to the development of Argentine cuisine and making Argentina the country with most immigrants only second to the United States. [5] [6] 
 Most immigrants were from Italy and Spain. The  Italians  introduced  pizza , as well as a variety of pasta dishes, including  spaghetti  and  lasagna .  British ,  German ,  Jewish , and other immigrants also settled in Argentina, all bringing their styles of cooking and favourite foods with them. The British brought tea, starting the tradition of  teatime . All of these cultures influenced the dishes of Argentina. [7] 
 
 Typical foods [ edit ] 
   Dulce de leche , a popular national spread used to fill cakes and pancakes, eaten over toast, and as an ice-cream flavour 
   Boxed  empanadas 
 Most regions of Argentina are known for their beef-oriented diet.  Grilled  meat from the  asado  (barbecue) is a staple, with  steak  and beef  ribs  especially common. The term  asado  itself refers to long strips of flank-cut beef ribs.
 Popular items such as  chorizo  (pork  sausage ),  morcilla  ( blood sausage ),  chinchulines  ( chitterlings ),  mollejas  ( sweetbread ), and other parts of the animal are also enjoyed.
 In  Patagonia , however,  lamb  and  chivito  (goat) are eaten more frequently than beef. Whole lambs and goats are traditionally cooked over an open fire in a technique known as asado a la estaca.
 The most common condiment for Asado is  chimichurri , a  sauce  of herbs, garlic and vinegar. Unlike other preparations, Argentines do not include chilli in their version of  chimichurri , but it does include a still-spicy, but milder form of red pepper, ají molido.
 Breaded  and  fried  meats ( milanesas )  are used as  snacks , in  sandwiches , or eaten warm with  mashed potatoes ,  purée .
 
   Different empanadas with a variety of  repulgues  being enjoyed 
 Empanadas ,  small  pastries  of meat, cheese,  sweet corn , and many other fillings, are a common sight at parties and  picnics , or as  starters  to a meal. They also vary in their looks, since they are folded with a traditional decorative edging called  repulgue . The  repulgue  is not just aesthetic, but also serves as a way to identify the flavor of each empanada since they are traditionally ordered in dozens where people mix and match flavors.  Empanadas are one of the most important staples of this country do to the wide array of variety in their recipe. [8] 
 The Empanadas seen in Argentina today originate from a Spanish dish from the fifteenth century where travelers used easy to carry bread and filled it with a variety of ingredients. Eventually it evolved into a popular gastronomic item and spread across the world. [8]  There are plenty of variations of Empanadas both inside and outside of Argentina. One of them is the  Empanada Gallega  (Galician  empanada ), is a big, round meat pie made most commonly with  tuna  and  mackerel  ( caballa  in Spanish).
 Vegetables and  salads  are also eaten by Argentines; tomatoes, onions, lettuce,  eggplants ,  squashes , and  zucchini  are common  side dishes .
 Italian staples, such as pizza and pasta, are eaten as commonly as beef.  Fideos  ( noodles ),  tallarines  ( fettuccine  and  tagliatelle ),  ñoquis  ( gnocchi ) are traditionally served on the 29th day of the month,  ravioles , and  canelones  ( cannelloni ) can be bought freshly made in many establishments in the larger cities. Italian-style  ice cream  is served in large  parlours  and even drive-through businesses. Other Italian staples are  polenta ,  tarta pascualina , and  pastafrola .
 In  Chubut , the  Welsh community  is known for its  teahouses , offering  scones  and  torta galesa , which is rather like  torta negra .
 Sandwiches de miga  are delicate sandwiches made with crustless buttered English bread, very thinly sliced  cured  meat, cheese, and lettuce. They are often purchased from entrepreneurial home cooks and may be eaten for a light evening meal.
 A sweet  paste ,  dulce de leche  is another treasured national food, used to fill cakes and  pancakes , spread over  toasted  bread for breakfast, or served with ice cream. In terms of sweets,  Alfajores  are another key staple. These are  shortbread   cookies  sandwiched together with chocolate and  dulce de leche  or a fruit paste. The "policeman's" or "truck driver's" sweet is cheese with  quince  paste or  dulce de membrillo .  Dulce de batata  is made of  sweet potato / yam : this with cheese is the  Martín Fierro ' s  sweet . Additionally, ice cream shops or  heladerias  are a big boom especially in the city of Buenos Aires. Argentinian ice cream comes in plenty of flavors (from fruits to  cheesecake  and even duce de leche flavors) and has a special smoothness as it follows a recipe very similar to that of Italian  gelato . [9] 
 Apples , pears,  peaches ,  kiwifruits ,  avocados , and  plums  are major exports.
 A traditional drink of Argentina is an  infusion  called  mate  (in Spanish,  mate , with the accent on the first syllable [MAH-teh]). The name comes from the hollow  gourd  from which it is traditionally drunk.
 The  mate  (gourd) or other small  cup  is filled about three-quarters full with  yerba mate , the dried  leaves  and  twigs  of the  Ilex paraguariensis . The drink, which is rather  bitter , is sipped through a metal or cane  straw  called a  bombilla .  Mate  can be sweetened with sugar, or  flavoured  with  aromatic  herbs or dried orange  peel .
 Hot but not boiling water is poured into the gourd, drunk, then the  mate  is refilled. The  mate  is nearly full of leaves, so each refill only makes a small drink, but many refills are possible before the  yerba  is spent. In small gatherings it is traditional for one  mate  to be passed from person to person, filled by whoever has the kettle. It is customary not to thank the refiller routinely; a final  gracias  (thank you) implies that the drinker has had enough. [10] 
 Drinking  mate  together is an important social ritual.  Mate cocido  is the same leaf, which rather than  brewed  is  boiled  and served, like tea, with milk and sugar to taste.
 Other typical drinks include wine (sometimes with  soda water  added); tea and coffee are equally important.  Quilmes  is the national brand of  pale lager , named after the town of  Quilmes, Buenos Aires , where it was first produced.
 
 Ingredients [ edit ] 
 Argentine cuisine uses locally-grown cereals, grains,  oil seeds , fruits and vegetables, as well as meat.
 Meat products have been dominant in the country since the 16th century. [11]  The country is regarded as a major beef, pork and poultry producing and consuming country. Certain areas such as those located in the south are usually engaged in activities involving sheep and  lamb  breeding, and  shellfish ,  crustaceans ,  molluscs  and  salmonides  fishing.
 The vast breeding activity involving any type of cattle has given rise to a highly developed dairy industry that includes products like  cow ,  sheep  and  camelide ,  dulce de leche  and  yogurts . Some of the cheeses from Argentina are  reggianito ,  sardo ,  provoleta  and  cremoso . Argentina can also be conceived as a great industry engaged in the production of  dried fruits ,  olives , all types of oils and spices. [3] 
 In the  Mesopotamia  region, river fish such as  silverside ,  surubi , dorado or  boga  are common. [3] 
 
 Regional differences [ edit ] 
 Argentine cuisine is heavily influenced by its European roots and has regional variations.  Asado ,  dulce de leche ,  empanadas , and  yerba mate  are found throughout Argentina. In many parts of the country, food is prepared differently and different kinds of foods are made; this includes to a smaller degree food from  pre-Columbian  times, as in the Northwest.
 
 Central region and la Pampa [ edit ] 
   Typical pizzeria from Buenos Aires. 
   Argentine  Puchero 
 For long periods, urban areas such as  Buenos Aires ,  Rosario , and  Córdoba  welcomed  European immigrants , including, above all, those of  Italian  and  Spanish  descent. Nevertheless, there was also a migratory flow of  German ,  Swiss , and Middle-Eastern immigrants arriving in Argentina. Among the countless changes this melting pot brought was the enrichment of culinary art. Dishes such as pasta, pizza,  pucheros  ( stews ),  croquetas  ( fritters ),  sauces ,  embutidos  ( sausages ), and chicken and meat courses brought a wider scope of options to daily menus. Furthermore, the bread-making, dessert, pastry, and dairy industries have achieved considerable development in this region.
 The above-mentioned dishes have developed a distinctively Argentine nuance. That is why, for example, Argentine pasta includes a wide variety of dishes ranging from  spaghetti , fusiles ( fusilli ), ñoquis ( gnocchi ),  ravioli , cintas (pasta ribbons), and  lasagne  to the Argentine-made  sorrentinos , agnolottis ( agnolotti ), canelones ( cannelloni ), and fetuchines ( fettuccine ).
 Pizza—made with very thin, and sometimes thick, high-rising  doughs , with or without cheese, cooked in the oven or  a la piedra  (on a  stone oven ), and stuffed with numerous ingredients—is a dish which can be found in nearly every corner of the country.  Buenos Aires ,  Rosario , and  Córdoba  also serve it with  fainá , which is a chick pea-flour dough placed over the piece of pizza. People say that what makes Argentine pizza unique is the blending of Italian and Spanish cultures. At the turn of the 19th century, immigrants from  Naples  and  Genoa  opened the first pizza bars, though Spanish residents subsequently owned most of the pizza businesses.
 
   Argentine pastry, including  Rogel  (a cake of layers of  hojaldre  covered with  meringue ),  dulce de leche , and regional variants of  Alfajores  (from  Mar del Plata ,  Córdoba ,  Tucumán , among others). 
 Bread products are consumed all around the country. The deeply rooted bread, pastry, and dessert-making tradition derive from blending the above nationalities' products.  Bakeries  sell not only a wide scope of bread, cookies, and cakes, but also pastries. The latter resembles a sort of roll pastry whose main dough ingredient is either butter or fat and which may be simple or stuffed with  dulce de leche , milk,  jam , crema pastel, or quince or apple jelly, among other fillings. The most popular type of pastry is said to be that of  medialunas  (singular:  medialuna,  literally half-moon, that is to say, crescent), based upon  French   croissants . Furthermore,  sandwiches de miga  are another type of bread products; they are made only with thin layers of  white bread  (generally referred to as crustless bread) and stuffed with food items ranging from  ham and cheese  to other more sophisticated combinations such as raw ham, tomatoes, olives, hard-boiled eggs, tuna, lettuce, red pepper, and the like.
 Desserts and sweets are usually stuffed or covered with  dulce de leche . The latter can be eaten alone or on top of cakes,  alfajores , panqueques ( crepes ), and pastries, or as a topping spread over  flan de leche .  Chantilly cream  is widely consumed and used in preparing sweets and desserts. Additionally, cakes, sponge cakes, and puddings are very popular dishes.  Italian ice-creams  in this region also achieved a significant degree of development by adding local flavours that somehow preserved the local spirit involved in their preparation.
 Although Asado is eaten all over the country, its origin may be traced back to the  Pampas . It entails manifold types of meat, which are generally eaten as follows: achuras ( offal , or the cow's inner parts), morcilla ( blood sausage ), and sometimes also a  provoleta  (a piece of  provolone  cheese cooked on the grill with  oregano ) are eaten first. Then comes the  choripán  (a kind of spiced sausage made with pork or lamb and placed between two slices of bread), and lastly meat such as  asado de tira , vacío ( flank steak ), lomo ( tenderloin ), colita de cuadril ( rump ), matambre (rolled stuffed steak cut into slices and served cold), entraña ( hanger steak ); the list is never-ending. It is quite common to eat and enjoy a dish known as  cabrito al asador  (roast kid or goat) in the  province of Córdoba .
 
 Northwest and Cuyo [ edit ] 
   A bowl of  Locro  stew, a traditional standby in northwestern Argentina. 
 This region is regarded as perhaps the one most influenced by Native Americans, and its foods are closely linked to the Andean-Incan tradition. When preparing regional dishes, potatoes and  corn  or wheat are almost always used, including  quinoa  (a cereal typically used in Incan cuisine),  peppers ,  squashes , tomatoes and in some provinces beans. The most celebrated dishes are  humita  and  tamal , in which the corn husk is stuffed with the corn filling itself, seasonings or meat.
 This region is the most suitable to taste  empanadas , particularly those stuffed with meat and offering different types of tempting varieties such as the  meat empanada , salteña also filled with potatoes, or the  empanada tucumana , which is stuffed with matambre and cut with a knife, or empanadas made with cheese. Empanadas are individual-sized and closed savoury pastries which may be fried or baked in the oven and are generally eaten with the hands.
 Stews such as  locro , carbonada,  pollo al disco , and  cazuelas  (casseroles) are also typical dishes characterizing this region, which also include pumpkin or potato pudding stuffed with meat.
 There are also some local holidays in this region related to food. For example, in Salta they hold a festival dedicated to a locally grown bean similar to  Edamame . During this holiday, the traditional foods of corn and beans are celebrated. Meals of all kinds are eaten, always with these two ingredients as a side dish, and even competitions of who can eat a set number of beans in the shortest period of time are held. [12] 
 
 Mesopotamia [ edit ] 
   Mate , the  northeastern region 's best-known contribution to Argentine cuisine. 
 The humid and verdant area of north-east Argentina known as  Mesopotamia , comprising the provinces of Corrientes, Misiones and Entre Ríos is another area influenced by Native Americans, particularly by the  Guaraní tribe . Abounding in rivers and shores, it offers a wide diversity of fish species, such as dorado,  pacú ,  surubi ,  boga  and  silverside .
 Widely grown in this area,  cassava  is typically included in the region's dishes, as are other components of meals, such as the  chipá  (cassava and cheese bread). However, in this area Cassava is cooked alone too, boiled or fried, often as a side dish for Asado and empanadas. As well,  mbeyú ,  chipá avatí ,  sopa paraguaya ,  sopa correntina ,  chipa solo or chipá con carne , el  quibebé , el  borí borí ,  chipá guasú o pastel de choclo ,  mbaipy ,  chipá mbocá  o  chipá caburé  and some other similar meals that have as basis:manioc, corn, cheese and, sometimes, some meat..  Chipá  from Cassava is often eaten during breakfast with yerba mate, prepared with hot water, or with  café con leche . Sopa Paraguaya and pastel/Carta de Choclo are eaten for lunch or dinner. As regards products made with sugar,  Papaya  (mamón in Argentine Spanish)  jam  is typical of the north of this region.
 The principal product of this region is certainly  yerba mate . Consumed countrywide, this product features a peculiarity of its own in this area: it is not only prepared with hot water but, driven by the region's high temperatures, it is common to see it prepared with cold water as well, in which case the beverage is known as  tereré .
 
 Patagonia [ edit ] 
 Foods produced in the large southern region of  Patagonia  include fish and seafood from the sea and rivers and the products of the sheep are widely farmed there.
 Marine species such as  salmon ,  spider crabs ,  squid  and other  shellfish  and  molluscs  may be caught in the Atlantic Ocean. There are  trout  in the rivers.
 
   Chocolate y  dulce de leche  cakes and other regional favorites in a  San Martín de los Andes ,  Neuquén  shop. 
 The many berries grown in the area include  cherries ,  bilberries ,  strawberries ,  rosa mosqueta  and elders, which are made into  jams .
 The  Northern  and Central European settlements in this region have built up large-scale production of chocolate and its by-products. Viennese and German cuisine and pastries are also typically associated with this region.
 Mutton and lamb, together with wild boar and venison tend to make up the region's meat-based dishes. Also typical of the southern region are smoked products, including salmon, stag, wild boar, and pheasant.
 Patagonia has been profoundly influenced by the tribes living there since long before Europeans arrived, in particular, the  Mapuches  and the  Araucanos . A typical dish prepared by the latter is the  curanto  (a term meaning "hot stone"). Its preparation involves making a fire in a hole about 150  cm deep in the ground, and heating stones in it. A bed of nalca or maqui leaves is arranged on top of the stones, and ingredients are added in turn on top. Ingredients vary, but may include beef, lamb, pork, chicken,  Argentine chorizos  (pork sausages), potatoes, sweet potatoes, apples and holed squashes filled with cheese, cream and peas. The food is covered with leaves and damp pieces of cloth to keep the heat in, and covered with plenty of soil.
 
 Alcoholic beverages [ edit ] 
 See also:  Argentine wine 
 Glasses of Argentine red (left) and white (right) wine. 
 Though wine ( vino ) has traditionally been the most popular alcoholic beverage in Argentina, beer ( cerveza ; the Italian  birra  is frequently used) in recent decades has competed with wine in popularity. Breweries appeared in Argentina at the end of the 1860s, started by  Alsatian  colonists. The first were nearly all in the downtown of Buenos Aires ( el égido de la Ciudad Autónoma de Buenos Aires ), and soon Polish brewers began industrial production of beer: San Carlos in the province of Santa Fe,  Río Segundo  and Córdoba in the province of Córdoba,  Quilmes  and  Llavallol  on the outskirts of  La Plata  (in Buenos Aires Province),  San Miguel de Tucumán  in the province of Tucumán and on the outskirts of the cities of  Mendoza  and  Salta .
 The local consumption of beer has risen dramatically in the last generation: Argentines consumed 233 million litres in 1980 and 1.57 billion in 2007 (40 litres per capita). [13]  Outpacing that of wine since 2001, the growing production and consumption of beer have supported the existence of related events, for example, beer festivals called  Oktoberfests  or " Fiestas de la Cerveza " in locations that have a significant German population ( Villa General Belgrano  in Córdoba, San Carlos and  Esperanza  in the province of Santa Fe, etc.). Such celebrations copy, in an Argentine manner,  Munich 's  Oktoberfest , and similarly are tourist attractions. However, the presence of a vigorous population of  Celtic  lineage, principally of Irish origin, has supported the creation of other celebrations of beer, often for marketing purposes, such as  Saint Patrick's Day  ( Día de San Patricio ), patron of Ireland, which is celebrated with abundant libations.
 The consumption of alcoholic beverages in Argentina is similar to that of the United States and somewhat lower than the Western European average. [14]  Argentines enjoy a variety of alcoholic beverages and Argentina can boast a varied array of  elaboraciones , whether industrial or  artisanal . Besides beer and wine, Argentines frequently drink  cider  (here again, the heritage comes from Spain and Italy, more precisely from  Asturias  and  Campania ). Cider is the most popular beverage of the middle and lowers economic classes at Christmas and New Year (the upper classes proverbially preferring to celebrate with locally produced champagne, although real old-line " creole " aristocrats will still drink cider, which is much more traditional).
 Other widely consumed spirits are  aguardiente  (firewater) made from  sugar cane , known as  caña quemada  ("burnt cane") or, simply, ' caña ' ("cane"). [15]  A folkloric note about  caña quemada : until 21 June it is traditional to drink  caña quemada  with  ruda macho  (a variant of  common rue ), it is supposed that this mixture prevents the  flu  and other illnesses.  Caña  competes, mainly in rural areas, with  gin  ("ginebra"—as in the Dutch kind of gin.)
 The bitter spirit  Fernet , and particularly the Italian brand  Fernet-Branca , is highly popular in Argentina. (A study in 2017 found that Argentines consume more than 75% of all fernet produced globally.) [16]  Fernet is most commonly enjoyed as a mixed drink with  Coca-Cola . Given Fernet's qualities as a digestive aid, it is a common choice for an after-dinner  digestif .
 There are many artisanally produced  liqueurs  (distilled, flavoured alcoholic beverages) in Argentina, for example, those flavoured with orange,  egg ,  anise , coffee, cherry and, inevitably,  dulce de leche . The  Hesperidina  is a type of liqueur made from orange peels, invented in Argentina around 1890. One may also encounter  chitronchelo  or (in Italian)  citronella , based on lemon. This beverage arrived with immigrants from the  Mezzogiorno  and is produced both artisanally and industrially (for example, at  Mar del Plata ).
 
 Non-alcoholic specialties [ edit ] 
   Café Tortoni , one of the many  coffeehouses  in  Buenos Aires . The consumption of coffee is very common (141 cups per capita, annually). [17] 
   Traditional serving of merienda in Café El Gato Negro,  Buenos Aires .  Medialunas  (croissants),  café en jarrito  (a double espresso coffee) and a little glass of mineral water. 
 Argentines enjoy a wide variety of non-alcoholic infusions (although now and then both "families" are mixed; the  yerbiao  for example, is mate mixed with  caña  or gin). Among these,  mate  has long been the most widely enjoyed; in 2006, over 700,000 metric tons were harvested in Argentina, mostly for domestic consumption. Mate is also one of the top exports from Argentina, as it is valued all over the world. [18] 
 The fact that mate is so prevalent in the  Southern Cone , however, should not necessarily make visitors think that other infusions are rare in the region; in Argentina especially, given the strong European cultural imprint, the consumption of coffee is very common (141 cups per capita, annually). [17]  Chocolate  infusions  are also popular (the eating of chocolate is a Spanish influence, although the plant originated in  Mesoamerica ). This consumption grows during autumn and winter, or in the cold regions of the country; there are two dates where consumption of chocolate infusions is traditional in the primary educational centres: 25 May and 9 July, that is, the two national dates of Argentina.
 English cultural influence (reinforced at the end of the 19th century and the beginnings of the 20th by British contacts with the Far East) has also made the consumption of tea very common.
 Medicinal herbs  are common in the whole country; among the most popular are:  chamomile ,  lanceleaf ,  boldo ,  poleo ,  peperina ,  carqueja ,  thyme ,  canchalagua ,  rue  ( macho  and  hembra , that is, "male" and "female"),  mallow ,  rosemary ,  passion flower ,  bira bira ,  palán palán ,  muña muña , to mention only the main ones. Many of these herbs are also used in  apéritifs  and  bitters , whether alcoholic or not.
 
 Popular short-order dishes [ edit ] 
   Bar Británico , Buenos Aires. These "bars" are typically more akin to  British  " pubs " and are popular at lunchtime. 
 Common  restoranes  or  restaurantes  and  rotiserias  (grill restaurants) nearly anywhere in Argentina today serve (into the small hours) quickly prepared meals that in the course of the 20th century came to be known as  minutas , "short-order dishes". Some of the dishes included in the category of  minutas  are  milanesas ,  churrascos ,  bifes  ( beefsteaks ),  escalopes ,  tallarines ,  ravioles  ( ravioli ),  ñoquis  ( gnocchi ), although some are very typical of locations that sell food: " bifes " and " milanesas " are served " a caballo " ("on horseback", with  fried egg  on top), " milanesa completa " (a  milanesa  with two fried eggs and  French fries ), " revuelto Gramajo ", " colchón de arvejas " (an omelette made with peas), " suprema de pollo " (chicken  supreme , usually breaded as a  milanesa ),  matambres , " lengua a la vinagreta " ( pickled   tongue ), and " sandwiches " ( sandwiches de miga ) are made with sliced white bread, rather than, say, rolls.
 The most common sandwiches are those made of  milanesa , baked ham and cheese,  pan de miga ,  toast ,  pebetes ,  panchos  (hot dogs),  choripanes ,  morcipanes , etc.; from  Montevideo  comes a different species of sandwich called the  chivito , even though it contains no goat meat.
 Picadas , which are consumed at home or in bars, cafés, " cafetines " and " bodegones " are also popular; they consist of an ensemble of plates containing cubes of cheese (typically from  Mar del Plata  or  Chubut ), pieces of  salame ,  olives  in  brine , french fries,  maníes  (peanuts), etc.;  picada s are eaten accompanied by an alcoholic beverage (" fernet ", beer, wine with  soda , to give some common examples).
 The people of Argentina greatly enjoy  helado  ( ice creams  of Italian lineage or  sorbets  Spanish lineage). In Spanish colonial times a type of  sorbet  was made from  hail  or snow. [19] 
 
 
 
 
 
 A  picada , the Italian-influenced between-meals standby
 
 
 
 
 Eating habits [ edit ] 
 Breakfast typically is small and consists of coffee (or mate) and pastry. In most parts of Argentina, lunch is the largest meal of the day. Excluding the largest cities, such as Buenos Aires, Rosario or Cordoba, most towns close for lunchtime. This is when most people return home to enjoy a large meal and siesta. Traditional lunches in Argentina are long and well developed. Argentines often have a light evening snack (called a "merienda" – typically a coffee or mate and a pastry) and it is common to not eat dinner until 9 at night, or even later on weekends.
 
 See also [ edit ] 
 
 Argentina portal Food portal 
 Cheese in Argentina 
 Italian cuisine 
 Spanish cuisine 
 Uruguayan cuisine 
 References [ edit ] 
 
 
 ^   National Geographic Magazine . March 1958. 
 
 ^   [1] [ dead link ] 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   e   f   g   h   "Argentina – Tourism – Gastronomy" . 2 March 2012. Archived from  the original  on 23 March 2012 . Retrieved  26 February  2016 . 
 
 ^   "Cuisine of Argentina and Chile" .  About.com Travel . Archived from  the original  on 22 September 2005 . Retrieved  26 February  2016 . 
 
 ^  a   b     (PDF) . 10 June 2007  https://web.archive.org/web/20070610215422/http://www.cels.org.ar/Site_cels/publicaciones/informes_pdf/1998.Capitulo7.pdf . Archived from  the original   (PDF)  on 10 June 2007 . Retrieved  2 August  2017 .   {{ cite web }} :  Missing or empty  |title=  ( help ) 
 
 ^  a   b     (PDF) . 14 August 2011  https://web.archive.org/web/20110814202421/http://docentes.fe.unl.pt/~satpeg/PapersInova/Labor%20and%20Immigration%20in%20LA-2005.pdf . Archived from  the original   (PDF)  on 14 August 2011 . Retrieved  2 August  2017 .   {{ cite web }} :  Missing or empty  |title=  ( help ) 
 
 ^   "Food in Argentina – Argentine Food, Argentine Cuisine – popular, dishes, history, main, people, favorite, make, customs, fruits, country" .  Foodbycountry.com . Retrieved  2 August  2017 . 
 
 ^  a   b   Zanoni, Enrique; Stivelmaher Akiko Ida, Gaston (2022).  Argentinian Street Food Empanadas, Helados & Dulce De Leche . Murdoch Books. p. 16. 
 
 ^   Zanoni, Enrique; Stivelmaher, Gaston (2021).  Argentinian Street Food: Empanadas, Helados & Dulce de Leche . Murdoch Books. p. 102. 
 
 ^   La Nación newspaper: ¿Se toma un mate? (Segunda Parte)  Source for everything about mate, including terminal "gracias".  (in Spanish) 
 
 ^   Edelstein, Sari (2010).  Food, Cuisine, and Cultural Competency for Culinary, Hospitality, and Nutrition Professionals . Jones & Bartlett Publishers.  ISBN   978-0763759650 . Retrieved  19 March  2014 . 
 
 ^   "Entre comida y baile. El goce corporal en la Fiesta del Haba de Santa Rosa de Tastil (Salta, Argentina) | RIVAR"  (in European Spanish).  doi : 10.35588/rivar.v8i24.5188 .   {{ cite journal }} :  Cite journal requires  |journal=  ( help ) 
 
 ^   "Programación Macroeconómica" .  Mecon.gov.ar . Archived from  the original  on 25 May 2015 . Retrieved  26 February  2016 . 
 
 ^   "Global Status Report on Alcohol 2004"   (PDF) .  Who.int .  Archived   (PDF)  from the original on 9 October 2022 . Retrieved  2 August  2017 . 
 
 ^   Although "caña" in this sense is really derived from " cognac " and the term was traditionally used in old Argentina for any  brandy , but especially for peach brandy,  caña de durazno . 
 
 ^   Lahrichi, Kamilia.  "Argentina loves its Fernet, a bitter Italian liquor" .  CNN . Retrieved  15 April  2020 . 
 
 ^  a   b   "El negocio del café en la Argentina" .  Blog.federicosanchez.info . Retrieved  2 August  2017 . [ permanent dead link ] 
 
 ^   "INDEC: Instituto nacional de estadistica y censos de la Republica Argentina" .  Indec.mecon.ar . Archived from  the original  on 21 February 2016 . Retrieved  26 February  2016 . 
 
 ^   Lucio V Mansilla :  Mis Memorias 
 
 
 External links [ edit ] 
 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons has media related to  Cuisine of Argentina . 
 
 SaltShaker  – Blog on Buenos Aires "food, drink, and life". 
 Pick Up the Fork  – Guide to Buenos Aires' food, restaurant and bar scene 
 Argentina on two steaks a day 
 v t e Argentina   articles History 
 First inhabitants 
 Colonial Argentina 
 Governorate 
 Viceroyalty 
 War of Independence 
 Civil Wars 
 Generation of '80 
 Arms race with Chile 
 Dreadnought race with Brazil, Chile 
 Infamous Decade 
 World War II 
 Peronism 
 Dirty War 
 National Reorganization Process 
 Falklands War 
 Trial of the Juntas 
 December 2001 riots 
 Geography 
 Cities 
 Climate 
 Earthquakes 
 Environment 
 Extreme points 
 Fauna 
 Flora 
 Islands 
 Mountains 
 National Parks 
 Regions 
 Rivers 
 World Heritage Sites 
 Politics 
 Administrative divisions 
 Constitution 
 Elections 
 Foreign relations 
 Government 
 ministries 
 Human rights 
 Intersex 
 LGBT 
 Transgender 
 Law 
 Law enforcement 
 Military 
 National Congress 
 Political parties 
 President 
 list 
 Vice President 
 Supreme Court 
 Economy 
 Agriculture 
 Banking 
 Central Bank 
 Communications 
 Electricity sector 
 Economic history 
 Foreign trade 
 Peso  (currency) 
 Science and technology 
 Stock Exchange 
 Taxation 
 Tourism 
 Transport 
 Society 
 Corruption 
 Crime 
 Education 
 Healthcare 
 Languages 
 LGBT+ 
 People 
 Demographics 
 Ethnic groups 
 Religion 
 Water supply and sanitation 
 Women 
 Culture 
 Architecture 
 Cinema 
 Cuisine 
 Humor 
 Literature 
 Music 
 National symbols 
 Newspapers 
 Painting 
 Public holidays 
 Radio 
 Sports 
 Television 
 Outline Index 
 Category 
 Portal 
 v t e South American cuisine Sovereign states 
 Argentina 
 Bolivia 
 Brazil 
 Chile 
 Colombia 
 Ecuador 
 Guyana 
 Paraguay 
 Peru 
 Suriname 
 Uruguay 
 Venezuela 
 Dependencies  and other territories 
 Falkland Islands 
 French Guiana 
 South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands 
 
 v t e Cuisines Continental 
 African 
 North 
 West 
 list 
 Americas 
 Caribbean 
 North 
 South 
 list 
 Asian 
 Caucasian 
 Central 
 Indian subcontinent 
 Levantine 
 list 
 European 
 Balkan 
 Central 
 Eastern 
 list 
 Oceanic 
 Intercontinental
 Global 
 Latin American 
 Mediterranean 
 Middle Eastern 
 National  and regional 
 Afghan 
 Albanian 
 Algerian 
 American 
 Californian 
 Floribbean 
 Hawaiian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Lowcountry (South Carolina) 
 New England 
 New Mexico 
 Pacific Northwest 
 Pennsylvania Dutch 
 Puerto Rican 
 Southern US 
 Southwest US 
 Texas 
 Angolan 
 Argentine 
 Armenian 
 Australian 
 Austrian 
 Azerbaijani 
 Bahraini 
 Bangladeshi 
 Barbadian 
 Belarusian 
 Belgian 
 Belizean 
 Beninese 
 Bhutanese 
 Bolivian 
 Bosnian-Herzegovinian 
 Botswana 
 Brazilian 
 British 
 Channel Islands 
 English 
 Gibraltarian 
 Northern Irish 
 Saint Helena 
 Scottish 
 Welsh 
 Bruneian 
 Bulgarian 
 Burkinabé 
 Burmese 
 Burundian 
 Cambodian 
 Cameroonian 
 Canadian 
 Acadian 
 Québécois 
 Central African Republic 
 Chadian 
 Chilean 
 Chinese 
 Cantonese 
 Hong Kong 
 Macanese 
 Tibetan 
 Xinjiang 
 Colombian 
 Congolese 
 Corsican 
 Croatian 
 Cuban 
 Cypriot 
 Czech 
 Danish 
 Faroese 
 Greenlandic 
 Djiboutian 
 Dominican 
 Dominican Republic 
 Dutch 
 East Timorese 
 Ecuadorian 
 Egyptian 
 Emirati 
 Equatorial Guinean 
 Eritrean 
 Estonian 
 Ethiopian 
 Fijian 
 Filipino 
 Finnish 
 French 
 Occitan 
 French Guianan 
 Gabonese 
 Gambian 
 Georgian 
 German 
 Ghanaian 
 Greek 
 Cretan 
 Epirotic 
 Greek Macedonian 
 Heptanesean 
 Guatemalan 
 Guinea-Bissauan 
 Guinean 
 Haitian 
 Honduran 
 Hungarian 
 Icelandic 
 Indian 
 Arunachalese 
 Assamese 
 Bengali 
 Bihari 
 Goan 
 Gujarati 
 Himachal Pradesh 
 Kashmiri 
 Jharkhandi 
 Karnataka 
 Kerala 
 Maharashtrian 
 Manipuri 
 Meghalayan 
 Mizo 
 Naga 
 Odia 
 Punjabi 
 Rajasthani 
 Sikkimese 
 Sindhi 
 Tamil 
 Telangana 
 Telugu 
 Indonesian 
 Acehnese 
 Balinese 
 Banjar 
 Batak 
 Betawi 
 Indo 
 Javanese 
 Madurese 
 Makassar 
 Minahasan 
 Minangkabau 
 Palembangese 
 Sundanese 
 Iranian 
 Iraqi 
 Irish 
 Israeli 
 Italian 
 Abruzzese 
 Ligurian 
 Lombard 
 Lucanian 
 Neapolitan 
 Roman 
 Sardinian 
 Sicilian 
 Venetian 
 Ivorian 
 Jamaican 
 Japanese 
 Okinawan 
 Jordanian 
 Kazakh 
 Kenyan 
 Korean 
 North Korean 
 South Korean 
 Kosovan 
 Kuwaiti 
 Kyrgyz 
 Lao 
 Latvian 
 Lebanese 
 Lesotho 
 Liberian 
 Libyan 
 Liechtensteiner 
 Lithuanian 
 Luxembourg 
 Macedonian 
 Malagasy 
 Malawian 
 Malaysian 
 Sabahan 
 Sarawakian 
 Maldivian 
 Malian 
 Maltese 
 Mauritanian 
 Mauritian 
 Mexican 
 Moldovan 
 Monégasque 
 Mongolian 
 Montenegrin 
 Moroccan 
 Mozambican 
 Namibian 
 Nauruan 
 Nepalese 
 New Zealand 
 Nicaraguan 
 Niger 
 Nigerian 
 Niuean 
 Norwegian 
 Omani 
 Pakistani 
 Palestinian 
 Panamanian 
 Peruvian 
 Polish 
 Portuguese 
 Qatari 
 Romanian  (incl.  Transylvanian Saxon ) 
 Russian 
 Bashkir 
 Chechen 
 Circassian 
 Komi 
 Mordovian 
 Sakha 
 Tatar 
 Udmurt 
 Yamal 
 Rwandan 
 Saint Lucian 
 Salvadoran 
 Sammarinese 
 São Tomé and Príncipe 
 Saudi Arabian 
 Senegalese 
 Serbian 
 Seychellois 
 Sierra Leonean 
 Singaporean 
 Slovak 
 Slovenian 
 Somali 
 South African 
 Spanish 
 Andalusian 
 Asturian 
 Balearic 
 Basque 
 Canarian 
 Cantabrian 
 Catalan 
 Extremaduran 
 Galician 
 Manchegan 
 Valencian 
 Sri Lankan 
 Sudanese 
 Swazi 
 Swedish 
 Swiss 
 Syrian 
 Taiwanese 
 Tajik 
 Tanzanian 
 Zanzibari 
 Thai 
 Togolese 
 Tunisian 
 Turkish 
 Turkmen 
 Trinidadian and Tobagonian 
 Ugandan 
 Ukrainian 
 Uruguayan 
 Uzbek 
 Venezuelan 
 Vietnamese 
 Western Saharan 
 Yemeni 
 Zambian 
 Zimbabwean 
 Ethnic 
 Ainu 
 Arab 
 Indonesian 
 Aromanian 
 Assyrian 
 Balochi 
 Berber 
 Cajun 
 Chinese 
 American 
 Canadian 
 Chifa 
 Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Crimean Tatar 
 Greek American 
 Hazaragi 
 Indian 
 Anglo-Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Indigenous American 
 Inuit 
 Italian American 
 Kurdish 
 Livonian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Malay 
 Ossetian 
 Parsi 
 Pashtun 
 Peranakan 
 Romani 
 Sámi 
 Soul food 
 Sylheti 
 Transylvanian Saxon 
 Yup'ik 
 Religious 
 Buddhist 
 Christian 
 Goan Catholic 
 Mangalorean Catholic 
 Mennonite 
 Hindu 
 Islamic 
 Chinese 
 Ital 
 Jain 
 Jewish 
 American 
 Ashkenazi 
 Bukharan 
 Ethiopian 
 Mizrahi 
 Sephardic 
 Syrian 
 Ritual slaughter 
 Sikh 
 Historical 
 Ancient Egyptian 
 Ancient Greek 
 Ancient Israelite 
 Ancient Roman 
 Antebellum America 
 Aztec 
 Byzantine 
 Early modern European 
 Historical Chinese 
 Historical Indian subcontinent 
 Historical North Indian and Pakistani 
 History of agriculture 
 History of alcoholic drinks 
 History of bread 
 History of seafood 
 History of vegetarianism 
 Historical Argentine 
 Historical Japanese 
 Inca 
 Mayan 
 Muisca 
 Mughal 
 Medieval 
 Ottoman 
 Peasant 
 Soviet 
 Thirteen Colonies 
 Styles 
 Classique 
 Fast food 
 Fusion 
 New American 
 Eurasian 
 Haute 
 Molecular gastronomy 
 Note by Note 
 Nouvelle 
 Lists 
 List of cuisines 
 List of historical cuisines 
 Lists of prepared foods 
 Related 
 Cookbook 
 Cooking 
 Culinary arts 
 Drink 
 Food 
 history 
 Diet 
 Meal preparation 
 
   Food portal 
   Drink portal 
   Category 
   Commons 
   Cookbook 
   WikiProject 
   Outline 
 
 Authority control : National libraries  
 Israel 
 United States 
 
  
NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw2326
Cached time: 20230311043359
Cache expiry: 1814400
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc, no‐toc‐conversion]
CPU time usage: 0.842 seconds
Real time usage: 1.085 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 6522/1000000
Post‐expand include size: 165621/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 13095/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 31/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 95671/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.446/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 25085115/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/400
 
 
Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  794.118      1 -total
 20.90%  165.985      1 Template:Reflist
 15.33%  121.752      1 Template:Argentina_topics
 15.08%  119.783      1 Template:Country_topics
 13.58%  107.831      2 Template:Lang
 13.12%  104.210     10 Template:Cite_web
  9.41%   74.723      1 Template:Argentine_cuisine
  7.59%   60.284      2 Template:Navbox
  7.16%   56.865      1 Template:Short_description
  6.55%   52.027      1 Template:More_citations_needed
 
  Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:idhash:2222-0!canonical and timestamp 20230311043357 and revision id 1143988850. Rendering was triggered because: api-parse
  
 esi <esi:include src="/esitest-fa8a495983347898/content" />  
 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Argentine_cuisine&oldid=1143988850 " 
 Categories :  Argentine cuisine South American cuisine Latin American cuisine Hidden categories:  All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from August 2017 CS1 errors: missing title CS1 errors: bare URL Articles with Spanish-language sources (es) CS1 errors: missing periodical CS1 European Spanish-language sources (es-es) Articles with dead external links from December 2018 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from September 2020 Articles needing additional references from August 2010 All articles needing additional references Articles containing Spanish-language text Commons category link is on Wikidata Region topic template using suffix Articles with J9U identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  This page was last edited on 11 March 2023, at 04:33  (UTC) . 
 Text is available under the  Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0 ;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the  Terms of Use  and  Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the  Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. 
 
 
 Privacy policy 
 About Wikipedia 
 Disclaimers 
 Contact Wikipedia 
 Mobile view 
 Developers 
 Statistics 
 Cookie statement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
