
 
 
 Jump to content 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle sidebar 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Create account Log in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Personal tools 
 
 
 
 
   Create account   Log in 
 
 
 
 
		Pages for logged out editors  learn more 
 
 
 Contributions Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Navigation 
 
 
 Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate 
 
 
 
 
 Contribute 
 
 
 Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file 
 
 
 
 
 Tools 
 
 
 What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item 
 
 
 
 
 Print/export 
 
 
 Download as PDF Printable version 
 
 
 
 
 In other projects 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons Wikibooks 
 
 
 
 
 Languages 
 
 On this Wikipedia the language links are at the top of the page across from the article title.  Go to top . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CentralNotice  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Contents 
 move to sidebar 
 hide 
 
 
 
 
 (Top) 
 
 
 
 
 
 1 Background 
 
 
				Toggle Background subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 1.1 Sources 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 Grains and legumes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 Herbs and spices 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4 Dairy and cheese 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5 Fruits and other sweets 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6 Meats 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 7 Doughs 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8 Typical dishes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 9 Breakfast 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 10 Appetizers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 11 Salads 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 12 Byorek 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 13 Soups 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 14 Fish 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 15 Main courses 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 16 Ritual foods 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 17 Drinks 
 
 
				Toggle Drinks subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 17.1 Alcoholic drinks 
 
 
 
 
 
 17.1.1 Beer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 17.1.2 Brandy 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 17.1.3 Oghi 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 17.1.4 Wine 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 17.1.5 Mineral waters 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 18 References 
 
 
				Toggle References subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 18.1 Bibliography 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 19 External links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
						Toggle the table of contents
					 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle the table of contents 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Armenian cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 31 languages 
 
 
 
 العربية Արեւմտահայերէն Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Jawa ქართული Қазақша Kurdî Bahasa Melayu Nederlands Polski Português Română Русский Српски / srpski Türkçe Українська 中文 
 Edit links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Article Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 English 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 More 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
 
 
 Culinary traditions of Armenia 
 
 
 Part of  a series  on the Culture of Armenia 
 History 
 People 
 Languages 
 Traditions 
 Costume 
 
 Mythology 
 Cuisine 
 Festivals 
 Vartavar 
 
 Religion 
 Art 
 Carpet 
 
 Literature 
 Medieval authors 
 Illuminated manuscripts 
 Writers 
 
 Music  and Performing arts 
 Dance 
 Theatre 
 
 Media 
 Radio 
 Television 
 Cinema 
 
 Sport 
 Monuments 
 World Heritage Sites 
 Architecture 
 Church 
 Churches and monasteries 
 Castles 
 Caravanserais 
 Khachkar 
 
 Symbols 
 Flag 
 Coat of arms 
 National anthem 
 v t e 
 Part of a series on Armenians 
 Armenian culture 
 Architecture   ·   Art Cuisine   ·   Dance   ·   Dress Literature   ·   Music   ·   History 
 
 By country  or region 
 Armenia   ·   Artsakh See also  Nagorno-Karabakh Armenian diaspora Russia   ·   France   ·   India United States   ·   Iran   ·   Iraq   ·   Georgia Azerbaijan   ·   Argentina   ·   Brazil   ·   Uruguay Lebanon   ·   Syria   ·   Ukraine Poland   ·   Canada   ·   Australia Turkey   ·   Greece   ·   Cyprus Egypt   ·   Singapore   ·   Bangladesh   ·   China 
 
Subgroups 
 Hamshenis   ·   Cherkesogai   ·   Armeno-Tats   ·   Lom people   ·   Hayhurum 
 
 Religion 
 Armenian Apostolic   ·   Armenian Catholic Evangelical   ·   Brotherhood 
 
 Languages and dialects 
 Armenian :  Eastern   ·   Western 
 
Persecution 
 Genocide   ·   Hamidian massacres Adana massacre   ·   Anti-Armenianism Hidden Armenians 
 v t e 
 Armenian cuisine  includes the foods and cooking techniques of the  Armenian people  and traditional  Armenian  foods and dishes. The cuisine reflects the history and geography where Armenians have lived as well as sharing outside influences from  European  and  Levantine  cuisines. The cuisine also reflects the traditional crops and animals grown and raised in Armenian-populated areas.
 The preparation of meat, fish, and vegetable dishes in an Armenian kitchen often requires  stuffing ,  frothing , and  puréeing . [1]  Lamb,  eggplant , and bread ( lavash ) are basic features of Armenian cuisine. Armenians traditionally prefer cracked wheat ( bulgur ) to  maize  and  rice . The flavor of the food often relies on the quality and freshness of the ingredients rather than on excessive use of spices.
 Fresh herbs are used extensively, both in the food and as accompaniments. Dried herbs are used in the winter when fresh herbs are not available. Wheat is the primary grain and is found in a variety of forms, such as whole wheat, shelled wheat, bulgur (parboiled cracked wheat), semolina,  farina , and flour. Historically, rice was used mostly in the cities and in certain rice-growing areas (such as  Marash  and the region around  Yerevan ). Legumes are used liberally, especially  chick peas ,  lentils ,  white beans , and  kidney beans . Nuts are used both for texture and to add nutrition to Lenten dishes. Of primary usage are not only  walnuts ,  almonds , and  pine nuts , but also  hazelnuts ,  pistachios  (in  Cilicia ), and nuts from regional trees. [2] 
 Fresh and dried fruit are used both as main ingredients and as sour agents. As main ingredients, the following fruits are used:  apricots  (fresh and dried),  quince ,  melons , and others. As sour agents, the following fruits are used:  sumac  berries (in dried, powdered form), sour grapes,  plums  (either sour or dried),  pomegranate ,  apricots ,  cherries  (especially  sour cherries ), and  lemons . In addition to  grape leaves ,  cabbage  leaves,  chard ,  beet  leaves,  radish  leaves,  strawberry  leaves, and others are also stuffed.
 
 
 Background [ edit ] 
 A typical meal in an Armenian household might consist of bread, butter, buttermilk, cheese, fresh and picked vegetables, and  radishes . Lunch might include a vegetable or meatball soup with sour milk. [3] 
 Lamb ,  yogurt , eggplant and bread are basic features of the  cuisine of the Caucasus , and in this regard, Armenian cuisine is often similar, but there are some regional differences. In Soviet cookbooks the Armenian cuisine is always stated to be the oldest of Transcaucasia and one of the oldest in whole Asia. Armenian dishes make use of  cracked wheat , especially in their  pilavs , while  Georgian  variations use  maize . Armenian cuisine also makes use of mixed flours made from  wheat ,  potato  and maize, which produces flavors that are difficult to replicate. Armenians call  kofta   kiufta  and  tail fat   dmak . [4]  Archaeologists have found traces of  barley ,  grapes ,  lentils ,  peas ,  plums ,  sesame , and  wheat  during excavations of the  Erebuni Fortress  in  Yerevan . [5] 
 Herbs are used copiously in Armenian cuisine, and Armenian desserts are often flavored with  rose water ,  orange flower water  and  honey . [4]  Salads are a staple of the Armenian diet, along with various  yogurt soups  and lamb stews, which sometimes include apricots. [3]   Pomegranate juice  is a popular beverage. [6]   Murat Belge  has written that both Armenian and  Iranian  cuisines have meat and fruit dishes, where meat is cooked together with fruits like  quince  and  plums , which are uncommon in  Ottoman cuisine . [7] 
 Mezes  made with  chickpeas ,  lentils ,  beans  and eggplants play a role in Armenian cuisine, often served with traditional  lavash  bread. Lavash may also be used as a wrap for various combinations of fried meat, vegetables, cheese and herbs. [3]   Cold cucumber soup  is a common dish.  Bozbash  is a soup of fatty lamb meat that may include various fruits and vegetables such as  quince  and  apples . Armenian cuisine also features filled  pastry  pies called  boereg , various types of sausages, toasted pumpkin seeds,  pistachios ,  pine nuts ,  basturma , and  dolma . [4] 
 Cinnamon is a very commonly used spice in Armenian cuisine; it is sprinkled on soups, breads, desserts and sometimes even fish. Salads are served with a lemon-cinnamon dressing alongside as an accompaniment to meat kebabs. [5]  In a survey of Armenian-American cuisine,  ginger  was rated an important spice. [8] [3] 
 
 Sources [ edit ] 
 Armenians were affected by the ongoing  Ottoman–Persian Wars  (one text laments "The whole land is enslaved by the cursed Suleyman") and produced many literary works in the 16th and 17th centuries emphasizing the Christian identity of Armenians in troubled Anatolia. Food became a central theme in this body of Armenian literature. Despite prohibitions in early Armenian law codes against Armenians eating or drinking with Muslims, a "sort of blasphemous" 17th century Armenian drinking song describes a feast in  Van  attended by Armenian priests, laymen and Turks, with the refrain repeating "Intercede to the great barrel, bountiful is its wine." [9]   The poem contains many Armenian terms for common foods. Some of the terms found in Andreas are: 
 
 Halva 
 Porak 
 Paxlava 
 Herisa 
 Lahana 
 Yaprax k'ufta 
 Xorovac 
 Ardashes H. Keoleian authored the  Oriental Cookbook  (1913) is a collection of recipes from the Middle East "adapted to American tastes and methods of preparation" is a mixed collection of recipes that includes some recipes from the Armenian cuisine. [10] 
 Armenian-American cookbook author Rose Baboian made her collection of traditional Armenian recipes accessible for young, English-speaking Armenians. Born in  Aintab  (present day Gaziantep), she survived the  Armenian Genocide  when her school was moved to Syria, eventually relocating to the United States. Mark Zanger, a Boston-based food reporter, wrote that Baboian's book "stands out as a model of American ethnic food because she recorded so many traditions". [11]  She is considered to have anticipated Armenian American fusion cooking with recipes like "chocolate yogurt". [12] 
 
 Grains and legumes [ edit ] 
 Grains used in traditional Armenian cuisine included  millet ,  wheat ,  barley ,  rye ,  peas  and  maize . Various  legumes  were also consumed such as  lentils ,  chickpeas , and  beans . [13] 
 Grains are used for a variety of purposes: traditional  lavash  bread is made from  wheat flour  and grains are also added to soups to give them a thicker consistency. [3]   Lavash  is baked in a traditional clay  tonir  oven. Bread is a very important staple of Armenian cuisine. [5] 
 Kofta  can be made with bulgur, finely chopped vegetables, herbs and often lamb. There are variations intended to be eaten cold or served hot.  Sini keufteh  is a dish similar to  kibbeh , but layered and baked in a baking dish. The two outer layers are made with bulgur, lamb mince, onion and spices. The inner filling includes butter, onion, lamb mince, pine nuts and spices. [14] 
 Harissa  is a porridge made of wheat and meat cooked together for a long time, originally in the tonir but nowadays over a stove.  Ardashes Hagop Keoleian called it the "national dish" of Armenians. [15]  Traditionally, harissa was prepared on feast days in communal pots. The wheat used in harissa is typically shelled (pelted) wheat, though in  Adana , harissa is made with կորկոտ ( korkot ; ground, par-boiled shelled wheat). Harissa can be made with lamb, beef, or chicken.
 A common dish of Armenian cuisine is  pilaf  (եղինձ;  yeghints ). Pilaf is a seasoned rice, bulgur, or shelled wheat dish often served with meats such as lamb or beef. Armenian recipes may combine  vermicelli  or  orzo  with rice cooked in stock seasoned with mint, parsley and allspice. [16]  One traditional Armenian pilaf is made with the same noodle rice mixture cooked in stock with  raisins ,  almonds  and allspice. [17]  Armenian rices are discussed by  Rose Baboian  in her cookbook from 1964 which includes recipes for different pilafs, most rooted in her birthplace of  Aintab  in Turkey. [18]  Baboian recommends that the noodles be stir-fried first in chicken fat before being added to the pilaf. Another Armenian cookbook written by Vağinag Pürad recommends to render poultry fat in the oven with red pepper until the fat mixture turns a red color before using the strained fat to prepare pilaf. Pilaf made with bulgur and liver is a specialty of  Zeytun  (present day  Süleymanlı ). [19] 
 Lapa  is an Armenian word with several meanings, one of which is "watery boiled rice, thick rice soup, mush" and  lepe  which refers to various rice dishes differing by region. [20]   Antranig Azhderian  describes Armenian pilaf as "dish resembling porridge". [21] 
 In Agn (present day  Kemaliye ) a thin  flatbread  calling  loshig  was baked and dried. It would be wetted again before being eaten.  Badjoug  was a pastry of fat and flour stamped with designs and sent as a wedding invitation.  Glodj  was  unleavened  bread made for  Lent  and  klrdig  was a bread made of  semolina . [22] 
 
 Herbs and spices [ edit ] 
 Armenians make extensive use of various herbs in their dishes. One  porridge  prepared from  cereals  and wild herbs is called  kerchik . (The same name is used by  Yazidis .) Armenians usually eat  kerchik  with  pickled   cabbage , whereas Yazidis eat it with  knotgrass  ( Polygonum aviculare ). [23]  The  Eastern Anatolia  region, where many Armenians lived prior to the  Armenian genocide , has an immensely rich plant biodiversity with over 3,000  vascular plant  taxa—of these almost 800 are  endemic  species. The inhabitants of this region often lived in inaccessible area and were dependent on local cultivated and wild flora. Some of the most important areas of the region, in terms of plant diversity, include  Harput ,  Lake Hazar  and  Munzur . [24] 
 Commonly used spices include black pepper,  sumac ,  cumin , and  cinnamon . Some greens were dried and used to season cooking including  mint ,  summer savory  and  basil . Red pepper pulp was dried in the sun. Sprigs of  terebinth  were dried and infused in a mixture of water, olive oil and brine, then toasted and ground. The ground terebinth was added as a seasoning for  tabouleh  and baked breads. [25] 
 
 Dairy and cheese [ edit ] 
   Armenian  lori  cheese 
 Typical dairy items were present in the Armenian cuisine such as yogurt,  strained yogurt ,  butter ,  cream , and  cheese . [25] 
 Cheese is a staple of Armenian cuisine and in the traditional cuisine it was consumed daily. The process of making Armenian  lori  cheese begins by boiling, similar to  halloumi  cheese. It is preserved in a  brine  solution. [26]  Armenian-American cookbook author  Rose Baboian  explains that Armenian cheesemaking techniques date back to an era before refrigeration was widely available so cheeses had to be  preserved  in brine solution. [27]   Chechil  is a type of smoked Armenian cheese. [28] 
 In  Musa Dagh  traditional cheese was made from  curds  called  choukalig .  Gij  or  kebdzoudz baneyr  was salted and dried  thyme  combined with curds and preserved in a jug.  Sourki  cheese was a mixture of spices and curds shaped as a pyramid, dried, and stored in glass until it began to turn moldy.  Khiroubaneyr  was made by adding yogurt water to  milk . [25] 
 
   A bowl of yogurt  jajek  with spices 
 Yogurt (մածուն) and yogurt-derived products are of particular importance in the cuisine.  Tahn  (called  ayran  in Turkey) is a yogurt based drink made by mixing yogurt with water and salt (Baboian's recipe also includes sugar). This may have originated as a way of preserving yogurt by the addition of salt. [29]   Tan  is the traditional Armenian name for  strained yogurt . [30]  Strained yogurt that was boiled with water until completely solid was called  yepadz madzoun  (cooked yogurt) and it could be stored for use in winter soups. [25]  Butter was made by beating yogurt in a  churn . [25] 
 Baboian gives several different recipes that can be prepared with yogurt ( madzoon ) like  barley  yogurt soup,  jajek  (which she calls Easter Spinach Salad) and sauce served with koftas. [31]  She has also a yogurt spice cake with cinnamon,  nutmeg  and  cloves  served with coconut and walnut topping. Her recipe for  fruitcake , also made with yogurt, includes  dried fruits , nuts, baking spices and assorted  candied fruits . [32] 
 Baboian's recipes were published before yogurt was widely available in American shops, so her recipe collection included instructions for preparing yogurt at home from fresh  milk  when it was published. [12]  In the 1950s, Sarkis Colombosian, an Armenian who had fled Turkey in 1917, began selling yogurt from an  Andover, Massachusetts  based  dairy farm , which he purchased during the  Great Depression . The family made the yogurt themselves and also made  tan . Armenian merchants in  Watertown, Massachusetts  began ordering yogurt,  labneh  and string cheese from  Colombo Yogurt , and the product eventually made it on to supermarket shelves. [33] 
 
   Tarhana 
 Tarhana  is a mixture of yogurt and bulgur wheat. [34]  The yogurt and bulgur are combined and left on a tray until the grains absorb the yogurt. Once the liquid is absorbed, the grain is placed in the sun to dry and then rubbed into a powder. This powder can be used to thicken soups or stews. [35]  Traditionally, it was stored in cloth bags. [25]  Three types  tarhana  are known from Agn (present day Kemaliye): the commonly known  tahneh tarhana  made from milled bulgur and ayran,  chreh tarhana  from bulgur and water (for Lent) and  shira tarhana  with bulgur and grape juice. [22]  According to  Stanley Kerr , a staff member at the  Near East Relief  orphanage for Armenian children, when the massacres began during the  Battle of Marash  Armenians sheltering at a soap factory sustained themselves on stores that included  tarhana , dried fruits and olive oil. [36] 
 
 Fruits and other sweets [ edit ] 
   Pestil /bastegh  is a flat fruit leather, here seen sold alongside other dried fruit products at a market in  Yerevan 
 The main ingredients in Armenian sweets are  honey , fruits, nuts, yogurt and sesame. Both dried and fresh fruits are used. [37]  There are many fruit-based Armenian desserts including smoked peaches and nuts cooked in honey and various fruit  compotes . [3]  Armenian syrupy walnuts (called  churchkhela  in  Georgia ) are sweetened with  mulberry  or grape juice. Yogurt and nuts can be sweetened with honey. [37]  Cinnamon is heavily used as spice for desserts like apricot compote and  kurabiye  (a type of cookie). [5] 
 Armenian and Persian peaches were reportedly traded westward during the era of  Alexander the Great . [38]  One Soviet-era writer reports that Armenia's apricots, peaches, walnuts and quince are "equal or superior to the world's best grades". [39]  Another writes "Armenian peaches are famous, and her brandies are popular throughout the world". [40]  Grapes, figs, and pomegranates are also popular. [5]  Grapes and apricots are commonly used to make  bastegh , a dried "fruit leather" of possible Persian origins that resembles  Fruit Roll-Ups . [37] 
 
   Anoushabour  also called "Armenian Christmas Pudding" and "Noah's Pudding" 
 The Armenian version of the  wheat berry  pudding  ashure  is called  anoushabour . Since Armenians serve this pudding during  Christmas  and on  New Year's Eve , it is sometimes called "Armenian Christmas Pudding". The pudding may be accompanied by  kurabiye  or nuts such as  almonds  and  pistachios . [37]  Like  ashure , the Christmas Pudding may be garnished with pomegranate seeds and flavored with rose water, and shared with neighbors during the Christmas season. This festive pudding is the centerpiece of the New Year's table, which is often decorated with dried fruits, nuts and pomegranates. [41] 
 In  The Art of Armenian Cooking , Rose Baboian describes three methods of making the  pastry  sheets for  baklava , noting that this pastry is one of the most difficult to make from scratch. [42]  Armenians say the name of the pastry, which they call  paklava , derives from the Armenian word  bakh  ( Lent ) and  helvah  ("sweet"). [43] 
 Other Armenian sweets:
 
 Alani  ( Armenian :  ալանի   alani ) – pitted dried peaches stuffed with ground walnuts and sugar. 
 Kadaif  ( ghataif ) – shredded dough with cream, cheese, or chopped walnut filling, soaked with sugar syrup. 
 Meats [ edit ] 
   Basturma 
   Lula kebab 
 Armenians eat various meats like  mutton ,  beef  and  goat  but the most popular meat in Armenian cuisine is  pork . [5] [44]  Sixteenth- and seventeenth-century Armenian writers in Ottoman Anatolia considered eating pork an important marker of Christian identity. An Armenian priest writing in the sixteenth century concluded, "If we didn't eat the meat of the pig, then we wouldn't be Christian." [45] 
 Roasted piglet, called  gochi , is a traditional holiday meal prepared for New Year's celebrations. Roasted pork chops ( chalagach ) are a favored item for barbeques. [44]   Horovats  is an Armenian-style kebab that is usually made from  pork , but can also be made with lamb. This kebab is prepared with vegetables like eggplant, tomato and green pepper. [3]   Lula kebab  is very similar to  adana kebab , but spiced with  cinnamon . [5] 
 Keshkegh  is a bulgur pilav based dish with lamb or chicken; it is cooked in a broth and flavored with butter, cinnamon and pepper. [46] 
 Tavuklu çullama  is a chicken dish that is sometimes identified as Armenian, [47]  but there are conflicting accounts about its region of origin and preparation of the dish varies substantially between regions. Some say it's a specialty of the  Kırşehir  region, [48]  while another variation served in  simple syrup  is prepared annually in  Maraş, Turkey . [49] 
 Basturma  is a salted meat that is dried and pressed before being rubbed with a special spice paste called  çemen ;it is a common food item in Armenia. [5] 
 
 Yershig  ( Armenian :  երշիկ  yershik or  սուջուխ  suǰux) – a spicy beef sausage 
 Kiufta  ( Armenian :  կոլոլակ  kololak) – meaning meatball comes in many types, such as Hayastan kiufta, Kharpert kiufta (Porov kiufta), Ishli kiufta, etc. 
 Tehal ( Armenian :  տհալ , also known as ghavurma) is potted meat preserved in its own fat. 
 Doughs [ edit ] 
   Lavash  from  Yerevan 
   Choreg  at an Armenian Easter celebration 
 Matnakash  ( Armenian :  մատնաքաշ   matnak’aš ) – soft and puffy leavened bread, made of wheat flour and shaped into oval or round loaves; the characteristic golden or golden-brown crust is achieved by coating the surface of the loaves with sweetened tea essence before baking. 
 Bagharch  ( Armenian :  բաղարջ ) – ritual bread prepared for New Year's Eve, Mid-Lent, etc. [50] 
 Choereg  (or  choreg ) – braided bread formed into rolls or loaves, also a traditional loaf for Easter. [51] 
 Zhingyalov hats  ( Armenian :  Ժինգյալով հաց ) - Zhingyalov hats, not an everyday bread, are made with  dough , dried  cranberry  and  pomegranate  molasses that go inside the dough, and seven different greens which include  spinach ,  coriander ,  parsley ,  basil ,  scallions ,  dill , and  mint . There is a variety of combinations that can be used in the bread and these greens can easily be substituted for other greens. The greens are placed in the bread and the bread is folded like a  calzone . 
 Typical dishes [ edit ] 
   Armenian khash 
   Armenian dolma 
   Armenian kibbeh with cucumber/yoghurt soup 
 The "everyday" Armenian dish is the  dzhash  (Ճաշ). This is a brothy stew consisting of meat (or a legume, in the meatless version), a vegetable, and spices. The dzhash was typically cooked in the  tonir . The dzhash is generally served over a pilaf of rice or bulgur, sometimes accompanied by bread, pickles or fresh vegetables or herbs. A specific variety of dzhash is the porani (պորանի), a stew made with yogurt. Examples of dzhash are:
 
 Meat and green beans or green peas (with tomato sauce, garlic, and mint or fresh dill) 
 Meat and summer squash (or zucchini). This is a signature dish from  Ainteb , and is characterized by the liberal use of dried mint, tomatoes, and lemon juice. 
 Meat and pumpkin. This is a wedding dish from  Marash  made with meat, chick peas, pumpkin, tomato and pepper paste, and spices. 
 Meat and leeks in a yoghurt sauce. 
 Urfa-style porani, made with small meatballs, chickpeas, chard, and  desert truffles . 
 Grilled meats are quite common as well and are omnipresent at market stalls, where they are eaten as fast food, as well as at barbecues and picnic. Also, in modern times, no Armenian banquet is considered complete without an entree of kabob. Kabobs vary from the simple (marinated meat on a skewer interspersed with vegetables) to the more elaborate. Certain regions in Western Armenia developed their local, specialized kabobs. For example:
 
 Urfa kebab, spiced ground meat interspersed with eggplant slices. 
 Orukh and khanum budu, two Cilician specialties in which lean ground meat is kneaded with dough and spices and lined on a skewer. 
 Breakfast [ edit ] 
 The modern Armenian breakfast consists of coffee or tea, plus a spread of cheeses, jams, jellies, vegetables, eggs, and breads. Armenians living in the Diaspora often adopt local customs. Thus, Armenians in Lebanon, Syria, and Egypt may include " ful " (stewed fava beans in olive oil).
 Traditional Armenian breakfast dishes were hearty. They included:
 
 Khash , sometimes colloquially called the "Armenian hangover cure", is a basic dish of simmered cow's hooves. [52] [53]   Khash  is mentioned in 12th century medieval Armenian texts. [52] 
 Kalagyosh: There are many variants of this dish. It can be a meat and yogurt stew or it can be a vegetarian stew made with lentils, fried onions, and  matzoon . In either case, it was traditionally eaten by crumbling stale lavash bread over it and eating it with a spoon. 
 Loligov dzvadzekh (tomato and egg scramble): This is a very common breakfast item, essentially a simple scramble with tomato as the base. Some iterations of this dish can include, most commonly, onions and bell peppers. This is usually served with traditional lavash bread, ani panir (Armenian feta) and herbs (tarragon, purple basil, and cilantro). 
 Appetizers [ edit ] 
 Meals in Armenia often start with a spread of appetizers served for "the table". [54] 
 Armenian appetizers include stuffed vine leaves (called  yalanchy sarma , a type of  dolma ), a fried cheese-stuffed pastry called  dabgadz banir boerag , [46]  stuffed mussels ( midye dolma ) [55]  and several types of pickled vegetables generally known as  torshi . [56]  Toasted pumpkin seeds are a popular snack; Armenians call them  tutumi gud . [46] 
 Chickpea balls called  topik  are made by Turkey's Armenian community; they are spiced with  currants , onions, and cinnamon and served with a tahini sauce. [5] [57] 
 Takuhi Tovmasyan discusses several Armenian mezzes in her book  Sofranız Şen Olsun  including  stuffed mackerel , a dish of beans in sauce served over stale bread (leftover  yufka bread  or  lavash  may be used also) called  fasulye paçası , and a type of olive-oil based appetizer with  mussels  called  midye  pilakisi . [47] 
 
 Salads [ edit ] 
 Many, if not most, Armenian salads combine a grain or legume with fresh vegetables—often tomato, onions, and fresh herbs. Mayonnaise is used in Western or Russian-inspired salads ( e.g.,  Salade Olivier). Examples of Armenian salads include:
 
 Eetch  – cracked wheat salad, similar to the Middle Eastern  tabouleh . 
 Lentil salad – brown lentils, tomatoes, onions, in a dressing of lemon juice, olive oil, and chopped parsley. This salad has many variations, with the lentils being replaced by chick peas, black-eyed peas, chopped raw or roasted eggplant, etc. 
 Byorek [ edit ] 
   Typical homemade byorek, with meat, caramelized onion and bell pepper filling 
 Byoreks  ( Armenian :  բյորեկ ), are pies made with  phyllo pastry  and stuffed with cheese ( panirov byorek , from  Armenian :  panir  for cheese, Eastern Armenians refer to this as  Khachapuri ) or spinach (similar to  spanakopita  in  Greek cuisine ). They are a popular snack and fast food, often served as appetizer.  Su byorek   lit.  'water burek' is a lasagna-style dish with sheets of phyllo pastry briefly boiled in a large pan before being spread with fillings. [58]   Msov byorek  is a bread roll (not phyllo pastry) stuffed with ground meat (similar to Russian  pirozhki ). 
 Semsek, from the region of Urfa, is a fried open-faced meat byorek. 
 A specific Lenten byorek is made with spinach and tahini sauce. 
 Soups [ edit ] 
   Harissa served with vegetables 
   Manti with  matzoon : an essential component of mantapour 
 Armenian soups include  spas , made from  matzoon , hulled  wheat  and  herbs  (usually  cilantro ), and  aveluk , made from lentils, walnuts, and wild mountain sorrel (which gives the soup its name).  Kiufta  soup is made with large balls of strained boiled meat ( kiufta ) and greens.
 Another soup,  khash , is considered an Armenian institution. Songs and poems have been written about this one dish, which is made from cow's feet and herbs made into a clear broth. Tradition holds that khash can only be cooked by men, who spend the entire night cooking, and can be eaten only in the early morning in the dead of winter, when it is served with heaps of fresh  garlic  and dried  lavash .
 T'ghit  is made from  t'tu lavash  ( fruit leather , thin rolled-up sheets of sour plum purée), [59]  which are cut into small pieces and boiled in water. Fried  onions  are added and the mixture is cooked into a  purée . Pieces of  lavash  bread are placed on top of the mixture, and it is eaten hot with fresh lavash used to scoop up the mixture by hand. [60] 
 Karshm  is a local soup made in the town of  Vaik  in the  Vayots Dzor Province . This is a walnut-based soup with red and green beans, chick peas and spices, served garnished with red pepper and fresh garlic. [61] 
Soups of  Russian  heritage include  borscht , a  beet root  soup with  meat  and  vegetables  (served hot in Armenia, with fresh  sour cream ) and  okroshka , a  matzoon - or  kefir -based soup with chopped  cucumber , green onion, and garlic.
 
 Arganak  ( Armenian :  արգանակ   arganak ) – chicken soup with small meatballs, garnished before serving with beaten egg yolks, lemon juice, and parsley. 
 Blghourapour  ( Armenian :  բլղուրապուր   blġurapur ) – a sweet soup made of hulled wheat cooked in grape juice; served hot or cold. [62] 
 Bozbash  ( Armenian :  բոզբաշ   bozbaš ) – a mutton or lamb soup that exists in several regional varieties with the addition of different vegetables and fruits. [63] 
 Brndzapour  ( Armenian :  բրնձապուր   brndzapur ) – rice and potato soup, garnished with coriander. 
 Dzavarapour  ( Armenian :  ձավարապուր   dzavarapur ) – hulled wheat, potatoes, tomato purée; egg yolks diluted with water are stirred into the soup before serving. 
 Flol  – beef soup with coarsely chopped spinach leaves and cherry-sized dumplings ( Armenian :  flol ) made from oatmeal or wheat flour. 
 Harissa  ( Armenian :  հարիսա   harisa , also known as ճիտապուր) –  porridge  of coarsely ground wheat with pieces of boned chicken 
 Katnapour  ( Armenian :  կաթնապուր   kat’napur ) – a milk-based rice soup, sweetened with sugar. 
 Katnov  ( Armenian :  կաթնով   kat’nov ) – a milk-based rice soup with cinnamon and sugar. 
 Kololak  ( Armenian :  կոլոլակ   kololak ) – soup cooked from mutton bones with ground mutton dumplings, rice, and fresh tarragon garnish; a beaten egg is stirred into the soup before serving. 
 Krchik  ( Armenian :  Քրճիկ   kṙčik )  – soup made from  sauerkraut , pickled cabbage, hulled wheat,  potatoes , and  tomato purée . 
 Mantapour  ( Armenian :  մանթապուր   mantʿapur ) – beef soup with  manti ; the manti are typically served with matzoon or sour cream ( ttvaser ), accompanied by clear soup. 
 Matsnaprtosh  ( Armenian :  մածնաբրդոշ   matsnaprt'oš ) - this is the same as  okroshka , referenced earlier, with sour clotted milk diluted with cold water, with less vegetation than okroshka itself. Matsnaprtosh is served cold as a refreshment and supposedly normalizes blood pressure. 
 Putuk  ( Armenian :  պուտուկ   putuk ) – mutton cut into pieces, dried peas, potatoes, leeks, and tomato purée, cooked and served in individual crocks. 
 Sarnapour  ( Armenian :  սառնապուր   saṙnapur ) – pea soup with rice, beets and matzoon. 
 Snkapur  ( Armenian :  սնկապուր   snkapur ) – a  mushroom  soup. 
 Tarkhana  ( Armenian :  թարխանա   t’arxana ) – flour and matzoon soup 
 Vospapour  ( Armenian :  ոսպապուր   ospapur ) – lentil soup with dried fruits and ground walnuts. 
 Pekhapour  (mustache soup) – chick peas, shelled wheat (ծեծած), lentils, in a vegetarian broth and fresh tarragon. This soup originates from Aintab. 
 Fish [ edit ] 
   Sevan trout  prepared before baking 
 Armenian cuisine includes many typical seafood dishes like fried mussels ( midye tava ), stuffed calamari ( kalamar dolma ), mackerel ( uskumru ) and  bonito  ( palamut ). [5] 
 The  trout  from  Lake Sevan  is called  ishkhan  and can be prepared different ways including a baked  dolma  version stuffed with  dried fruits  ( prunes ,  damsons , or apricots) and a poached version marinated with red peppers.  Ishkhan  is also sometimes served in a  walnut sauce . [4]  One recipe for fish  tirit  is given by a 1913 cookbook that adapted Near Eastern recipes for the American palatte. [15] 
 For a relatively land-locked country, Armenian cuisine includes a surprising number of fish dishes. Typically, fish is either broiled, fried, or sometimes poached. A few recipes direct the fish to be stuffed. Fish may have been used to stuff vegetables in ancient times, though that is not common anymore.
 There are several varieties of fish in Armenia:
 
 Sig  ( Armenian :  սիգ   sig ) – a whitefish from Lake Sevan, native to northern Russian lakes (endangered species in Armenia). 
 Karmrakhayt ( alabalagh ) ( Armenian :  կարմրախայտ   karmrakhayt ) – a river trout, [64]  also produced in high-altitude artificial lakes (e.g., the Mantash Reservoir in  Shirak Province ). [65] 
 Koghak  ( Armenian :  կողակ   koġak ) – an indigenous Lake Sevan fish of the  carp  family, also called  Sevan khramulya  (overfished) 
 Main courses [ edit ] 
   Ghapama made with butternut squash, instead of pumpkin 
 Fasulya ( fassoulia ) – a stew made with green beans, lamb and tomato broth or other ingredients 
 Ghapama  ( Armenian :  ղափամա   ġap’ama ) – pumpkin stew 
 Kchuch ( Armenian :  կճուճ   kč̣uč̣ ) – a casserole of mixed vegetables with pieces of meat or fish on top, baked and served in a clay pot 
 Tjvjik  ( Armenian :  տժվժիկ   tžvžik ) – a dish of fried liver and kidneys with onions 
 Ritual foods [ edit ] 
 Baki Koufta are peanut butter and tahini stuffed kofta made with a shell of chickpeas, bulgur and semolina. They are commonly made for  Lent  which is observed in the Armenian Orthodox Church. [66] 
 
 Nshkhar  ( Armenian :  նշխար   nšxar ) – bread used for Holy Communion 
 Mas ( Armenian :  մաս   mas ) – literally means "piece" a piece of leftover bread from the making of Nshkhar, given to worshippers after church service 
 Matagh  ( Armenian :  մատաղ   mataġ ) – sacrificial meat. can be of any animal such as goat, lamb, or even bird. 
 Drinks [ edit ] 
   Bottled water from Artashat 
   Jermuk is a bottled mineral water originating from the town of Jermuk in Armenia, and bottled since 1951 
 Armenian coffee ( Armenian :  սուրճ ) – strong black coffee, finely ground, sometimes sweet 
 Kefir  ( Armenian :  կեֆիր ) – fermented milk drink 
 Tahn  ( Armenian :  թան ) – yogurt drink (still or carbonated) 
 ARARAT , THE WELL, WELL GO, BABY WELL – a  brands  of mineral waters from  Ararat Region , Vedi, Artashat. 
 Jermuk  ( Armenian :  Ջերմուկ   J̌ermuk ) – a brand of mineral water from the  Jermuk  area. 
 Hayq, Sari  – a brand of bottled mountain spring water from the  Jermuk  area (in  Armenian   Hayq  stands for  Armenia  and  Sari  for  from the mountains ). 
 Tarkhun soda  ( Armenian :  թարխուն   t’arxun ) –  tarragon -flavored soda. 
 Alcoholic drinks [ edit ] 
 Beer [ edit ] 
   A bottle of  Kotayk Gold 
 Beer  ( Armenian :  գարեջուր   gareǰur )
 
 Main article:  Beer in Armenia 
 Armenian produced beer is considered to be one of the favorite drinks of Armenian men. The beer industry is developing barley  malt  and producing beer from it. The preparation of beer in Armenia was known from ancient times. According to the Greek historian  Xenophon  the manufacture of beer in Armenia has begun from BC 5th-4th centuries. Armenians used beer grains for  brewing  ( barley ,  millet ,  hops ).
 In 1913 there were 3 beer factories that produced 54 thousand deciliters of beer. In 1952-78 new factories in Yerevan,  Goris ,  Alaverdi ,  Abovyan  were built while existing factories were expanded and improved upon. For providing raw materials for beer production in  Gyumri  was launched large malt plant, based in the production of barley melt of  Shirak  valley farms (with the capacity of 10 thousand tons of production). In 1985 was produced 6 million deciliters of beer.
 Popular Brands 
 
 Kotayk 
 Kilikia 
 Erebuni (produced by  Kotayk Brewery ) 
 Gyumri 
 Aleksandrapol   Archived  1 August 2015 at the  Wayback Machine 
 Dargett 
 Brandy [ edit ] 
 Armenian  brandy  ( Armenian :  կոնյակ   konyak ), known locally as  konyak  is perhaps Armenia's most popular exported  alcoholic drink . It has a long history of production. Armenian brandy made by Yerevan Wine & Brandy Factory was said to be the favorite drink of British statesman  Winston Churchill . It was the favorite alcoholic drink of Joseph Stalin,  Franklin D. Roosevelt  and Churchill at the  Yalta conference  at 1945.
 The history of Armenian brandy begins in 1887, in the winery of Armenian merchant  N. Tairov  (Yerevan). By 1890-1900 Yerevan was becoming a center for the production of brandy, numbering a number of factories owned by  Gyozalov  (1892),  Saradjev  (1894),  Ter-Mkrtchian  (1899), and others. In 1899, N. Tairov sold his factory to  Nikolay Shustov 's well-known brand in  Russia . In 1914, there were 15 factories in the province of Yerevan (the largest the one now owned by Shustov) produced 210,010 deciliters of brandy. In 1921, the Soviet state took over Shustov's factory, and it was renamed to "Ararat". This became the main factory for wine manufacturing.
 Despite the fact that only brandies produced in the  Cognac  region of  France  have the copyright to be called "cognac" according to Western trade rules, Armenian brandy is called cognac inside Armenia.  Yerevan Brandy Factory  is now negotiating to obtain an official privilege to market its brandy as cognac.
 Armenian brandy is categorized by its age and method of aging. The rated stars indicate the age of brandy since its  fermentation  starting from 3 stars. The most expensive cognacs have passed additional  vintage  for more than 6 years and have special names. The brandy is aged in  oak   barrels  and is made from selected local white  grapes  grown in the Ararat Valley which is giving it a shade of caramel brown.
 Popular Brands 
 
 Ararat 
 Noy 
 Oghi [ edit ] 
   Armenian wine 
 Oghi  ( Armenian :  օղի   òġi ) – an Armenian alcoholic beverage usually distilled from fruit; [67]  also called  aragh . [68]   Artsakh  is a well-known brand name of Armenian mulberry vodka ( tuti oghi ) produced in  Nagorno-Karabakh  from local fruit. [69]  In the  Armenian Diaspora , where fruit vodka is not distilled,  oghi  refers to the aniseed-flavored distilled alcoholic drink called  arak  in the Middle East,  raki  in Turkey, or  ouzo  in Greece. [70] [71] 
 
 Mulberry   vodka  ( Armenian :  թթի   արաղ   t’t’i araġ ) A traditional Armenian vodka made from distilling the mulberry, which is grown all over Armenia, especially in the highlands and  Artsakh . 
 Wine [ edit ] 
 The alcoholic drink with the longest history in Armenia is wine. The oldest known  winery in the world  was discovered in Armenia. Historically, wineries in Armenia were concentrated along the Ararat valley. Of particular note was the district of Koghtn (Գողթն, current Nakhichevan area). Today, Armenian wineries are concentrated in the Areni region (district of Vayots Dzor). [72] [73] 
 Armenian wine is mostly made from local varietals, such as Areni, Lalvari, Kakhet, etc., though some wineries mix in better known European varietals such as Chardonnay and Cabernet. Winemaking took a downward plunge in the years following the collapse of the Soviet Union, but is undergoing a revival, with the addition of world-class labels such as  Zorah Wines . A yearly  wine festival , held in Areni, is popular with the locals and features wines from official wineries as well as homemade hooch of varying quality. Armenian wines are predominantly red and are sweet, semi-sweet (Vernashen, Ijevan), or dry (Areni).
 Armenian Highland engaged in winemaking since ancient times. It has achieved considerable development of  Urartu  times (9th - 6th centuries. BC). During excavations in the castle of  Teyshebaini  have been found around 480, and in  Toprakkale ,  Manazkert ,  Red Hill  and Ererbunium 200 pot.
 The evidences of high-level and large-scale wine production in Armenia are as foreign ( Herodotus ,  Strabo ,  Xenophon  and others) and Armenian historians of the 5th-18th centuries, as well as sculptures of architectural monuments and protocols. Armenia's current area began wine production in the 2nd half of the 19th century. At the end of the 19th century, next to the small businesses in Yerevan,  Ghamarlu  ( Artashat ),  Ashtarak ,  Echmiadzin  ( Vagharshapat  ), there were 4 mill.
 In addition to grapes, wines have been made with other fruit, notably pomegranate ( Armenian :  նռան   գինի   nran kini ), apricot, quince, etc. In some cases, these fruit wines are fortified.
 
 Mineral waters [ edit ] 
 Among the soft drinks Armenian mineral water is known for its healing specialty and is recommended by doctors. This spring water originates from the depth of earth and flowing from ancient mountains in the city of  Jermuk .
 Armenia has rich reserves of mineral water. After the establishment of the  Soviet Union  the study and development of multilateral disciplines in these waters began. First industrial bottling was organized in  Arzni  in 1927. In 1949,  Dilijan  and Jermuk mineral water factories were put into operation. In 1960-1980 “ Sevan ”, “ Hankavan ”, “ Lichk ”, “ Bjni ”, “ Lori ”, “ Arpi ”, “ Ararat ”, mineral water bottling plants and factories were launched, which are involved in the production unit "mineral water of Armenia".  ASSR  in 1985 produced 295 million bottles of mineral water.
 
 References [ edit ] 
 
 
 ^   Pokhlebkin, V. V. (1978).  Russian Delight: A Cookbook of the Soviet People . London: Pan Books. 
 
 ^   Uvezian 1996 , p. 455. 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   e   f   g   Roudik, Peter (2009).  Culture and Customs of the Caucasus . Greenwood Press. p.  131 .  ISBN   978-0-313-34885-3 . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   Davidson, Alan (2006).  The Oxford Companion to Food . Oxford University Press.  ISBN   978-0-19-280681-9 .  Archived  from the original on 3 June 2018 . Retrieved  16 July  2018 . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   e   f   g   h   i   j   "Lavaştan Topiğe Ermeni Mutfağı" .  Archived  from the original on 5 April 2017 . Retrieved  18 July  2018 . 
 
 ^   Joshi, V. K.; Panesar, P. S.; Rana, V. S.; Kaur, S. (1 January 2017). "Chapter 1 - Science and Technology of Fruit Wines: An Overview".  In Kosseva, Maria R.; Joshi, V. K.; Panesar, P. S. (eds.).  Science and Technology of Fruit Wine Production . San Diego: Academic Press. pp. 1–72.  doi : 10.1016/B978-0-12-800850-8.00001-6 .  ISBN   978-0-12-800850-8 . 
 
 ^   Belge, Murat (28 March 2016).  Tarih Boyunca Yemek Kültürü . İletişim Yayınları.  ISBN   978-975-05-1960-4 .  Archived  from the original on 16 July 2018. 
 
 ^   Nair, K. P. Prabhakaran (1 January 2013). "26 - Ginger as a Spice and Flavorant".  In  K. P. Prabhakaran Nair  (ed.).  The Agronomy and Economy of Turmeric and Ginger . Oxford: Elsevier. pp. 497–510.  doi : 10.1016/B978-0-12-394801-4.00026-0 .  ISBN   978-0-12-394801-4 . 
 
 ^   Goshgarian, Rachel.  Blending In and Separating Out: Sixteenth-Century Anatolian Armenian Food and Feasts . 
 
 ^   Smith, Merril D. (2013).  History of American Cooking . ABC CLIO. p. 74.  ISBN   9780313387111 . 
 
 ^   Zanger, Mark (2001).  The American Ethnic Cookbook for Students . ABC CLIO.  ISBN   9781573563451 . 
 
 ^  a   b   Kraig, Bruce (2004).  The Oxford Encyclopedia of Food and Drink in America, Volume 1 . Oxford University Press. pp. 711–712.  ISBN   9780199734962 . 
 
 ^   "Zeytun - Foods" .  Houshamadyan . Retrieved  17 February  2019 . 
 
 ^   Holding, Nicholas (2011).  Armenia: With Nagorno Karabagh . Bradt Travel Guides.  ISBN   9781841623450 . 
 
 ^  a   b   Keoleian, Ardashes Hagop (1913).  The Oriental Cook Book . Sully & Kleinteich. 
 
 ^   "Recipe for Armenian-style rice pilaf with vermicelli, peas, and herbs" . The Boston Globe. 14 January 2014. 
 
 ^   "Armenian Rice Pilaf With Raisins and Almonds" .  The New York Times . 
 
 ^   From Ajem Pilaf to Yalanchi Dolma: Armenian Cookbooks Added to Janice Bluestein Longone Culinary Archive . University of Michigan Library. 
 
 ^   "Zeytun - Foods" .  Archived  from the original on 1 December 2016 . Retrieved  7 January  2017 . 
 
 ^   Dankoff, Robert  (1995).  Armenian Loanwords in Turkish . Otto Harrassowitz Verlag. p. 53.  ISBN   978-3-447-03640-5 . 
 
 ^   Azhderian, Antranig (1898).  The Turk and the Land of Haig; Or, Turkey and Armenia: Descriptive, Historical, and Picturesque . Mershon Company. pp. 171–172. 
 
 ^  a   b   "Cuisine of Agn" .  Houshamadyan . Retrieved  17 February  2019 . 
 
 ^   Hovsepyan, Roman; Stepanyan-Gandilyan, Nina; Melkumyan, Hamlet; Harutyunyan, Lili (2016).  "Food as a marker for economy and part of identity: traditional vegetal food of Yezidis and Kurds in Armenia" .  Journal of Ethnic Foods .  3  (1): 32–41.  doi : 10.1016/j.jef.2016.01.003 .  ISSN   2352-6181 . 
 
 ^   Dalar, Abdullah; Uzun, Yusuf; Turker, Musa; Mukemre, Muzaffer; Konczak, Izabela (1 June 2016).  "Health attributes of ethnic vegetables consumed in the Eastern Anatolia region of Turkey: Antioxidant and enzyme-inhibitory properties" .  Journal of Ethnic Foods .  3  (2): 142–149.  doi : 10.1016/j.jef.2016.05.005 .  ISSN   2352-6181 . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   e   f   "Mousa Ler – Cuisine" .  Houshamadyan . Retrieved  17 February  2019 . 
 
 ^   The Oxford Companion to Cheese . Oxford University Press. 2016. p. 475. 
 
 ^   Baboian, Rose (1971).  The Art of Armenian Cooking . Doubleday & Company, Inc. pp.  11 –18. 
 
 ^   Ledesma, E.; Rendueles, M.; Díaz, M. (1 January 2017). "8 - Smoked Food".  In Ashok Pandey; Maria Ángeles Sanromán; Guocheng Du; Carlos Ricardo Soccol; Claude-Gilles Dussap (eds.).  Current Developments in Biotechnology and Bioengineering . Elsevier. pp. 201–243.  doi : 10.1016/B978-0-444-63666-9.00008-X .  ISBN   978-0-444-63666-9 . 
 
 ^   Yildiz, Fatih (2010).  Development and Manufacture of Yogurt and Other Functional Dairy Products . Taylor and Francis. p. 10.  ISBN   9781420082081 . 
 
 ^   Tamime, A. Y.; Wszolek, M.; Božanić, R.; Özer, B. (1 November 2011). "Popular ovine and caprine fermented milks".  Small Ruminant Research . Special Issue: Products from Small Ruminants.  101  (1): 2–16.  doi : 10.1016/j.smallrumres.2011.09.021 .  ISSN   0921-4488 . 
 
 ^   Baboian, Rose (1971).  The Art of Armenian Cooking . Doubleday & Company, Inc. p.  20 . 
 
 ^   Baboian, Rose (1971).  The Art of Armenian Cooking . Doubleday & Company, Inc. p.  61 –62. 
 
 ^   Denker, Joel (2003).  The World on a Plate: A Tour Through the History of America's Ethnic Cuisine . University of Nebraska Press.  ISBN   0803260148 . 
 
 ^   Soghoian, Florence M. (1997).  Portrait of a Survivor . Christopher Publishing House.  ISBN   9780815805267 .  tarhana. 
 
 ^   "Ferment to be: Yotam Ottolenghi's kashk recipes" .  The Guardian . Retrieved  16 February  2019 . 
 
 ^   Kerr, Stanley E. (1973).  The Lions of Marash . State University of New York Press. p.  125 . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   Roufs, Timothy G.; Roufs, Kathleen Smyth (29 July 2014).  Sweet Treats around the World: An Encyclopedia of Food and Culture: An Encyclopedia of Food and Culture . ABC-CLIO. p. 12.  ISBN   978-1-61069-221-2 .  Archived  from the original on 18 July 2018 . Retrieved  18 July  2018 . 
 
 ^   Laudan, Rachel (3 April 2015).  Cuisine and Empire: Cooking in World History . Univ of California Press. p. 72.  ISBN   978-0-520-28631-3 . 
 
 ^   Aslani͡an, A. A. (1971).  Soviet Armenia . Progress Publishers. 
 
 ^   Varzhapetean, Sisak Hakob (1977).  The Armenians ; from Prehistoric Times to the Present: A Digest of Their History, Religion, Language, Literature, Arts, and Culture in General . Varjabedian. 
 
 ^   McWilliams, Mark (1 July 2012). "Be Merry, Around a Wheat Berry!".  Celebration: Proceedings of the Oxford Symposium on Food and Cookery 2011 . Oxford Symposium.  ISBN   978-1-903018-89-7 . 
 
 ^   Baboian, Rose (1971).  The Art of Armenian Cooking . Doubleday & Company, Inc. p. xi. 
 
 ^   Richardson, Tim (2002).  Sweets: A History of Candy . Bloomsbury. p. 156.  ISBN   9781596918900 . 
 
 ^  a   b   Albala, Ken (2011).  Food Cultures of the World Encyclopedia . ABC-CLIO. p. 4.  ISBN   978-0-313-37626-9 .  Archived  from the original on 18 July 2018 . Retrieved  18 July  2018 . 
 
 ^   Goshgarian, Rachel.  Blending In and Separating Out: Sixteenth-Century Anatolian Armenian Food and Feasts . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   Jacob, Jeanne; Ashkenazi, Michael (2006).  The World Cookbook for Students . Greenwood Publishing Group.  ISBN   978-0-313-33454-2 . 
 
 ^  a   b   "Fransa'dan ödüllü İstanbul yemek kitabı" .  Milliyet .  Archived  from the original on 10 May 2018 . Retrieved  16 July  2018 . 
 
 ^   "Çullama tarifi (Kırşehir) - Haber - Mutfağım" .  Kanal D .  Archived  from the original on 5 July 2014 . Retrieved  16 July  2018 . 
 
 ^   Pelin Karahan'la Nefis Tarifler.  Çullama Tarifi .  Archived  from the original on 16 July 2018 . Retrieved  16 July  2018 . 
 
 ^   "Armenian Sweet Bread" .  Heghineh . 14 August 2016.  Archived  from the original on 3 June 2017 . Retrieved  26 May  2017 . 
 
 ^   Bread recipes in  Adventures in Armenian Cooking   Archived  21 May 2008 at the  Wayback Machine 
 
 ^  a   b   "A Brief History of Khash, Armenia's Love-It-or-Hate-It Hangover Cure (Recipe)" .  Smithsonian . Retrieved  16 July  2018 . 
 
 ^   "Cure Your Ararat Brandy Hangover With the Armenian Hangover Cure, Beef Khash" .  Travel Channel .  Archived  from the original on 26 December 2017 . Retrieved  16 July  2018 . 
 
 ^   Davidson, Alan (1999).  The Oxford Companion to Food , Oxford University Press, p. 35. 
 
 ^   Vakfı, Türkiye Ekonomik ve Toplumsal Tarih (1994).  Dünden bugüne İstanbul ansiklopedisi . Kültür Bakanlığı.  ISBN   978-975-7306-06-1 . 
 
 ^   Villa, Susie Hoogasian (1982).  Armenian Village Life Before 1914 . Wayne State University Press. p. 54.  Cabbage and mixed vegetable pickles, made in large quantities, and stored in earthenware jars, were very popular. Such pickled foods served alone added variety to the winter diet, and they were also used in preparing other foods. 
 
 ^   Kesmez, Melisa; Aydın, Mehmet Said (2014).  Rakı Cep Kitabı: Rakı Cep Kitabı . Overteam Yayınları.  ISBN   978-605-5058-01-2 .  Archived  from the original on 16 July 2018. 
 
 ^   Sou boereg  recipe   Archived  21 August 2007 at the  Wayback Machine ,  ChowHound . 
 
 ^   T'tu lavash  described here   Archived  5 August 2008 at the  Wayback Machine . 
 
 ^   "The Armenian Cuisine" . Archived from  the original  on 29 May 2017 . Retrieved  22 May  2017 . 
 
 ^   "Karshm" soup   Archived  15 October 2007 at the  Wayback Machine ,  Travel Guide to Shirak . 
 
 ^   Blghourapour  recipe on  Gnozis.info   Archived  27 November 2016 at the  Wayback Machine   (in Russian) 
 
 ^   Bozbash  in Uvezian, Sonia,  The Cuisine of Armenia , Siamanto Press, Northbrook, IL, 2001. 
 
 ^   " Karmrakhayt  in Marmarik River" .  Archived  from the original on 23 October 2007 . Retrieved  26 July  2008 . 
 
 ^   Karmrakhayt  in Mantash Reservoir   Archived  18 April 2008 at the  Wayback Machine 
 
 ^   Ashkenazi, Michael; Jacob, Jeanne (2006).  The World Cookbook for Students . Greenwood. p. 44. 
 
 ^   "Oghi, an Armenian fruit vodka" .  Archived  from the original on 8 October 2008 . Retrieved  12 December  2008 . 
 
 ^   "Aragh, Armenian moonshine" .  Answers.com .  Archived  from the original on 27 December 2008 . Retrieved  12 December  2008 . 
 
 ^   Artsakh mulberry vodka 
 
 ^   Hacikyan, Agop Jack; Basmajian, Gabriel; Franchuk, Edward S.; Nourhan Ouzounian (2000).  The Heritage of Armenian Literature . Wayne State University Press. p. 815.  ISBN   0-8143-3221-8 . 
 
 ^   Sherman, Chris (26 July 2006).  "The spirit of relaxation"   Archived  25 February 2008 at the  Wayback Machine ,  St Petersburg Times , Florida. 
 
 ^   " 'Oldest known wine-making facility' found in Armenia" .  BBC . 11 January 2011.  Archived  from the original on 20 December 2017. 
 
 ^   Maugh II, Thomas H. (11 January 2011).  "Ancient winery found in Armenia" .  Los Angeles Times .  Archived  from the original on 11 May 2011 . Retrieved  13 January  2011 . 
 
 
 Bibliography [ edit ] 
 Uvezian, Sonia (1996).  Cuisine of Armenia . Hippocrene Cookbooks Series. Hippocrene Books.  ISBN   9780781804172 . 
 External links [ edit ] 
 
 Food portal 
 
 
 
 Wikibooks  Cookbook  has a recipe/module on
 
  Cuisines 
 
 
 v t e Armenian cuisine Հայկական խոհանոց Ingredients Vegetables and fruits 
 Apple 
 Apricot 
 Bean 
 Bell pepper 
 Cabbage 
 Carrot 
 Chickpea 
 Cornelian cherry 
 Cucumber 
 Eggplant 
 Green bean 
 Lentil 
 Mushroom 
 Okra 
 Pomegranate 
 Potatoes 
 Pumpkin 
 Spinach 
 Tomato 
 Herbs and spices 
 Black pepper 
 Cilantro 
 Dill 
 Garlic 
 Nut 
 Onion 
 Paprika 
 Parsley 
 Tarragon 
 Walnut 
 Breads 
 Bokon 
 Choreg 
 Gata 
 Lavash 
 Matnakash 
 Soups 
 Arganak 
 Aveluk 
 Blghourapour 
 Brindzapour 
 Dzavarapour 
 Flol 
 Karshm 
 Katnapour 
 Katnov 
 Khash 
 Kololik 
 Krchik 
 Mantapour 
 Matsunaprtosh 
 Pekhapour 
 Putuk 
 Sarnapour 
 Spas 
 Sunkapour 
 Tarkhana 
 T’ghit 
 Vospapour 
 Appetizers and salads 
 Bastırma 
 Chechil 
 Chi kofte 
 Dolma (Summer) 
 Dolma  (Winter) 
 Eetch 
 Matzoon 
 Sujuk 
 Topik 
 Main entrées 
 Fasulya 
 Ghapama 
 Harisa 
 Kchuch 
 Lula kebab 
 Tjvjik 
 Grilled meats 
 Kebab 
 Khorovats 
 Kofta 
 Matagh 
 Beverages Mineral water 
 Arzni 
 Bjni 
 Dilijan 
 Jermuk 
 Non-alcoholic beverages 
 Armenian coffee 
 Tahn 
 Tarkhun 
 Beer 
 List of breweries in Armenia 
 Ani 
 Ararat 
 Erebuni 
 Gyumri 
 Kilikia 
 Kotayk 
 Distilled beverages 
 Armenian brandy 
 Ararat 
 Noy 
 Other 
 Oghi 
 Mulberry oghi 
 Wines 
 Armenian wine 
 Pomegranate  wine 
 Grape varieties 
 Areni 
 Kakhet 
 Meghrabujr 
 Mschali 
 Nerkarat 
 Rkatsiteli 
 Voskehat 
 Desserts 
 Alani 
 Kadaif 
 Anoushabour 
 Pastegh 
 T’tu lavash 
 Shamali 
 Paklava 
 Instruments 
 Tonir 
 Related cuisines 
 Caucasian 
 Central Asian 
 Greek 
 Iranian 
 Levantine 
 Middle Eastern 
 Mongolian 
 Ottoman 
 Turkish 
 
   Food portal 
 
 v t e Armenia   articles History   ( timeline ) Early 
 Origins 
 Name 
 Shulaveri-Shomu culture 
 Kura–Araxes culture 
 Hayk 
 Hayasa-Azzi 
 Mitanni 
 Nairi 
 Mushki 
 Urumeans 
 Diauehi 
 Etiuni 
 Kingdom of Urartu 
 Median kingdom 
 Orontid dynasty 
 Achaemenid Empire 
 Satrapy of Armenia 
 Kingdom of Armenia 
 Roman Armenia 
 Parthian Empire 
 Byzantine Armenia 
 Sasanian Armenia 
 Middle 
 Arminiya 
 Sajids 
 Bagratuni Armenia 
 Armenian Kingdom of Cilicia 
 Sallarids 
 Ilkhanate 
 Chobanids 
 Aq Qoyunlu 
 Kara Koyunlu 
 Ottoman Armenia 
 1508–1828 Iranian Armenia 
 Safavid Iran 
 Afsharid Iran 
 Qajar Iran 
 Erivan Khanate 
 Karabakh Khanate 
 Treaty of Turkmenchay 
 Russian Armenia 
 Modern 
 First Republic of Armenia 
 Soviet Armenia 
 Independent Armenia 
 By topic 
 Armenian genocide 
 Nagorno-Karabakh conflict 
 Armenian national movement 
 more... 
 Geography 
 Ararat Plain 
 Armenian highlands 
 Cities 
 Earthquakes 
 Extreme points 
 Lake Sevan 
 Mountains 
 Municipalities 
 Rivers 
 Lakes 
 Shikahogh State Reserve 
 Shirak Plain 
 more... 
 Politics 
 Administrative divisions 
 Constitution 
 Corruption 
 Elections 
 Foreign relations 
 Government 
 Human rights 
 Judiciary 
 Military 
 National Assembly 
 National Security Service 
 Police 
 Political parties 
 President 
 Prime Minister 
 President of the National Assembly 
 more on government 
 on politics 
 Economy 
 Agriculture 
 AMX (stock exchange) 
 Central Bank 
 Central Depository  
 Dram (currency) 
 Energy 
 Mining 
 Pension reform 
 Taxation 
 Telecommunications 
 Tourism 
 Transport 
 Waste management 
 Culture 
 Alphabet 
 Architecture 
 Art 
 Cinema 
 Cuisine 
 Dance 
 Language 
 Eastern 
 Western 
 Literature 
 Music 
 Sport 
 Theatre 
 more... 
 Demographics 
 Census 
 Crime 
 Education 
 Ethnic minorities 
 Health 
 People 
 diaspora 
 Social issues 
 Women 
 more... 
 Religion 
 Armenian Apostolic Church 
 Armenian Catholic Church 
 Armenian Evangelical Church 
 Armenian Brotherhood Church 
 Judaism 
 Islam 
 more... 
 Symbols 
 Armenian Cross 
 Armenian eternity sign 
 Coat of arms 
 Flag 
 Mount Ararat 
 National anthem 
 Apricot 
 Grape 
 Pomegranate 
 Outline Index 
 Category 
 v t e Artsakh  articles Overviews 
 History 
 Geography 
 Economy 
 Tourism 
 Politics 
 Elections 
 Foreign relations 
 National Assembly 
 Political parties 
 Prime Minister 
 Religion 
 Culture 
 Flag 
 Music 
 
 Category 
 
 v t e European cuisine Sovereign states European Union 
 Austria 
 Belgium 
 Bulgaria 
 Croatia 
 Cyprus 
 Czech Republic 
 Denmark 
 Estonia 
 Finland 
 France 
 Germany 
 Greece 
 Hungary 
 Republic of Ireland 
 Italy 
 Latvia 
 Lithuania 
 Luxembourg 
 Malta 
 Netherlands 
 Poland 
 Portugal 
 Romania 
 Slovakia 
 Slovenia 
 Spain 
 Sweden 
 Other 
 Albania 
 Andorra 
 Armenia 
 Azerbaijan 
 Belarus 
 Bosnia and Herzegovina 
 Georgia 
 Iceland 
 Kazakhstan 
 Liechtenstein 
 Moldova 
 Monaco 
 Montenegro 
 North Macedonia 
 Norway 
 Russia 
 San Marino 
 Serbia 
 Switzerland 
 Turkey 
 Ukraine 
 United Kingdom 
 Vatican City 
 States with limited recognition 
 Abkhazia 
 Kosovo 
 Nagorno-Karabakh 
 Northern Cyprus 
 South Ossetia 
 Transnistria 
 Dependencies  and other territories 
 Faroe Islands 
 Gibraltar 
 Guernsey 
 Isle of Man 
 Jersey 
 
 v t e Asian cuisine Sovereign states 
 Afghanistan 
 Armenia 
 Azerbaijan 
 Bahrain 
 Bangladesh 
 Bhutan 
 Brunei 
 Burma (Myanmar) 
 Cambodia 
 China 
 Cyprus 
 East Timor (Timor-Leste) 
 Egypt 
 Georgia 
 India 
 Indonesia 
 Iran 
 Iraq 
 Israel 
 Japan 
 Jordan 
 Kazakhstan 
 North Korea 
 South Korea 
 Kuwait 
 Kyrgyzstan 
 Laos 
 Lebanon 
 Malaysia 
 Maldives 
 Mongolia 
 Nepal 
 Oman 
 Pakistan 
 Philippines 
 Qatar 
 Russia 
 Saudi Arabia 
 Singapore 
 Sri Lanka 
 Syria 
 Tajikistan 
 Thailand 
 Turkey 
 Turkmenistan 
 United Arab Emirates 
 Uzbekistan 
 Vietnam 
 Yemen 
 States with limited recognition 
 Abkhazia 
 Artsakh 
 Northern Cyprus 
 Palestine 
 South Ossetia 
 Taiwan 
 Dependencies and other territories 
 British Indian Ocean Territory 
 Christmas Island 
 Cocos (Keeling) Islands 
 Hong Kong 
 Macau 
 
 v t e Cuisines Continental 
 African 
 North 
 West 
 list 
 Americas 
 Caribbean 
 North 
 South 
 list 
 Asian 
 Caucasian 
 Central 
 Indian subcontinent 
 Levantine 
 list 
 European 
 Balkan 
 Central 
 Eastern 
 list 
 Oceanic 
 Intercontinental
 Global 
 Latin American 
 Mediterranean 
 Middle Eastern 
 National  and regional 
 Afghan 
 Albanian 
 Algerian 
 American 
 Californian 
 Floribbean 
 Hawaiian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Lowcountry (South Carolina) 
 New England 
 New Mexico 
 Pacific Northwest 
 Pennsylvania Dutch 
 Puerto Rican 
 Southern US 
 Southwest US 
 Texas 
 Angolan 
 Argentine 
 Armenian 
 Australian 
 Austrian 
 Azerbaijani 
 Bahraini 
 Bangladeshi 
 Barbadian 
 Belarusian 
 Belgian 
 Belizean 
 Beninese 
 Bhutanese 
 Bolivian 
 Bosnian-Herzegovinian 
 Botswana 
 Brazilian 
 British 
 Channel Islands 
 English 
 Gibraltarian 
 Northern Irish 
 Saint Helena 
 Scottish 
 Welsh 
 Bruneian 
 Bulgarian 
 Burkinabé 
 Burmese 
 Burundian 
 Cambodian 
 Cameroonian 
 Canadian 
 Acadian 
 Québécois 
 Central African Republic 
 Chadian 
 Chilean 
 Chinese 
 Cantonese 
 Hong Kong 
 Macanese 
 Tibetan 
 Xinjiang 
 Colombian 
 Congolese 
 Corsican 
 Croatian 
 Cuban 
 Cypriot 
 Czech 
 Danish 
 Faroese 
 Greenlandic 
 Djiboutian 
 Dominican 
 Dominican Republic 
 Dutch 
 East Timorese 
 Ecuadorian 
 Egyptian 
 Emirati 
 Equatorial Guinean 
 Eritrean 
 Estonian 
 Ethiopian 
 Fijian 
 Filipino 
 Finnish 
 French 
 Occitan 
 French Guianan 
 Gabonese 
 Gambian 
 Georgian 
 German 
 Ghanaian 
 Greek 
 Cretan 
 Epirotic 
 Greek Macedonian 
 Heptanesean 
 Guatemalan 
 Guinea-Bissauan 
 Guinean 
 Haitian 
 Honduran 
 Hungarian 
 Icelandic 
 Indian 
 Arunachalese 
 Assamese 
 Bengali 
 Bihari 
 Goan 
 Gujarati 
 Himachal Pradesh 
 Kashmiri 
 Jharkhandi 
 Karnataka 
 Kerala 
 Maharashtrian 
 Manipuri 
 Meghalayan 
 Mizo 
 Naga 
 Odia 
 Punjabi 
 Rajasthani 
 Sikkimese 
 Sindhi 
 Tamil 
 Telangana 
 Telugu 
 Indonesian 
 Acehnese 
 Balinese 
 Banjar 
 Batak 
 Betawi 
 Indo 
 Javanese 
 Madurese 
 Makassar 
 Minahasan 
 Minangkabau 
 Palembangese 
 Sundanese 
 Iranian 
 Iraqi 
 Irish 
 Israeli 
 Italian 
 Abruzzese 
 Ligurian 
 Lombard 
 Lucanian 
 Neapolitan 
 Roman 
 Sardinian 
 Sicilian 
 Venetian 
 Ivorian 
 Jamaican 
 Japanese 
 Okinawan 
 Jordanian 
 Kazakh 
 Kenyan 
 Korean 
 North Korean 
 South Korean 
 Kosovan 
 Kuwaiti 
 Kyrgyz 
 Lao 
 Latvian 
 Lebanese 
 Lesotho 
 Liberian 
 Libyan 
 Liechtensteiner 
 Lithuanian 
 Luxembourg 
 Macedonian 
 Malagasy 
 Malawian 
 Malaysian 
 Sabahan 
 Sarawakian 
 Maldivian 
 Malian 
 Maltese 
 Mauritanian 
 Mauritian 
 Mexican 
 Moldovan 
 Monégasque 
 Mongolian 
 Montenegrin 
 Moroccan 
 Mozambican 
 Namibian 
 Nauruan 
 Nepalese 
 New Zealand 
 Nicaraguan 
 Niger 
 Nigerian 
 Niuean 
 Norwegian 
 Omani 
 Pakistani 
 Palestinian 
 Panamanian 
 Peruvian 
 Polish 
 Portuguese 
 Qatari 
 Romanian  (incl.  Transylvanian Saxon ) 
 Russian 
 Bashkir 
 Chechen 
 Circassian 
 Komi 
 Mordovian 
 Sakha 
 Tatar 
 Udmurt 
 Yamal 
 Rwandan 
 Saint Lucian 
 Salvadoran 
 Sammarinese 
 São Tomé and Príncipe 
 Saudi Arabian 
 Senegalese 
 Serbian 
 Seychellois 
 Sierra Leonean 
 Singaporean 
 Slovak 
 Slovenian 
 Somali 
 South African 
 Spanish 
 Andalusian 
 Asturian 
 Balearic 
 Basque 
 Canarian 
 Cantabrian 
 Catalan 
 Extremaduran 
 Galician 
 Manchegan 
 Valencian 
 Sri Lankan 
 Sudanese 
 Swazi 
 Swedish 
 Swiss 
 Syrian 
 Taiwanese 
 Tajik 
 Tanzanian 
 Zanzibari 
 Thai 
 Togolese 
 Tunisian 
 Turkish 
 Turkmen 
 Trinidadian and Tobagonian 
 Ugandan 
 Ukrainian 
 Uruguayan 
 Uzbek 
 Venezuelan 
 Vietnamese 
 Western Saharan 
 Yemeni 
 Zambian 
 Zimbabwean 
 Ethnic 
 Ainu 
 Arab 
 Indonesian 
 Aromanian 
 Assyrian 
 Balochi 
 Berber 
 Cajun 
 Chinese 
 American 
 Canadian 
 Chifa 
 Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Crimean Tatar 
 Greek American 
 Hazaragi 
 Indian 
 Anglo-Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Indigenous American 
 Inuit 
 Italian American 
 Kurdish 
 Livonian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Malay 
 Ossetian 
 Parsi 
 Pashtun 
 Peranakan 
 Romani 
 Sámi 
 Soul food 
 Sylheti 
 Transylvanian Saxon 
 Yup'ik 
 Religious 
 Buddhist 
 Christian 
 Goan Catholic 
 Mangalorean Catholic 
 Mennonite 
 Hindu 
 Islamic 
 Chinese 
 Ital 
 Jain 
 Jewish 
 American 
 Ashkenazi 
 Bukharan 
 Ethiopian 
 Mizrahi 
 Sephardic 
 Syrian 
 Ritual slaughter 
 Sikh 
 Historical 
 Ancient Egyptian 
 Ancient Greek 
 Ancient Israelite 
 Ancient Roman 
 Antebellum America 
 Aztec 
 Byzantine 
 Early modern European 
 Historical Chinese 
 Historical Indian subcontinent 
 Historical North Indian and Pakistani 
 History of agriculture 
 History of alcoholic drinks 
 History of bread 
 History of seafood 
 History of vegetarianism 
 Historical Argentine 
 Historical Japanese 
 Inca 
 Mayan 
 Muisca 
 Mughal 
 Medieval 
 Ottoman 
 Peasant 
 Soviet 
 Thirteen Colonies 
 Styles 
 Classique 
 Fast food 
 Fusion 
 New American 
 Eurasian 
 Haute 
 Molecular gastronomy 
 Note by Note 
 Nouvelle 
 Lists 
 List of cuisines 
 List of historical cuisines 
 Lists of prepared foods 
 Related 
 Cookbook 
 Cooking 
 Culinary arts 
 Drink 
 Food 
 history 
 Diet 
 Meal preparation 
 
   Food portal 
   Drink portal 
   Category 
   Commons 
   Cookbook 
   WikiProject 
   Outline 
 
 Authority control   National libraries 
 France 
 BnF data 
 Israel 
 United States 
 Latvia 
 Other 
 IdRef 
 
  
NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw2305
Cached time: 20230311110602
Cache expiry: 1814400
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc, no‐toc‐conversion]
CPU time usage: 1.526 seconds
Real time usage: 1.821 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 39886/1000000
Post‐expand include size: 379612/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 30965/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 16/100
Expensive parser function count: 72/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 255584/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.744/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 20414009/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/400
 
 
Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1432.197      1 -total
 34.05%  487.626      8 Template:Navbox
 27.48%  393.636      1 Template:Reflist
 16.01%  229.334     39 Template:Cite_book
 13.03%  186.622    107 Template:Iso2country
 11.93%  170.927      1 Template:European_topic
 11.69%  167.490     45 Template:Lang-hy
  8.56%  122.645      1 Template:Asian_topic
  8.30%  118.942      2 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  7.99%  114.411      1 Template:Culture_of_Armenia
 
  Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:idhash:6582433-0!canonical and timestamp 20230311110600 and revision id 1135853075. Rendering was triggered because: page-view
  
 esi <esi:include src="/esitest-fa8a495983347898/content" />  
 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Armenian_cuisine&oldid=1135853075 " 
 Categories :  Armenian cuisine Caucasian cuisine Hidden categories:  Webarchive template wayback links Articles with Russian-language sources (ru) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from July 2020 Articles containing Armenian-language text Region topic template using suffix Articles with BNF identifiers Articles with J9U identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers Articles with LNB identifiers Articles with SUDOC identifiers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  This page was last edited on 27 January 2023, at 07:16  (UTC) . 
 Text is available under the  Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0 ;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the  Terms of Use  and  Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the  Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. 
 
 
 Privacy policy 
 About Wikipedia 
 Disclaimers 
 Contact Wikipedia 
 Mobile view 
 Developers 
 Statistics 
 Cookie statement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
