
 
 
 Jump to content 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle sidebar 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Create account Log in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Personal tools 
 
 
 
 
   Create account   Log in 
 
 
 
 
		Pages for logged out editors  learn more 
 
 
 Contributions Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Navigation 
 
 
 Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate 
 
 
 
 
 Contribute 
 
 
 Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file 
 
 
 
 
 Tools 
 
 
 What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item 
 
 
 
 
 Print/export 
 
 
 Download as PDF Printable version 
 
 
 
 
 In other projects 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons 
 
 
 
 
 Languages 
 
 On this Wikipedia the language links are at the top of the page across from the article title.  Go to top . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CentralNotice  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Contents 
 move to sidebar 
 hide 
 
 
 
 
 (Top) 
 
 
 
 
 
 1 History 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 Dishes 
 
 
				Toggle Dishes subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 2.1 Baked goods 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.1.1 Kugels 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.1.2 Bread and cake 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.2 Fats 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.3 Fish 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.4 Meat 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.4.1 Side dishes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.4.2 Soups 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.4.3 Sweets and confections 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 Gallery 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4 See also 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5 References 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
						Toggle the table of contents
					 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle the table of contents 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ashkenazi Jewish cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 1 language 
 
 
 
 فارسی 
 Edit links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Article Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 English 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 More 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
 
 
 Cooking traditions among Ashkenazi Jews 
   Matzoh ball soup topped with roast chicken 
 Ashkenazi Jewish cuisine  is an assortment of cooking traditions that was developed by the  Ashkenazi Jews  of  Eastern ,  Central ,  Western ,  Northern , and  Southern Europe , and their descendants, particularly in the  United States  and other Western countries. 
 Ashkenazi Jewish foods have frequently been unique to Ashkenazi Jewish communities, and they frequently consist of local ingredients (such as  beets ,  cabbage , and  potato ), all of which are generally prepared in accordance with the laws of  kashrut . Some of these ingredients have not been popular in local or neighbouring non-Jewish communities due to a history of limited interaction between Ashkenazi Jews and non-Jews.
 The cuisine is largely based on ingredients that were affordable to the historically poor Ashkenazi Jewish community of Europe, and it is frequently composed of ingredients that were readily available and affordable in the regions and communities of Europe in which Ashkenazi Jews lived. Some ingredients were considered less desirable than other ingredients, such as  brisket ,  chicken liver , and  artichokes , among other ingredients, and as a result, these items were rarely used by  gentile  neighbours of Ashkenazi Jews.
 Because Ashkenazi Jews were typically  forbidden  to own or rent land on which crops could be grown in their home countries in Europe, their cuisine is reflective of these limitations and as a result, contains fewer vegetable-focused dishes relative to  Sephardi  and  Mizrahi  cuisines. 
 Meat is ritually slaughtered in the  shechita  process, and it is also soaked and salted. Meat dishes are a prominent feature of  Shabbat , festivals, and celebratory meals. Braised meats such as  brisket  feature heavily, as do root vegetables such as potatoes, carrots, and parsnips which are used in such dishes as  latkes ,  matzo ball soup , and  tzimmes  (a braised fruit and vegetable dish which may also contain meat). Cooked, stuffed and baked vegetables such as  stuffed cabbage  and, in some regions, stuffed peppers are central to the cuisine. 
 Due to the lack of availability of  olive oil  and other fats which are commonplace in  Jewish cooking , rendered fat from leftover  poultry  skins ( gribenes ) called  schmaltz  is used in  fleishig  (meat) dishes, while  butter  is traditionally used in  milchig  (dairy) dishes. [1] [2]  Since the advent of mass-produced vegetable oils (particularly in the United States and Canada) such as  canola oil , many baked goods have been made with oils rather than butter, so as to render them  pareve .
 
 
 History [ edit ] 
 The cuisine of the Ashkenazi Jews is reflective of their journey from  Central  to  Eastern Europe  and then to the  Americas  and  Israel . [3]  Ashkenazi Jews are a  Jewish diaspora  population which coalesced in the  Holy Roman Empire  around the end of the first millennium CE. This population progressively migrated eastward, and established population centres in the  Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth  (a nation which then consisted of territories currently located in parts of present-day  Belarus ,  Estonia ,  Latvia ,  Lithuania ,  Moldova ,  Poland ,  Russia ,  Slovakia , and  Ukraine ). [4]  Ashkenazi communities have also historically been present in the  Banat , a region in central and eastern Europe that consists of parts of present-day  Serbia ,  Romania , and  Hungary . As a result, the cuisine of Ashkenazi Jews was highly regional in the past, and has also been influenced by a diverse range of European cooking traditions, including German, Italian, Slavic, and Ottoman cuisines.
 A common refrain is that the food of Ashkenazi Jews is the food of  poverty . Indeed, Jews in Europe generally lived at the sufferance of the gentile rulers of the lands in which they sojourned, and they were frequently subjected to  antisemitic   laws  that, at certain times and in certain places, limited their participation in the regular economy, [5]  or in land ownership and farming. [6]  This situation forced many Jews into intergenerational poverty, with the result being that for many Jews, only basic staples were available, and luxury items like meat and imported foods such as spices were not commonplace for anyone but the wealthy. However, the wealthy had access to and they enjoyed imported goods like spices,  olive oil , and exotic fruits, and they were able to eat meat more frequently.
 While the majority of Jews who have been living in the Western Levant and Turkey since the time of the first diaspora have been Sefardic, Mizrahi, and other non-Ashkenazi Jews, Ashkenazi communities also existed among the Jewish communities of the southern Syrian provinces in the Ottoman period (the  Old Yishuv ), and Turkey. [7]  Evidence of cross-cultural culinary exchange between Ottoman and Ashkenazi cuisines can be seen most readily in the food of Jews in the Banat, Romania, and Moldova, particularly  pastrami  and karnatzel. [8] 
 A stereotype of Ashkenazi food is that it contains few vegetables relative to other Jewish cuisines. [9]  While there is some truth to this allegation, it was most true in the late 19th and early 20th centuries, a period during which many eastern European Ashkenazi Jews experienced  particularly extreme deprivation  (including in terms of the availability of food), that coincided with the advent of industrial food processing. "Modern kitchen science" and industrial food processing continued and accelerated into the mid-20th century in the United States, leading to a narrowing of the culinary repertoire and a heavier reliance of processed shelf-stable foods. [10] 
 Root vegetables such as  turnips , beets,  parsnips ,  carrots ,  black radish  and potatoes historically made up a large portion of the Ashkenazi diet in Europe. The potato – indigenous to the Americas – had an enormous impact on Ashkenazi cuisine, though it reached most Ashkenazi Jews only in the second half of the 19th century. [11]  Other vegetables commonly eaten were cabbage,  cucumbers ,  sorrel ,  horseradish , and in the Banat,  tomatoes  and peppers. Cabbage, cucumbers, and other vegetables were frequently preserved through  pickling  or fermentation. Fruits include stone fruits such as plums and  apricots ,  apples  and  pears , and berries, which were eaten fresh or preserved. Raisins are also historically an integral part of Ashkenazi cuisine since the 14th century. [12]  Staple grains included  barley ,  rye ,  buckwheat  and  wheat ; barley and buckwheat were generally cooked whole by boiling the grains/groats in water, while rye and wheat were ground into flour and used to make breads and other baked goods. Dairy products were common, including sour cream, and cheeses such as  farmer's cheese  and  brindze  and  kashkaval  in southeastern regions. Nuts such as  almonds  and  walnuts  were eaten as well. Mushrooms were foraged or purchased. [13] 
 In North America, Ashkenazi food became blander than it had been in Europe, due primarily to the unavailability of certain ingredients and staple foods, the advent of industrial food processing and modern kitchen science, [14]  and poverty and pressures to assimilate. [15]  In the early 21st century, however, increased interest in heritage and food history, including that of Ashkenazi Jews, has resulted in efforts to revitalize this cuisine. [16] 
 
 Dishes [ edit ] 
 Baked goods [ edit ] 
 The  hamentash , a triangular cookie or turnover filled with fruit preserves ( lekvar ) or honey and black  poppy seed  paste, is eaten on the  Feast of Purim . It is said to be shaped like the hat of  Haman  the tyrant. The  mohn kichel  is a circular or rectangular wafer sprinkled with poppy seed.  Pirushkes , or turnovers, are little cakes fried in honey or dipped in molasses after they are baked.  Strudel  is served for dessert. 
 
 Kugels [ edit ] 
   A noodle kugel 
 Kugels  are a type of casserole. They come in two types: noodle or potato.  Lokshn kugl , or noodle kugel, is usually made from wide egg noodles, eggs, sour cream, raisins, and farmer's cheese, and contains some sugar. Potato kugels ( bulbenikes ) are made from chopped or shredded potatoes, onions, salt, and eggs, with oil or  schmaltz . A regional specialty,  kugel yerushalmi  (Jerusalem kugel) is made from long, thin eggs noodles, more sugar than a typical noodle kugel, and large quantities of black pepper. It is usually  pareve , whereas noodle kugel is dairy and potato kugel may be either pareve or meat-based (if made with schmaltz).
 
 Bread and cake [ edit ] 
   Challah bread 
 The dough of  challah  (called  barkhes  in Western Yiddish) is often shaped into forms having symbolical meanings; thus on  Rosh Hashanah  rings and coins are imitated, indicating "May the new year be as round and complete as these"; for  Hosha'na Rabbah , bread is baked in the form of a key, meaning "May the door of heaven open to admit our prayers." [ citation needed ] 
 In Eastern Europe, the Jews baked black ( proster , or "ordinary") bread, white bread and  challah . The most common form is the twist ( koilitch  or  kidke  from the  Romanian  word  încolăci  which means "to twist"). The  koilitch  is oval in form and about one and a half feet in length. On special occasions, such as weddings, the  koilitch  is increased to a length of about two and a half feet. 
 The  bagel , which originated in  Jewish communities of Poland , is a popular Ashkenazi food and became widespread in the  United States . [17] [18] 
 
 Fats [ edit ] 
 The rendered fat of chickens, known as  schmaltz , is sometimes kept in readiness for cooking use when needed.  Gribenes  or "scraps", also called  griven,  the cracklings left from the rendering process were one of the favorite foods of the former Jewish community in Eastern Europe.  Schmaltz  is eaten spread on bread.
 
 Fish [ edit ] 
   Gefilte fish with carrot slices and  chrain 
 With kosher meat not always available, fish became an important staple of the Jewish diet. In Eastern Europe it was sometimes especially reserved for  Shabbat . As fish is not considered meat in the same way that beef or poultry are, it can also be eaten with dairy products (although some  Sephardim  do not mix fish and dairy). 
 Even though fish is  parve , when they are served at the same meal, Orthodox Jews will eat them during separate courses and wash (or replace) the dishes in between.  Gefilte fish  and  lox  are popular in Ashkenazi cuisine.
 Gefilte fish  (from German  gefüllte  "stuffed" fish) was traditionally made by skinning the fish steaks, usually  German carp , de-boning the flesh, mincing it and sometimes mixing with finely chopped browned onions (3:1), eggs, salt or pepper and vegetable oil. The fish skin and head were then stuffed with the mixture and poached. [19] 
 The religious reason for a boneless fish dish for Shabbat is the prohibition of separating bones from food while eating ( borer ).
 
   Vorschmack / gehakte  herring spread on rye bread 
 A more common commercially packaged product found today is the "Polish" gefilte-fish patties or balls, similar to  quenelles , where sugar is added to the broth, resulting in a slightly sweet taste. [20]  Strictly speaking they are the fish filling, rather than the complete filled fish. [21]  This method of serving evolved from the tradition of removing the stuffing from the skin, [22]  rather than portioning the entire fish into slices before serving.
 While traditionally made with  carp  or whitefish and sometimes  pike , gefilte fish may also be made from any large fish:  cod ,  haddock , or  hake  in the United Kingdom.
 The combination of  smoked salmon , or whitefish with  bagels  and  cream cheese  is a traditional breakfast or brunch in  American Jewish cuisine , made famous at  New York City   delicatessens .
 Vorschmack  or  gehakte hering  (chopped herring), a popular appetizer on Shabbat, is made by chopping skinned, boned  herrings  with hard-boiled  eggs , sometimes  onions ,  apples ,  sugar  or  pepper  and a dash of  vinegar .
 
 Meat [ edit ] 
 Holishkes , stuffed cabbage, also known as the  cabbage roll , is also a European Jewish dish that emerged from more impoverished times for Jews. Because having a live cow was more valuable than to eat meat in the Middle Ages, Jews used fillers such as breadcrumbs and vegetables to mix with ground beef. This gave the effect of more meat being stuffed into the cabbage leaves.
 A spread of  chopped liver , prepared with  caramelized onions  and often including  gribenes , is a popular appetizer, side dish, or snack, especially among Jews on the east coast of North America. It is usually served with rye bread or crackers.
 Gebratenes  (roasted meat), chopped meat and  essig-fleisch  (vinegar meat) are favorite meat recipes. The  essig  or, as it is sometimes called,  honig  or  Sauerbraten , is made by adding to meat which has been partially roasted some sugar, bay leaves, pepper, raisins, salt and a little vinegar.  Knish  is a snack food consisting of a meat or potato filling covered with dough that is either baked or grilled.
 
 Side dishes [ edit ] 
 Tzimmes  generally consists of cooked vegetables or fruits, sometimes with meat added. The most popular vegetable is the carrot ( mehren tzimes ), which is sliced. Turnips are also used for  tzimmes , particularly in Lithuania. In southern Russia, Galicia and Romania  tzimmes  are made with pears, apples, figs, prunes or plums ( floymn tzimes ).
 Kreplach  are  ravioli -like dumplings made from flour and eggs mixed into a dough, rolled into sheets, cut into squares and then filled with finely chopped, seasoned meat or cheese. They are most often served in soup, but may be fried.  Kreplach  are eaten on various holidays, including  Purim  and  Hosha'na Rabbah .
 
 Soups [ edit ] 
   Borscht  with sour cream 
 A number of soups are characteristically Ashkenazi, one of the most common of which is  chicken soup  traditionally served on  Shabbat , holidays and special occasions. The soup may be served with noodles ( lokshen  in Yiddish). It is often served with  shkedei marak  (lit. "soup almonds", croutons popular in Israel), called  mandlen  or  mandlach  in Yiddish. Other popular ingredients are  kreplach  (dumplings) and matza balls  ( kneidlach )— a mixture of matza meal, eggs, water pepper or salt. Some reserve  kneidlach  for  Passover  and  kreplach  for other special occasions.
 In the preparation of a number of soups, neither meat nor fat is used. Such soups formed the food of the poor classes. An expression among Jews of Eastern Europe,  soup mit nisht  (soup with nothing), owes its origin to soups of this kind. 
 Soups such as  borscht  were considered a staple in  Ukraine .  Shtshav , a soup made with sorrel, was often referred to as "green borscht" or "sour grass". [23]  Soups like  krupnik  were made of barley, potatoes and fat. This was the staple food of the poor students of the  yeshivot ; in richer families, meat was added to this soup.
 At weddings, "golden" chicken soup was often served. The reason for its name is probably the yellow circles of molten  chicken fat  floating on its surface. Today, chicken soup is widely referred to (not just among Jews) in jest as "Jewish penicillin", and hailed as a cure for the common cold. [24] 
 There are a number of sour soups in the borscht category. One is  kraut  or cabbage borscht, made by cooking together cabbage, meat, bones, onions, raisins, sour salt (citric acid), sugar and sometimes tomatoes. 
 Beet borscht is served hot or cold. In the cold version, a beaten egg yolk may be added before serving and each bowl topped with a dollop of sour cream. This last process is called  farweissen  (to make white).
 Krupnik, or barley soup, originates in Polish lands; its name comes from the Slavic term for hulled grains,  krupa . While non-Jewish recipes for krupnik often involve meat (beef, chicken, pork or a mixture) and dairy (sour cream) in the same recipe, Jewish recipes for meat-based krupnik generally use chicken or (more rarely) beef broth; if made without meat, sour cream may be added. [25] 
 
 Sweets and confections [ edit ] 
   Teiglach 
 Teiglach , traditionally served on  Rosh Hashanah , the Jewish New Year, consists of little balls of dough (about the size of a marble) drenched in a honey syrup.  Ingberlach  are ginger candies shaped into small sticks or rectangles.  Rugelach ,  babka , and  kokosh  are popular pastries as well.
 In Europe, jellies and preserves made from fruit juice were used as pastry filling or served with tea. Among the poor, jelly was reserved for invalids, hence the practice of reciting the Yiddish saying  Alevay zol men dos nit darfn  (May we not have occasion to use it) before storing it away.
 Flodni , a layered sweet pastry consisting of apples, walnuts, currants and poppy seeds, were a staple of  Hungarian Jewish  bakeries prior to  World War II .
 Because it was easy to prepare, made from inexpensive ingredients and contained no dairy products,  compote  became a staple dessert in Jewish households throughout Europe and was considered part of Jewish cuisine. [26] 
 
 Gallery [ edit ] 
 
 
 
 
 Chocolate rugelach
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bagel with lox, cream cheese, and capers
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cholent
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Half sour and full sour fermented cucumber pickles
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Chicken broth with kreplach (soup dumplings)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kasha varnishkes
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Holishkes (cabbage rolls)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gefilte feffers (stuffed peppers)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cheese blintzes with blackberry preserves
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Varenikes (dumplings with fruit preserves)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Krupnick (barley and mushroom) soup
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Shtshav (sorrel soup)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Shashlik  cooked outdoors
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fresh curd cheese
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fruit preserves
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tzimmes with sweet potato and pear
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gefilte fish  quenelles 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Helzel 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pontshkes  (jelly doughnuts)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cucumber salad with dill and onions
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Arbes (boiled chickpeas)
 
 
 
 
 See also [ edit ] 
 American Jewish cuisine 
 Sephardic Jewish cuisine 
 Mizrahi Jewish cuisine 
 Ethiopian Jewish cuisine 
 Syrian Jewish cuisine 
 Israeli cuisine 
 Yemenite Jewish cuisine 
 Ancient Israelite cuisine 
 Jewish cuisine 
 German cuisine 
 References [ edit ] 
 
 
 ^   Nathan, Joan.  King Solomon's Table . 
 
 ^   Marks, Rabbi Gil.  The Encyclopedia of Jewish Food . 
 
 ^   "Ashkenazi Cuisine" .  My Jewish Learning . 70 Faces Media . Retrieved  22 October  2022 . 
 
 ^   Mosk (2013), p. 143 
 
 ^   Bauer, Ela.  "Guilds" .  YIVO Encyclopedia . YIVO . Retrieved  22 October  2022 . 
 
 ^   Landsburg, Steven E. (13 June 2003).  "Why Jews Don't Farm" .  Slate . Retrieved  22 October  2022 . 
 
 ^   Headrick, Isabelle S. (15 March 2021).  "A Family Fight on the Bosporus: The Ashkenazi Jews of the Ottoman Empire" .  Not Even Past . Retrieved  22 October  2022 . 
 
 ^   "The Hirshon Romanian-Jewish Garlic Beef "Sausages" – Karnatzlach" .  The Food Dictator . 24 March 2019 . Retrieved  22 October  2022 . 
 
 ^   Wex, Michael (2016).  Rhapsody in Schmaltz: Yiddish Food and Why We Can't Stop Eating It . New York: St. Martin's Press. pp. 16–17.  ISBN   978-1-250-07151-4 . 
 
 ^   Haber, Joel (27 April 2022).  "Ashkenazi Food: Unrecognized Diversity" .  A Taste of Jew . Retrieved  22 October  2022 . 
 
 ^   Wex, Michael (2016).  Rhapsody in Schmaltz: Yiddish Food and Why We Can't Stop Eating It . New York: St. Martin's Press. p. 116.  ISBN   978-1-250-07151-4 . 
 
 ^   Schoenfein, Liza (March 2, 2023).  "Could this be the most underrated ingredient in all of Jewish cooking?" . The Forward . Retrieved  2 March  2023 . 
 
 ^   Kirshenblatt-Gimblett, Barbara.  "Food and Drink" .  YIVO Encyclopedia . YIVO . Retrieved  22 October  2022 . 
 
 ^   Haber, Joel (27 April 2022).  "Ashkenazi Food: Unrecognized Diversity" .  A Taste of Jew . Retrieved  22 October  2022 . 
 
 ^   Koenig, Leah (20 April 2016).  "As American as Pot Roast and Potato Salad" .  Tablet Magazine . Retrieved  22 October  2022 . 
 
 ^   Kaplan, Ben (5 February 2020).  "Reclaiming Food, Reclaiming History" .  eJewish Philanthropy . Retrieved  22 October  2022 . 
 
 ^   Filippone, Peggy Trowbridge.  “Bagel History: Bagels date back to the 1600s” , About.com website, retrieved March 27, 2013. 
 
 ^   Altschuler, Glenn C. (2008).  ”Three Centuries of Bagels” , a book review of:  'The Bagel: The Surprising History of a Modest Bread', by Balinska, Maria, Yale University Press, 2008 , Jewish Daily Press website, published on-line November 05, 2008 in the issue of November 14, 2008 
 
 ^   Попова, М. Ф.,  Секреты Одесской кухни , Друк, Одесса, 2004, p.163 (Russian); Popova M.F.,  Secrets of  Odessa  kitchen, Druk, Odessa, 2004, p.163 
 
 ^   Satz, Miriam,  Heirloom cookbook: recipes handed down by Jewish mothers and modern recipes from daughters and friends , Kar-Ben, 2003, p.14 
 
 ^   Goodman, Hanna,  Jewish cooking around the World: gourmet and holiday recipes , Varda Books
Skokie, Illinois, 2002, p.147 
 
 ^   Garfunkel, Trudy,  Kosher for everybody: the complete guide to understanding, shopping, cooking, and eating the kosher way , John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 2004, p.11 
 
 ^   Polis, Jared.  "Schav (Sour Grass)" .  Jewish Food Experience . Retrieved  22 October  2022 . 
 
 ^   "Jewish penicillin definition" .  Medterms.Com . Medicine Net.Com, a WebMD Company. Archived from  the original  on 2012-08-01 . Retrieved  2012-07-12 . 
 
 ^   Romanow, Katherine.  "Eating Jewish: Krupnik (Polish Barley Soup)" .  Jewish Women's Encyclopedia . Retrieved  31 October  2022 . 
 
 ^   Be Merry / A taste of Poland ,  Haaretz 
 
 
 v t e Jewish cuisine History 
 Ancient Israelite cuisine 
 1902 kosher meat boycott 
 Jewish-American patronage of Chinese restaurants 
 Types 
 American Jewish 
 Ashkenazi 
 Bukharan 
 Ethiopian 
 Israeli 
 Mizrahi 
 Sephardi 
 Syrian Jewish 
 Yemenite 
 Religious dietary laws and related terms 
 Fleishig 
 Kashrut 
 Kitniyot 
 Kosher 
 Kosher airline meal 
 Kosher for Passover 
 Kosher restaurant 
 Kosher-style 
 Mashgiach 
 Milchig 
 Pareve 
 Shechita 
 Treif 
 Chefs 
 Ron Ben-Israel 
 Laura Frankel 
 Ina Garten 
 Gil Marks 
 Joan Nathan 
 Ruth Reichl 
 Eyal Shani 
 Michael Solomonov 
 Yotam Ottolenghi 
 Molly Yeh 
 Religious foods 
 Apples and honey 
 Brisket 
 Challah 
 Charoset 
 Dabo kolo 
 Etrog 
 Hanukkah gelt 
 Maror 
 Matzo 
 Mishloach manot 
 Mouna 
 Pain petri 
 Pekalach 
 Showbread 
 Teiglach 
 Zeroa 
 Ashkenazi breads 
 Babka 
 Challah 
 Onion roll 
 Pletzel 
 Pumpernickel 
 Rye Bread 
 Sephardi and Mizrahi breads 
 Bolo 
 Challah 
 Jachnun 
 Kubaneh 
 Lachooh 
 Laffa 
 Lahmacun 
 Lavash 
 Malawach 
 Manakish 
 Markook 
 Mouna 
 Pain petri 
 Pita 
 Pitot 
 Taboon bread 
 Water challah 
 Ethiopian Jewish breads 
 Injera 
 Bagels and similar breads 
 Bagel 
 Bagel Bites 
 Bagel toast 
 Bagel with cream cheese 
 Bialy 
 Everything bagel 
 Montreal-style bagel 
 New York-style bagel 
 Pizza bagel 
 Pancakes 
 Pesaha Appam 
 Atayef 
 Blintz 
 Chremslach 
 Keftes 
 Keftes de prasa 
 Latke 
 Mofletta 
 Noodle latkes 
 Cakes and other desserts 
 Apple strudel 
 Ashure 
 Atayef 
 Babka 
 Bambalouni 
 Basbousa 
 Bolo 
 Carrot pudding 
 Cheesecake 
 Coffee cake 
 Crumb cake 
 Dobosh 
 Flourless chocolate cake 
 Halva 
 Halvah 
 Halvah ice cream 
 Jewish apple cake 
 Jordan almonds 
 Kogel mogel 
 Krantz cake 
 Krembo 
 Kugelhopf 
 Lekach 
 Linzer torte 
 Lokum 
 Malabi 
 Marzipan 
 Milky 
 Mofletta 
 New York cheesecake 
 Plum cake 
 Poppy seed roll 
 Sesame seed candy 
 Sfinj 
 Sfinz 
 Sponge cake 
 Sufganiyot 
 Strudel 
 Streuselkuchen 
 Cookies 
 Alfajores 
 Biscochos 
 Black and white cookie 
 Chinese cookie 
 Egg kichel 
 Duvshaniot 
 Hamantaschen 
 Honey buttons 
 Jewish almond cookie 
 Jødekager 
 Kichel 
 Kipfel 
 Linzer cookie 
 Ma'amoul 
 Macaroons 
 Mandelbread 
 Rainbow cookie 
 Rugelach 
 Tahini cookie 
 Pastries 
 Baklava 
 Bichak 
 Bourekas 
 Boyoz 
 Chebureki 
 Hojaldre 
 Knish 
 Nunt 
 Pastelitos de hoja 
 Pastilla 
 Pirozhki 
 Rugelach 
 Sambusak 
 Ziva 
 Fried foods 
 Blintz 
 Buñuelo 
 Brik 
 Carciofi alla giudia 
 Churro 
 Corn schnitzel 
 Falafel 
 Fatoot 
 Fatoot samneh 
 Fazuelos 
 Fish and chips 
 Fried cauliflower 
 Fritas de prasa 
 Gribenes 
 Jelly doughnut 
 Keftes 
 Keftes de prasa 
 Kibbeh 
 Ktzitzot Khubeza 
 Latke 
 Matzah brei 
 Noodle latkes 
 Potatonik 
 Sfinj 
 Sufganiyot 
 Teiglach 
 Torrija 
 Tulumba 
 Dumplings, pastas and grain dishes 
 Bsisa 
 Bulgur 
 Couscous 
 Dampfnudel 
 Egg noodles 
 Dolma 
 Farfel 
 Fideos 
 Freekeh 
 Gefilte fish 
 Germknödel 
 Gondi 
 Kasha 
 Kasha varnishkes 
 Kneidlach 
 Kreplach 
 Kibbeh 
 Kubbeh 
 Lokshen kugel 
 Macaroni hamin 
 Manti 
 Matzo ball 
 Orez Shu'it 
 Pelmeni 
 Pierogi 
 Pilaf 
 Ptitim 
 Shirin polo 
 Shlishkes 
 Soup mandels 
 Tabbouleh 
 Tahdig 
 Vareniki 
 Casseroles and savory baked dishes 
 Almadrote 
 Brisket 
 Cholent 
 Hamin 
 Holishkes 
 Jerusalem kugel 
 Karniyarik 
 Kishka 
 Knish 
 Ktzitzot Khubeza 
 Kugel 
 Lokshen kugel 
 Matzo lasagna 
 Pom 
 Potato kugel 
 Potatonik 
 Sólet 
 Stuffed artichoke 
 Stuffed cabbage 
 Stuffed peppers 
 Tagine 
 Yakhna 
 Yapchik 
 Snacks and other baked goods 
 Bamba 
 Bissli 
 Khachapuri 
 Pitzuchim 
 Pretzel 
 Shkedei marak 
 Stuffed dates 
 Sandwiches 
 Corned beef sandwich 
 Hillel sandwich 
 Pastrami on rye 
 Rachel 
 Reuben 
 Sabich 
 Sailor sandwich 
 Shawarma 
 Tuna sandwich 
 Egg dishes 
 Beitzah 
 Fatoot samneh 
 Haminados 
 Hardboiled egg 
 Matzah brei 
 Matzoquiles 
 Shakshouka 
 Meat dishes 
 Brisket 
 Cholent 
 Chopped liver 
 Corned beef 
 Gribenes 
 Gondi 
 Hamin 
 Helzel 
 Hot dog 
 Jerusalem mixed grill 
 Kebab 
 Kibbeh 
 Kishka 
 Kofta 
 Merguez 
 Miltz 
 Montreal smoked meat 
 Pargiyot 
 Pastilla 
 Pastirma 
 Pastrami 
 Plov 
 Sanbat wat 
 Shawarma 
 Skewered goose liver 
 Schmaltz 
 Shish kebab 
 Shish taouk 
 Sujuk 
 Tagine 
 Fish dishes 
 Abudaraho 
 Chraime 
 Dressed herring 
 Fish and chips 
 Gefilte fish 
 Gravlax 
 Herring 
 Ikra 
 Kipper 
 Lakerda 
 Lox 
 Pescado frito 
 Pickled herring 
 Schmaltz herring 
 Smoked salmon 
 Smoked whitefish 
 Tarama 
 Tunafish 
 Tuna salad 
 Tuna salad sandwich 
 Vorschmack 
 Whitefish salad 
 Salads and pickles 
 Apio 
 Eggplant salad 
 Israeli salad 
 Kosher dill pickle 
 Matbucha 
 Pickled cucumber 
 Tabbouleh 
 Torshi 
 Vegetable dishes 
 Bamia 
 Dolma 
 Stuffed cabbage 
 Tzimmes 
 Soups and stews 
 Adom kubbeh 
 Avgolemono 
 Borscht 
 Chamo kubbe 
 Chicken noodle soup 
 Chamin 
 Chamo kubbeh 
 Cholent 
 Ghormeh sabzi 
 Gondi 
 Hamusta kubbeh 
 Matzo ball soup 
 Msoki 
 Poike 
 Sanbat wat 
 Schav 
 Sofrito 
 Tarator 
 Cheeses and other dairy products 
 Akkawi 
 Ayran 
 Clarified butter 
 Cottage cheese 
 Cream cheese 
 Farmer's cheese 
 Feta 
 Kashkaval 
 Kefir 
 Labneh 
 Quark 
 Sirene 
 Smen 
 Smetana 
 Sour cream 
 Strained yogurt 
 Tzfat cheese 
 Condiments, dips and sauces 
 Applesauce 
 Amba 
 Baba ghanoush 
 Charoset 
 Chrain 
 Filfel chuma 
 Harissa 
 Hilbeh 
 Hummus 
 Horseradish 
 Muhammara 
 Mustard 
 Resek avganiyot 
 Spicy brown mustard 
 Tahini 
 Zhoug 
 Beverages 
 Arak 
 Beer 
 Boukha 
 Boza 
 Cel-Ray 
 Dr. Brown's 
 Egg cream 
 Grape juice 
 Kedem 
 Linden flower tea 
 Mint lemonade 
 Manischewitz 
 Mint tea 
 Pomegranate juice 
 Salep 
 Seltzer 
 Tallah 
 Vodka Perfect 
 Wine 
 Herbs, spices and seasonings 
 Anise 
 Baharat 
 Cardamom 
 Cinnamon 
 Consommé 
 Dried onion 
 Everything bagel seasoning 
 Hawaij 
 Montreal steak seasoning 
 Licorice root 
 Nigella seeds 
 Poppy seed 
 Sesame seeds 
 Za'atar 
 Related lists 
 List of foods with religious symbolism 
 List of Jewish cuisine dishes 
 List of kosher restaurants 
 List of restaurants in Israel 
 
   Category 
     Food portal 
   The Israel Portal 
 
 .
 
  
NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw2271
Cached time: 20230304142152
Cache expiry: 1814400
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc, no‐toc‐conversion]
CPU time usage: 0.525 seconds
Real time usage: 0.684 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1823/1000000
Post‐expand include size: 76863/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1327/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 1/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 82369/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.292/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 6284165/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/400
 
 
Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  491.361      1 -total
 37.75%  185.505      1 Template:Reflist
 20.85%  102.451      1 Template:Jewish_cuisine
 20.30%   99.765      1 Template:Navbox
 19.81%   97.342      1 Template:Gallery
 18.11%   88.971      4 Template:Cite_book
 12.64%   62.119     13 Template:Cite_web
 12.06%   59.246      1 Template:Short_description
  7.12%   34.986      1 Template:Citation_needed
  6.74%   33.112      2 Template:Pagetype
 
  Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:idhash:62138425-0!canonical and timestamp 20230304142151 and revision id 1142527721. Rendering was triggered because: page-view
  
 esi <esi:include src="/esitest-fa8a495983347898/content" />  
 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ashkenazi_Jewish_cuisine&oldid=1142527721 " 
 Categories :  Ashkenazi Jewish cuisine Jewish cuisine Jewish culture Hidden categories:  Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2021 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  This page was last edited on 2 March 2023, at 22:31  (UTC) . 
 Text is available under the  Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0 ;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the  Terms of Use  and  Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the  Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. 
 
 
 Privacy policy 
 About Wikipedia 
 Disclaimers 
 Contact Wikipedia 
 Mobile view 
 Developers 
 Statistics 
 Cookie statement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
