
 
 
 Jump to content 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle sidebar 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Create account Log in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Personal tools 
 
 
 
 
   Create account   Log in 
 
 
 
 
		Pages for logged out editors  learn more 
 
 
 Contributions Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Navigation 
 
 
 Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate 
 
 
 
 
 Contribute 
 
 
 Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file 
 
 
 
 
 Tools 
 
 
 What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item 
 
 
 
 
 Print/export 
 
 
 Download as PDF Printable version 
 
 
 
 
 In other projects 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons Wikibooks 
 
 
 
 
 Languages 
 
 On this Wikipedia the language links are at the top of the page across from the article title.  Go to top . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CentralNotice  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Contents 
 move to sidebar 
 hide 
 
 
 
 
 (Top) 
 
 
 
 
 
 1 Mealtimes 
 
 
				Toggle Mealtimes subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 1.1 Popular dishes of Vienna 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 Meat 
 
 
				Toggle Meat subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 2.1 Game 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 Sweets 
 
 
				Toggle Sweets subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 3.1 Cakes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.2 Desserts 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4 Drinks 
 
 
				Toggle Drinks subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 4.1 Coffee 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.2 Hot chocolate 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.3 Soft drinks 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.4 Beer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.5 Wine 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.6 Other alcoholic drinks 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5 Snack food 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6 Regional cuisine 
 
 
				Toggle Regional cuisine subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 6.1 Lower Austria 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6.2 Burgenland 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6.3 Styria 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6.4 Carinthia 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6.5 Upper Austria 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6.6 Salzburg 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6.7 Tyrol 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6.8 Vorarlberg 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 7 Gallery 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8 See also 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 9 References 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 10 External links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
						Toggle the table of contents
					 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle the table of contents 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Austrian cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 35 languages 
 
 
 
 العربية Azərbaycanca Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Català Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Español فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Jawa ქართული Lietuvių Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Русский Shqip Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 
 Edit links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Article Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 English 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 More 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
 
 
 Style of cuisine native to Austria 
 Part of  a series  on the Culture of Austria 
 History 
 People 
 Languages 
 Mythology and folklore 
 Mythology 
 folklore 
 
 Cuisine 
 Festivals 
 Religion 
 Art 
 Literature 
 Music and performing arts 
 Music 
 
 Media 
 Radio 
 Television 
 Cinema 
 
 Sport 
 Monuments 
 World Heritage Sites 
 
 Symbols 
 Flag 
 Coat of arms 
 
 
   Austria portal v t e 
 Austrian cuisine  ( German :  Österreichische Küche ) is a style of cuisine native to Austria and composed of influences from  Central Europe  and throughout the former  Austro-Hungarian Empire . [1]  Austrian cuisine is most often associated with  Viennese cuisine , but there are significant regional variations.
 
   Wiener Schnitzel , a traditional Austrian dish made with boneless meat thinned with a mallet ( escalope -style preparation), and fried with a coating of flour, egg, and breadcrumbs 
 
 Mealtimes [ edit ] 
   Apfelstrudel 
 Breakfast is of the "continental" type, usually consisting of  bread rolls  with either jam or cold meats and cheese, accompanied by coffee, tea or juice. The midday meal was traditionally the main meal of the day, but in modern times as Austrians work longer hours further from home this is no longer the case. The main meal is now often taken in the evening.
 A mid-morning or mid-afternoon snack of a slice of bread topped with cheese or ham is referred to as a  Jause ; a more substantial version akin to a British " ploughman's lunch " is called a  Brettljause  after the wooden board on which it is traditionally served.
 
 Popular dishes of Vienna [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Viennese cuisine 
 Rindsuppe  (beef soup), a clear soup with golden colour 
 Tafelspitz , [2]  beef boiled in  broth  (soup), often served with apple and horseradish and chives sauce 
 Gulasch  ( goulash ), [3] : 21   a hotpot similar to Hungarian  pörkölt.  Austrian goulash is often eaten with rolls, bread or dumplings ( Semmelknödel ) 
 Beuschel , a  ragout  containing lungs and heart 
 Liptauer , [3] : 135   a spicy cheese spread, eaten on a slice of bread 
 Selchfleisch , meat that is smoked, then cooked, served with  Sauerkraut  and dumplings 
 Powidl , a thick sweet jam made from plums 
 Apfelstrudel , apple strudel 
 Topfenstrudel , cream cheese strudel 
 Millirahmstrudel , milk-cream strudel 
 Palatschinken , pancakes similar to French  crêpes , filled with jam, sprinkled with sugar, etc. They are also served in savoury versions, such as with spinach and cheese. 
 Kaiserschmarrn , soft, fluffy pancake ripped into bites and slightly roasted in a pan, served with  compote , applesauce or stewed plums. 
 Germknödel , a fluffy yeast dough dumpling filled with plum jam ( Powidl ), garnished with melted butter and a mix of  poppy seeds  and powdered sugar, sometimes served with vanilla cream 
 Marillenknödel , a dumpling stuffed with an apricot and covered with  streusel  and powdered sugar. The dough is made of potatoes or  Topfen . 
 Saftgulasch  (juicy stew), also known as the Austrian or Viennese Goulash, is an Austrian twist on the traditional Hungarian dish. The characteristics of the Saftgulash is that it is prepared exclusively with lean beef and a large quantity of onions, at least two thirds of the quantity of meat used. No other vegetables are added and it must be slow cooked for at least three hours. The end result is a thick dark brown sauce with very tender pieces of beef. 
 Wurstsemmel  (ham rolls), basically sliced bread rolls containing a slice of ham, or sausage (Leberkäse), or also ham & cheese 
 Krautfleisch  or  Szegediner Krautfleisch  is a ragout of Austrian cuisine - prepared from pork and  Sauerkraut . 
 Krautspatzle,  a dish consisting mainly of small noodles ( spatzle ) and cabbage. 
 Meat [ edit ] 
   Schweinsbraten (roast pork) with Semmelknödel dumpling and cabbage salad 
 The most popular meats in Austria are  beef ,  pork ,  chicken ,  turkey  and  goose . The prominent Wiener Schnitzel is traditionally made of  veal . Pork in particular is used extensively, with many dishes using offal and parts such as the snout and trotters.
 Austrian butchers use a number of special cuts of meat, including  Tafelspitz  (beef), and  Fledermaus  (pork). Fledermaus (German for " bat ") is a cut of pork from the ham bone that resembles the winged animal. It is described as "very juicy, somewhat fatty, and crossed by tendons"; the latter fact makes it suitable for steaming, braising or frying after tenderization in a marinade. [4] 
 Austrian cuisine has many different sausages, like  Frankfurter ,  Krainer Wurst  from  Carniola  (Krain),  Debreziner  (originating from  Debrecen  in Hungary), or  Burenwurst ,  Blunzn  made out of pig-blood and  Grüne Würstl —green sausages. Green means raw in this context—the sausages are air dried and are consumed boiled.  Bacon  in Austria is called  Speck , bacon can be smoked, raw, salted, spiced, etc. Bacon is used in many traditional recipes as a salty spice.  Leberkäse  is a loaf of corned beef, pork and bacon—it contains neither liver nor cheese despite the name.  Vanillerostbraten  is a garlicky beef dish.
 
 Game [ edit ] 
 Austria has an old hunting tradition since there are many woods across the country. In the autumn season many restaurants in Austria traditionally offer game on their menu along with seasonal vegetables and fruits like pumpkins from Styria. Usual game are:
 
 Deer  ( venison ):  Hirsch 
 Wild boar :  Wildschwein 
 Roe deer :  Reh 
 Fallow deer :  Damhirsch 
 Brown hare :  Hase/Feldhase 
 Common pheasant :  Fasan 
 Duck :  Ente 
 Grey partridge :  Rebhuhn 
 The German names of game animals followed by  -braten  signifies a dish of roast game:  Hirschbraten  is roast venison.
 
 Sweets [ edit ] 
 Cakes [ edit ] 
   The original  Sachertorte , as served at Vienna's  Hotel Sacher 
 Austrian cakes and pastries are a well-known feature of its cuisine. Perhaps the most famous is the  Sachertorte , a chocolate cake with apricot jam filling, traditionally eaten with whipped cream. Among the cakes with the longest tradition is the  Linzer torte . Other favourites include the caramel-flavoured  Dobostorte  and the delicately layered  Esterhazy Torte , named in honour of  Prince Esterházy  (both originating from Hungary during the Austro-Hungarian empire), as well as a number of cakes made with fresh fruit and cream.  Punschkrapfen  is a classical Austrian  pastry , a cake filled with cake crumbs,  nougat  chocolate,  apricot  jam and then soaked with  rum .  Tirolerkuchen  is a hazelnut and chocolate  coffee cake .  Mohr im Hemd , while traditionally something closer to a chocolate  custard , is now generally prepared as a steamed cake.
 
   Linzer Torte 
 These cakes are typically complex and difficult to make. They can be eaten at a café or bought by the slice from a bakery. A "Konditorei" is a specialist cake-maker, and the designations "Café-Konditorei" and "Bäckerei-Konditorei" are common indicators that the café or bakery in question specialises in this field.
 
 Desserts [ edit ] 
 Austrian desserts are usually slightly less complicated than the elaborate cakes described above. The most famous of these is the  Apfelstrudel  ( apple strudel ), layers of thin pastry surrounding a filling of apple, usually with cinnamon and raisins. Other strudels are also popular, such as those filled with sweetened curd cheese called  Topfen , sour cherry ( Weichselstrudel ), sweet cherry and poppy seed strudel ( Mohnstrudel ).
 Another favourite is  Kaiserschmarr'n , a rich fluffy sweet thick  pancake  made with raisins and other fruits, broken into pieces and served with a fruit compote (traditionally made of plums called  Zwetschkenröster ) for dipping, while a speciality of Salzburg is the  meringue -like "Salzburger Nocken". The  Danish pastry  is said to originate from  Vienna  and in Denmark is called  wienerbrød  (Viennese bread). The Danish pastry uses a dough in the classic cuisine referred to as "Viennese Dough", made of thin layers of butter and flour dough, imported to Denmark by Austrian bakers hired during a strike among the workers in Danish bakeries in 1850. [5] 
 
 Drinks [ edit ] 
 Coffee [ edit ] 
   An  Einspänner  is classically served in a glass 
 Austria is credited in popular legend with introducing  coffee  to Europe after bags of coffee beans were left behind by the retreating Turkish army after the  Battle of Vienna  in 1683. Although the first  coffeehouses  had appeared in Europe some years earlier, the Viennese café tradition became an important part of the city's identity.
 Coffee  is served in a variety of styles, particularly in the  Viennese coffee houses . An Austrian  Mokka  or  kleiner Schwarzer  is similar to  espresso , but is extracted more slowly. Other styles are prepared from the  Mokka :
 
 großer Schwarzer  – a double  Mokka 
 kleiner Brauner  or  großer Brauner  – single or double  Mokka  plus  milk 
 Verlängerter  – "lengthened" (i.e., diluted)  Mokka  with more water plus milk 
 Melange  – half  Mokka , half heated milk, often topped with foamed milk 
 Franziskaner  –  Melange  topped with  whipped cream  and foamed milk 
 Kapuziner  –  kleiner Schwarzer  plus whipped cream 
 Einspänner  –  großer Schwarzer  topped with whipped cream 
 Wiener Eiskaffee  – iced  Mokka  with vanilla ice cream, topped with whipped cream 
 Italian styles such as  cappuccino ,  espresso  and  Latte  are also commonly served.
 Traditionally, coffee is served with a glass of still water.
 Drinking coffee together is an important social activity in Austrian culture. It is quite common for Austrians to invite friends or neighbours over for coffee and cake. This routine activity can be compared to the British  afternoon tea  tradition. It is also very common to go to a coffeehouse while  dating .
 
 Hot chocolate [ edit ] 
 Viennese  hot chocolate  is very rich, containing heavy cream in addition to chocolate, and sometimes thickened further with egg yolk.
 
 Soft drinks [ edit ] 
 Almdudler  is an Austrian soft drink based on mountain herbs and with a flavour reminiscent of  sambucus  beverages. It is considered the "national drink of Austria", and is popularly used as a mixer with white wine or water. While  Red Bull  is popular all across the West, the energy drink company started in Austria. The headquarters of the Red Bull company are located at  Fuschl am See  near  Salzburg .
 
 Beer [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Beer in Austria 
 Beer  is generally sold in the following sizes: 0.2 litre (a  Pfiff ), 0.33 litre (a  Seidel ,  kleines Bier  or  Glas Bier ) and 0.5 litre (a  Krügerl  or  großes Bier  or  Hoibe ). At festivals one litre  Maß  and two litre  Doppelmaß  in the  Bavarian  style are also sometimes dispensed. The most popular types of beer are pale  lager  (known as  Märzen  in Austria), naturally cloudy  Zwicklbier , and  wheat beer . At holidays like Christmas and Easter  bock  beer is also available.
 Austrian beers are typically in the  pale lager  style, with the exceptions noted above. A dark amber "Vienna Style" lager was pioneered in the city during the 19th century but is no longer common there.
 
 Wine [ edit ] 
   The Austrian wine seal is used on all wines at Qualitätswein level 
 Wine  is principally cultivated in the east of Austria. The most important wine-producing areas are in  Lower Austria ,  Burgenland ,  Styria , and Vienna. The  Grüner Veltliner  grape provides some of Austria's most notable white wines;  Zweigelt  is the most widely planted red wine grape. Southern Burgenland is a region that mainly grows red grapes; the "Seewinkel" area, east of the  Neusiedler See  in Burgenland's north, has more mixed wine cultures and is famous for its sweet wines. Wine is even grown within the city limits of Vienna – the only European capital where this is true – and some is even produced under the auspices of the city council.
 Young wine (i.e., wine produced from  grapes  of the most recent harvest) is called  Heuriger  and gives its name to  inns  in Vienna and its surroundings, which serve  Heuriger  wine along with food. In Styria, Carinthia and Burgenland, the  Heuriger  inns are known as  Buschenschanken .
 
 Other alcoholic drinks [ edit ] 
 In  Upper Austria ,  Burgenland , Lower Austria, Styria and  Carinthia ,  Most , the fresh juice of grapes or apples is produced, while  Sturm  ("storm"), a semi-fermented grape juice is drunk after the grape harvest.  Most  and  Sturm  are pre-stages of wine.
 At the close of a meal, sometimes  schnapps  ( fruit brandy ), typically of up to 60% alcohol, is drunk. In Austria schnaps is made from a variety of fruits, for example  apricots ,  rowanberries ,  gentiana  roots, various  herbs  and even flowers. The produce of small private schnaps  distilleries , of which there are around 20,000 in Austria, is known as  Selberbrennter  or  Hausbrand .
 
 Snack food [ edit ] 
   A  Käsekrainer  sausage with a Kaiser roll and mustard 
 For food consumed in between meals there are many types of open sandwiches called "belegte Brote", or different kinds of  sausage  with mustard, ketchup and bread, as well as sliced sausage,  Leberkäse  rolls or  Schnitzelsemmeln  (rolls filled with  schnitzel ).
 
   Open sandwiches  in Vienna, with a  Pfiff -size beer 
 Traditionally you can get a  Wurstsemmel  (a roll filled, usually, with  Extrawurst , a special kind of thinly sliced sausage, often with a slice of cheese and a pickle or cornichon) at a butcher or at the  delicatessen  counter in a supermarket.
 
   Viennese Würstelstand, Kärntner Straße 
 There are also other common yet informal delicacies that are typical of Austrian food. For example, the  Bosna  or Bosner (a spiced  bratwurst  in a  hot dog  roll), which is an integral part of the menu at Austria's typical fast-food restaurant, the sausage stand ( Würstelstand ). Most Austrian sausages contain pork.
 
 Regional cuisine [ edit ] 
 Lower Austria [ edit ] 
 In  Lower Austria , local delicacies such as  Waldviertel   poppies , Marchfeld  asparagus  and  Wachau  apricots are cultivated. Famous are the "Marillenknödel": small dumplings filled with apricots and warm butter-fried breadcrumbs on it. Their influence can be felt in the local cuisine, for example in poppy seed noodles " Mohnnudeln ".  Game  dishes are very common. Lower Austria is striking for the differences within its regional cuisine due to its size and the variety of its landscape.
 
 Burgenland [ edit ] 
 Burgenland 's cuisine has been influenced by  Hungarian cuisine  owing to its former position within the Hungarian part of the Austro-Hungarian Empire. Dishes consist mainly of fish, chicken or pork. Potatoes are the most common side dish, for example, crushed potatoes with onions called "Greste Krumpian" (= Geröstete Kartoffeln, which comes from "geröstet", meaning "roasted", and the Hungarian term "krumpli" for potatoes). Because of Hungarian influence, Burgenlandish dishes are often spicier than elsewhere in Austria, often indicated with the terms "Zigeuner..." ("Gypsy") or "Serbisch..." ("Serbian").  Polenta  is a popular side-dish within Burgenland's Croatian minority. On  St Martin's Day  (November 11) a  Martinigans  (St Martin's goose) is often prepared, and  carp  is a typical Christmas dish.
 
 Styria [ edit ] 
 Styrian  taverns where local winemakers serve their new wine, local cold food and homemade cakes are called:  Buschenschank . They are famous for their   Brettljause , a cold hors d'oeuvre served on a wooden board, typical with  Verhackertes  (a  spread  made from finely chopped raw white bacon), different kinds of cold meat ( Gselchtes : salted and smoked meat,  Schweinsbraten : roast pork, air-dried sausages,  Speck : ham) grated horseradish, hard-boiled eggs, meat paste,  Liptauer , pumpkin seed spread, vegetables, pickels and cheese with  sourdough bread , also  Käferbohnensalat  ( runner bean  salad) with  pumpkin seed oil  is typical [6] .  Schilcher , a very dry  rosé , is the regional style of wine in Western Styria. A typically Styrian delicacy is  pumpkin seed oil , which lends itself particularly to  salads  on account of its nutty taste. Many varieties of  pumpkin  dish are also very popular.  Heidensterz , resembling a dry, almost crumbly version of  grits  made from  buckwheat  flour, is a local dish enjoyed in cold weather. Especially in autumn, game dishes are very common. [7] 
 
 
 
 Styrian   Brettljause , a cold hors d'oeuvre
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Käferbohnensalat , Runner bean salad with onions and pumpkin seed oil
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Buschenschank , winery Kapun,  Gamlitz , South-Styria, Austria
 
 
 
 
 
 
 South-Styrian wine hills
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Styrian fried chicken salad with potato- and  cornsalad 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Schilchersturm
 
 
 
 
 Carinthia [ edit ] 
 Carinthia 's many lakes mean that fish is a popular main course. Grain, dairy produce and meat are important ingredients in Carinthian cuisine. Carinthian  Kasnudeln  (noodle dough pockets filled with  quark  and  mint ) and smaller  Schlickkrapfen  (mainly with a meat filling) are well-known local delicacies.  Klachlsuppe  (pig's trotter soup) and  Reindling  (yeast-dough pastry/cake filled with a mix of cinnamon, sugar, walnuts and raisins) are also produced locally.
 
 Upper Austria [ edit ] 
 Various types of  dumplings  are an important part of  Upper Austrian  cuisine, as they are in neighbouring Bavaria and Bohemia.  Linzer Torte , a cake that includes ground almonds or nuts and redcurrant jam, is a popular dessert from the city of  Linz , the capital of Upper Austria.  Linzeraugen  are fine, soft biscuits filled with  redcurrant  jam called  Ribiselmarmelade , which has a sharp flavour.
 
 Salzburg [ edit ] 
   Salzburger Nockerln 
 Kasnocken  (cheese dumplings) are a popular meal, as are freshwater fish, particularly trout, served in various ways.  Salzburger Nockerl  (a  meringue -like dish) is a well-known local dessert.
 
 Tyrol [ edit ] 
 Tyrolean bacon and all sorts of dumplings including  Speckknödel  (dumplings with pieces of bacon) and  Spinatknödel  (made of spinach) are an important part of the local cuisine. Tyrolean cuisine is very simple because in earlier times Tyroleans were not very rich, farming on mountains and in valleys in the middle of the Alpine Region. Tyrolean food often contains milk, cheese, flour and lard.
 
 Vorarlberg [ edit ] 
 The cuisine of  Vorarlberg  has been influenced by the  Alemannic  cuisine of neighbouring Switzerland and  Swabia . Cheese and cheese products play a major role in the cuisine, with  Käsknöpfle  and  Kässpätzle  (egg noodles prepared with cheese) being popular dishes. Other delicacies include  Krautspätzle  (sauerkraut noodles),  Käsdönnala  (similar to a  quiche ),  Schupfnudla  (made from a dough mixing potato and flour),  Frittatensuppe  (pancake soup),  Öpfelküachle  (apple cake) and  Funkaküachle  (cake traditionally eaten on the first Sunday of Lent).
 
 Gallery [ edit ] 
 
 Dishes 
 
 
 
 Bierschinken ,  Leberwurst  and  Blutwurst 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tiroler Speckknödelsuppe 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Erdäpfelsuppe
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Leberknödelsuppe
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Frittatensuppe
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tafelspitz 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bruckfleisch
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rindsgulasch
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Käsnudel - Carinthian Cheese Noodles
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Stelze 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Krustenbraten mit Dunkelbiersoße, baked pork served with a dark beer sauce.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Marillenknödel 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kaiserschmarrn 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mohnnudeln , poppy seed noodles
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mohnstrudel 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Plum cake
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Buchteln 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bundt Cake  with Grapes
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Palatschinken 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Salzburger Nockerln 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sachertorte 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Saftgulasch
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bratknödel
 
 
 
 
 See also [ edit ] 
 Culture of Austria 
 Vienna bread , innovative bread style from Vienna 
 References [ edit ] 
 
 
 ^   "Austrian cuisine" .  Archived  from the original on 2014-08-22 . Retrieved  2009-02-12 . 
 
 ^   "Vienna cuisine" . Archived from  the original  on 2018-04-01 . Retrieved  2009-02-12 . 
 
 ^  a   b   Gundel, Karoly (1992).  Gundel's Hungarian cookbook . Budapest: Corvina.  ISBN   963-13-3600-X .  OCLC   32227400 . 
 
 ^   " Die Neue Fleischeslust  (in German)" . falstaff. Archived from  the original  on May 13, 2016 . Retrieved  April 30,  2016 . 
 
 ^   "Wienerbrød" . Arbejdsgiverforeningen Konditorer, Bagere og Chocolademagere. Archived from  the original  on 2008-02-22 . Retrieved  2009-01-09 . 
 
 ^   "Was ist ein Buschenschank?"  [What is a Buschenschank?] (in German) . Retrieved  12 December  2022 . 
 
 ^   "Meat" . www.steiermark.com.  Archived  from the original on 2018-09-08 . Retrieved  2018-09-08 . 
 
 
 Much of the content of this article comes from  Österreichische Küche  retrieved April 2, 2005. 
 External links [ edit ] 
 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons has media related to  Cuisine of Austria . 
 
 Österreichische Küche – AEIOU 
 v t e Austria   articles History 
 Timeline 
 Margraviate of Austria 
 Duchy of Austria 
 Archduchy of Austria 
 Habsburg monarchy 
 Siege of Vienna (1529) 
 Austrian Empire 
 March Constitution 
 Congress of Vienna 
 Austria-Hungary 
 German Austria 
 First Austrian Republic 
 Austrian Civil War 
 Federal State of Austria 
 Austrofascism 
 Anschluss 
 Ostmark 
 Allied-administered Austria 
 History of Vienna 
 Military history of Austria 
 Geography 
 Administrative divisions 
 Cities 
 Districts 
 Lakes 
 Mountains 
 Rivers 
 States 
 World Heritage Sites 
 Politics 
 Climate change 
 Constitution 
 Elections 
 Foreign relations 
 Government 
 Human rights 
 Law 
 enforcement 
 LGBT rights 
 Legal system 
 Military 
 Parliament 
 Political parties 
 Economy 
 Agriculture 
 Banking 
 Companies 
 Energy 
 Mining 
 Taxation 
 Telecommunications 
 Tourism 
 Transport 
 Society 
 Austrian people 
 Crime 
 Demographics 
 Education 
 Ethnic groups 
 Health care 
 Languages 
 Religion 
 Culture 
 Architecture 
 Cinema 
 Coat of arms 
 Cuisine 
 Flag 
 Literature 
 Media 
 Museums 
 Music 
 National anthem 
 Public holidays 
 Sport 
 Outline Index 
 Category 
 Portal 
 v t e European cuisine Sovereign states European Union 
 Austria 
 Belgium 
 Bulgaria 
 Croatia 
 Cyprus 
 Czech Republic 
 Denmark 
 Estonia 
 Finland 
 France 
 Germany 
 Greece 
 Hungary 
 Republic of Ireland 
 Italy 
 Latvia 
 Lithuania 
 Luxembourg 
 Malta 
 Netherlands 
 Poland 
 Portugal 
 Romania 
 Slovakia 
 Slovenia 
 Spain 
 Sweden 
 Other 
 Albania 
 Andorra 
 Armenia 
 Azerbaijan 
 Belarus 
 Bosnia and Herzegovina 
 Georgia 
 Iceland 
 Kazakhstan 
 Liechtenstein 
 Moldova 
 Monaco 
 Montenegro 
 North Macedonia 
 Norway 
 Russia 
 San Marino 
 Serbia 
 Switzerland 
 Turkey 
 Ukraine 
 United Kingdom 
 Vatican City 
 States with limited recognition 
 Abkhazia 
 Kosovo 
 Nagorno-Karabakh 
 Northern Cyprus 
 South Ossetia 
 Transnistria 
 Dependencies  and other territories 
 Faroe Islands 
 Gibraltar 
 Guernsey 
 Isle of Man 
 Jersey 
 
 v t e Cuisines Continental 
 African 
 North 
 West 
 list 
 Americas 
 Caribbean 
 North 
 South 
 list 
 Asian 
 Caucasian 
 Central 
 Indian subcontinent 
 Levantine 
 list 
 European 
 Balkan 
 Central 
 Eastern 
 list 
 Oceanic 
 Intercontinental
 Global 
 Latin American 
 Mediterranean 
 Middle Eastern 
 National  and regional 
 Afghan 
 Albanian 
 Algerian 
 American 
 Californian 
 Floribbean 
 Hawaiian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Lowcountry (South Carolina) 
 New England 
 New Mexico 
 Pacific Northwest 
 Pennsylvania Dutch 
 Puerto Rican 
 Southern US 
 Southwest US 
 Texas 
 Angolan 
 Argentine 
 Armenian 
 Australian 
 Austrian 
 Azerbaijani 
 Bahraini 
 Bangladeshi 
 Barbadian 
 Belarusian 
 Belgian 
 Belizean 
 Beninese 
 Bhutanese 
 Bolivian 
 Bosnian-Herzegovinian 
 Botswana 
 Brazilian 
 British 
 Channel Islands 
 English 
 Gibraltarian 
 Northern Irish 
 Saint Helena 
 Scottish 
 Welsh 
 Bruneian 
 Bulgarian 
 Burkinabé 
 Burmese 
 Burundian 
 Cambodian 
 Cameroonian 
 Canadian 
 Acadian 
 Québécois 
 Central African Republic 
 Chadian 
 Chilean 
 Chinese 
 Cantonese 
 Hong Kong 
 Macanese 
 Tibetan 
 Xinjiang 
 Colombian 
 Congolese 
 Corsican 
 Croatian 
 Cuban 
 Cypriot 
 Czech 
 Danish 
 Faroese 
 Greenlandic 
 Djiboutian 
 Dominican 
 Dominican Republic 
 Dutch 
 East Timorese 
 Ecuadorian 
 Egyptian 
 Emirati 
 Equatorial Guinean 
 Eritrean 
 Estonian 
 Ethiopian 
 Fijian 
 Filipino 
 Finnish 
 French 
 Occitan 
 French Guianan 
 Gabonese 
 Gambian 
 Georgian 
 German 
 Ghanaian 
 Greek 
 Cretan 
 Epirotic 
 Greek Macedonian 
 Heptanesean 
 Guatemalan 
 Guinea-Bissauan 
 Guinean 
 Haitian 
 Honduran 
 Hungarian 
 Icelandic 
 Indian 
 Arunachalese 
 Assamese 
 Bengali 
 Bihari 
 Goan 
 Gujarati 
 Himachal Pradesh 
 Kashmiri 
 Jharkhandi 
 Karnataka 
 Kerala 
 Maharashtrian 
 Manipuri 
 Meghalayan 
 Mizo 
 Naga 
 Odia 
 Punjabi 
 Rajasthani 
 Sikkimese 
 Sindhi 
 Tamil 
 Telangana 
 Telugu 
 Indonesian 
 Acehnese 
 Balinese 
 Banjar 
 Batak 
 Betawi 
 Indo 
 Javanese 
 Madurese 
 Makassar 
 Minahasan 
 Minangkabau 
 Palembangese 
 Sundanese 
 Iranian 
 Iraqi 
 Irish 
 Israeli 
 Italian 
 Abruzzese 
 Ligurian 
 Lombard 
 Lucanian 
 Neapolitan 
 Roman 
 Sardinian 
 Sicilian 
 Venetian 
 Ivorian 
 Jamaican 
 Japanese 
 Okinawan 
 Jordanian 
 Kazakh 
 Kenyan 
 Korean 
 North Korean 
 South Korean 
 Kosovan 
 Kuwaiti 
 Kyrgyz 
 Lao 
 Latvian 
 Lebanese 
 Lesotho 
 Liberian 
 Libyan 
 Liechtensteiner 
 Lithuanian 
 Luxembourg 
 Macedonian 
 Malagasy 
 Malawian 
 Malaysian 
 Sabahan 
 Sarawakian 
 Maldivian 
 Malian 
 Maltese 
 Mauritanian 
 Mauritian 
 Mexican 
 Moldovan 
 Monégasque 
 Mongolian 
 Montenegrin 
 Moroccan 
 Mozambican 
 Namibian 
 Nauruan 
 Nepalese 
 New Zealand 
 Nicaraguan 
 Niger 
 Nigerian 
 Niuean 
 Norwegian 
 Omani 
 Pakistani 
 Palestinian 
 Panamanian 
 Peruvian 
 Polish 
 Portuguese 
 Qatari 
 Romanian  (incl.  Transylvanian Saxon ) 
 Russian 
 Bashkir 
 Chechen 
 Circassian 
 Komi 
 Mordovian 
 Sakha 
 Tatar 
 Udmurt 
 Yamal 
 Rwandan 
 Saint Lucian 
 Salvadoran 
 Sammarinese 
 São Tomé and Príncipe 
 Saudi Arabian 
 Senegalese 
 Serbian 
 Seychellois 
 Sierra Leonean 
 Singaporean 
 Slovak 
 Slovenian 
 Somali 
 South African 
 Spanish 
 Andalusian 
 Asturian 
 Balearic 
 Basque 
 Canarian 
 Cantabrian 
 Catalan 
 Extremaduran 
 Galician 
 Manchegan 
 Valencian 
 Sri Lankan 
 Sudanese 
 Swazi 
 Swedish 
 Swiss 
 Syrian 
 Taiwanese 
 Tajik 
 Tanzanian 
 Zanzibari 
 Thai 
 Togolese 
 Tunisian 
 Turkish 
 Turkmen 
 Trinidadian and Tobagonian 
 Ugandan 
 Ukrainian 
 Uruguayan 
 Uzbek 
 Venezuelan 
 Vietnamese 
 Western Saharan 
 Yemeni 
 Zambian 
 Zimbabwean 
 Ethnic 
 Ainu 
 Arab 
 Indonesian 
 Aromanian 
 Assyrian 
 Balochi 
 Berber 
 Cajun 
 Chinese 
 American 
 Canadian 
 Chifa 
 Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Crimean Tatar 
 Greek American 
 Hazaragi 
 Indian 
 Anglo-Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Indigenous American 
 Inuit 
 Italian American 
 Kurdish 
 Livonian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Malay 
 Ossetian 
 Parsi 
 Pashtun 
 Peranakan 
 Romani 
 Sámi 
 Soul food 
 Sylheti 
 Transylvanian Saxon 
 Yup'ik 
 Religious 
 Buddhist 
 Christian 
 Goan Catholic 
 Mangalorean Catholic 
 Mennonite 
 Hindu 
 Islamic 
 Chinese 
 Ital 
 Jain 
 Jewish 
 American 
 Ashkenazi 
 Bukharan 
 Ethiopian 
 Mizrahi 
 Sephardic 
 Syrian 
 Ritual slaughter 
 Sikh 
 Historical 
 Ancient Egyptian 
 Ancient Greek 
 Ancient Israelite 
 Ancient Roman 
 Antebellum America 
 Aztec 
 Byzantine 
 Early modern European 
 Historical Chinese 
 Historical Indian subcontinent 
 Historical North Indian and Pakistani 
 History of agriculture 
 History of alcoholic drinks 
 History of bread 
 History of seafood 
 History of vegetarianism 
 Historical Argentine 
 Historical Japanese 
 Inca 
 Mayan 
 Muisca 
 Mughal 
 Medieval 
 Ottoman 
 Peasant 
 Soviet 
 Thirteen Colonies 
 Styles 
 Classique 
 Fast food 
 Fusion 
 New American 
 Eurasian 
 Haute 
 Molecular gastronomy 
 Note by Note 
 Nouvelle 
 Lists 
 List of cuisines 
 List of historical cuisines 
 Lists of prepared foods 
 Related 
 Cookbook 
 Cooking 
 Culinary arts 
 Drink 
 Food 
 history 
 Diet 
 Meal preparation 
 
   Food portal 
   Drink portal 
   Category 
   Commons 
   Cookbook 
   WikiProject 
   Outline 
 
 Authority control   National libraries 
 France 
 BnF data 
 Israel 
 United States 
 Other 
 IdRef 
 
  
NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw2315
Cached time: 20230311071444
Cache expiry: 1814400
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc, no‐toc‐conversion]
CPU time usage: 0.762 seconds
Real time usage: 1.007 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 18380/1000000
Post‐expand include size: 153622/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 13769/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 16/100
Expensive parser function count: 52/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 84182/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.353/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 24580381/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/400
 
 
Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  809.393      1 -total
 38.41%  310.856      3 Template:Navbox
 19.74%  159.756      1 Template:European_topic
 12.78%  103.416      1 Template:Culture_of_Austria
 12.59%  101.882      1 Template:Austria_topics
 12.56%  101.691     55 Template:Iso2country
 12.50%  101.194      1 Template:Reflist
 12.43%  100.604      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 12.33%   99.804      1 Template:Country_topics
 10.44%   84.500      1 Template:Lang-de
 
  Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:idhash:592319-0!canonical and timestamp 20230311071443 and revision id 1135228346. Rendering was triggered because: page-view
  
 esi <esi:include src="/esitest-fa8a495983347898/content" />  
 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Austrian_cuisine&oldid=1135228346 " 
 Categories :  Austrian cuisine Austrian culture Hidden categories:  CS1 German-language sources (de) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing German-language text Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with BNF identifiers Articles with J9U identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers Articles with SUDOC identifiers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  This page was last edited on 23 January 2023, at 11:54  (UTC) . 
 Text is available under the  Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0 ;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the  Terms of Use  and  Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the  Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. 
 
 
 Privacy policy 
 About Wikipedia 
 Disclaimers 
 Contact Wikipedia 
 Mobile view 
 Developers 
 Statistics 
 Cookie statement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
