
 
 
 Jump to content 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle sidebar 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Create account Log in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Personal tools 
 
 
 
 
   Create account   Log in 
 
 
 
 
		Pages for logged out editors  learn more 
 
 
 Contributions Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Navigation 
 
 
 Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate 
 
 
 
 
 Contribute 
 
 
 Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file 
 
 
 
 
 Tools 
 
 
 What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item 
 
 
 
 
 Print/export 
 
 
 Download as PDF Printable version 
 
 
 
 
 Languages 
 
 On this Wikipedia the language links are at the top of the page across from the article title.  Go to top . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CentralNotice  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Contents 
 move to sidebar 
 hide 
 
 
 
 
 (Top) 
 
 
 
 
 
 1 Meals 
 
 
				Toggle Meals subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 1.1 Feasts 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.1.1 Domestic feasts 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.1.2 Public feasts 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 Food preparation 
 
 
				Toggle Food preparation subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 2.1 Kitchen tools 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 Foods 
 
 
				Toggle Foods subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 3.1 Cereals 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.2 Spices 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4 Drink 
 
 
				Toggle Drink subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 4.1 Alcohol 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.2 Ātōle 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.3 Cacao 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5 Dietary norms 
 
 
				Toggle Dietary norms subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 5.1 Fasting 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6 Food and politics 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 7 Cannibalism 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8 See also 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 9 References 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 10 Sources 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
						Toggle the table of contents
					 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle the table of contents 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aztec cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 15 languages 
 
 
 
 বাংলা Čeština Español Français Bahasa Indonesia Italiano 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 
 Edit links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Article Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 English 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 More 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
 
 
 Culinary traditions in the Aztec Empire 
 This article  needs additional citations for  verification .  Please help  improve this article  by  adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources:   "Aztec cuisine"  –  news   ·   newspapers   ·   books   ·   scholar   ·   JSTOR   ( February 2016 )  ( Learn how and when to remove this template message ) 
   Aztec men sharing a meal.  Florentine Codex , late 16th century. 
 Aztec  cuisine  is the cuisine of the former  Aztec Empire  and the  Nahua peoples  of the  Valley of Mexico  prior to European contact in 1519.
 The most important staple was corn ( maize ), a crop that was so important to Aztec society that it played a central part in  their mythology . Just like  wheat  in much of Europe or  rice  in most of  East Asia , it was the food without which a meal was not a meal. It came in varieties that differed in color, texture, size and prestige, and was eaten as  corn tortillas ,  tamales  or  ātōlli , maize gruel. The other constants of Aztec food were  salt  and  chili peppers  and the basic definition of Aztec  fasting  was to abstain from these two.
 The other major foods were  beans ,  squash [1]  and New World varieties of the grains  amaranth  (or pigweed), and  chia . The combination of maize and these basic foods would have provided the average diet.
 Aztec cuisine was a very well-rounded diet without any significant deficiencies in vitamins or minerals. [ citation needed ]  The cooking of maize grains in  alkaline  solutions, a process called  nixtamalization , significantly raised the nutritional value of the common staple.
 Water, maize gruels and  pulque  ( iztāc octli ), the fermented juice of the  century plant  ( maguey  in Spanish), were the most common drinks, and there were many different fermented alcoholic beverages made from honey,  cacti  and various fruits. The elite took pride in not drinking pulque, a drink of commoners, and preferred drinks made from  cacao , among the most prestigious luxuries available.  Favored by rulers, warriors and nobles, they were flavored with chili peppers, honey and a long list of spices and herbs.
 The Aztec diet included a variety of  fish  and wild game: various fowl,  pocket gophers ,  green iguanas ,  axolotls  (a type of amphibian, much like a salamander), a type of  crayfish  called  acocil , and a great variety of insects, larvae and insect eggs.
 They also domesticated turkeys, duck and dogs as food and at times ate meat from larger wild animals such as deer, but none of these were a major part of their diet. [2]  They ate various mushrooms and fungi, including the parasitic  corn smut , which grows on ears of corn.
 Squash  (also known as  cucurbita ) was very popular and came in many different varieties. Squash seeds, fresh, dried or roasted, were especially popular.  Tomatoes , though different from the varieties common today, were often mixed with chili in sauces or as filling for tamales.
 Eating in Aztec culture could take on a sacred meaning, especially as evidenced in  ritual cannibalism . The act of eating another human was deeply connected to the  Aztec mythology , in which gods needed to consume the sacrificed flesh and blood of humans to sustain themselves, and the world.
 One way to look at this is that since human flesh was a food of the gods, it was sacred, and consuming sacred food could sanctify an individual and bring him or her closer to the gods. Further, certain warriors, in their afterlife, were believed to have been turned into butterflies and hummingbirds with the ability to fly back to the realm of the living to feed on nectar. From this, the importance the Aztecs ascribed to the act of eating is clear. [3] 
 
 
 Meals [ edit ] 
 Most sources describe two meals per day, though there is an account of laborers getting three meals, one at dawn, another one at around 9 in the morning, and one at around 3 in the afternoon. [4]  This is similar to the custom in contemporary Europe, but it is unclear if intake of  ātōlli , maize  gruel , was considered a meal or not. Drinking a good amount of the thicker kinds of  ātōlli  could equal the calories in several corn tortillas, and  ātōlli  was consumed on a daily basis by most of the population.
 
 Feasts [ edit ] 
   Aztec men at a feast.  Florentine Codex . 
 Many accounts exist of Aztec feasts and banquets and the ceremony that surrounded them. Before a meal, servants presented fragrant tobacco tubes and sometimes also flowers with which the guests could rub their head, hands, and neck. Before the meal would start each guest would drop a little food on the ground as an offering to the god  Tlaltecuhtli .
 As military prowess was highly praised among the Aztecs, table manners imitated the movement of warriors. The smoking tubes and flowers went from the left hand of the servant to the right hand of the guest and the plate accompanying the smoking tube went from the right hand to the left hand.
 This was an imitation of how a warrior received his  atlatl  darts and shield. The flowers passed out bore different names depending on how they were handed out; "sword flowers" went from left hand to hand to left. When eating, guests would hold their individual bowls filled with dipping sauce in the center of the right hand and then dip corn tortillas or tamales (which were served from baskets) with the left. The meal was concluded by serving chocolate, often served in a  calabash  cup along with a stirring stick. [5] 
 Men and women were separated at banquets and, though it is not entirely clear from the sources, it seems as if only men drank chocolate. [ citation needed ]  The women would more likely have drunk  pozolli  (maize gruel from finely ground maize) or some type of pulque.
 Rich hosts could often receive guests sitting in rooms around an open courtyard similar to  Caravanserais  and senior military men would perform dances. Festivities would begin at midnight and some would drink chocolate and eat hallucinogenic mushrooms so that they could tell about their experiences and visions to the other guests.
 Right before dawn singing commenced and offerings were burned and buried in the courtyard to ensure the fortune of the children of the hosts. At dawn, the remaining flowers, smoking tubes and food were given to the old and poor that had been invited, or to the servants.
 As with all other aspects of life, the Aztecs stressed the dual nature of all things, and toward the end of the banquet the host would be sternly reminded by his elders of his own mortality and that he should not be overcome with pride. [6] 
 
 Domestic feasts [ edit ] 
 Aztec private feasts included music singing, storytelling, dancing, incense burning, flowers, tobacco, offerings, and gift-giving. Aztec feasts were a display of material culture and wealth—notes by Friar Bernardino de Sahagún and Friar Diego Durán describe Aztec feasts as events where "everything was to be created in abundance". Feasts were organized to the point of ritual, there were roles and relationships displayed and reinforced. Hosts needed to meet the obligations of banqueting, in order not to "offend" their guests, and guests needed to reinforce the hosts' stature.
 There are multiple important events in Aztec society that called for feasts. Child naming ceremonies involved the ritual calling out of the baby's name and progressed into a large organized feast. This feast could consist of dressed bird or dog, meat and/or maize tamales, beans, cacao bean, and roasted chillis. [7] 
 Izcalli  child presentation ceremonies were also important, part of the Aztec agricultural calendar.  Izcalli  was the last month of the calendar. Every fourth  Izcalli  celebration included the introduction of children, born during this four-year period, to the Aztec community. This feast introduced the child to actions important to their religious life such as singing, dancing, ceremonial drinking, sacrificial bloodletting, and body modification.
 The food served during this feast was traditionally spicy. Noted by Sahagun was: "And the sauce of the tamales was called 'red chilli sauce'. And when the good common folk ate, they sat about sweating, they sat about burning themselves. And the tamales stuffed with greens were indeed hot, gleaming hot." The wedding process also contained many ceremonies, the parents of a young male, when marriage was desired, had to ask permission of his  calmecac  school leaders.
 Part of this process was a feast of tamales, chocolate, and sauces. During the wedding itself, there were feasts of pulque, tamales, and turkey meat. Funerary feasts were also common among the wealthy class. Served at these feasts was  octli  ( pulque ), chocolate, bird, fruit, seeds, and other foods. [7] 
 
 Public feasts [ edit ] 
 Parts of the 260-day ritual calendar of the Aztecs were  veintena .  Veintena  can be approximated as months, however, they are more aptly described as 20-day public ceremony periods. Each 20-day  veintena  was a full and complex festival made up of ceremonies dedicated to specific gods and deities of the current  veintena .
 Regional and local ceremonies differed in deities and methods from the official state-sponsored ones at Tenochtitlan. Food was an important part of  veintena  ceremonies; it was both consumed and adorned by priests. It was noted that during the ceremonies honoring  Xipe Totec  the priests would adorn themselves in arrays of "butterfly nets, fish banners, ear of maize, coyote heads made of amaranth seed, tortillas, thick rolls covered with a dough of amaranth seeds, toasted maize, red amaranth, and maize stalks with ears of green or tender maize."
 In the ceremonies honouring  Mixcoatl , after a "great hunt," Aztecs would feast on deer, rabbit, and all other animals killed in the hunt. Hunting was also important to celebrations dedicated to  Xiuhtecuhtli  when Aztec boys and young men would hunt for ten days. The products of these hunts would then be turned over to priests, who cooked them in large fire flies. [7] 
 
 Food preparation [ edit ] 
 The main method of preparation was boiling or steaming in two-handled clay pots or jars called  xoctli  in Nahuatl and translated into Spanish as  olla  (pot). Ceramics were vital to the cooking process and served at least three major purposes:  nixtamal  preparation, tamale steaming, and cooking beans, stews, and hot beverages. [8]  The  xoctli  was filled with food and heated over a fire. It could also be used to steam food by pouring a little water into the  xoctli  and then placing tamales wrapped in maize husks on a light structure of twigs in the middle of the pot. [9] 
 Tortillas, tamales, casseroles and the sauces that went with them were the most common dishes. Chili and salt were both ubiquitous and the most basic meal was usually just corn tortillas that were dipped in chilis that had been ground in a mortar with a little water. The dough could be used to encase meat, sometimes even whole turkeys, before cooking.
 In major Aztec towns and cities there were vendors that sold street food of all kinds, catering to both the rich and poor. Other than ingredients and prepared food every imaginable type of  ātōlli  could be bought, either to quench one's thirst or as an instant meal in liquid form. [10] 
 Women, in charge of domestic duties in Aztec societies, were also the cooks. [11]  Generally, men did not directly participate in cooking. Based on where cooking tools are usually found, it seems that kitchens were a simple, single-room structure separate from the house itself. Most cooking probably took place on a small triangular hearth in the kitchen. [12] 
 
 Kitchen tools [ edit ] 
 Most information regarding Aztec cooking tools comes from finding the tools themselves, as depictions of the tools in art are rare, and when they are featured, they aren't particularly prominent or detailed. Luckily, tools were most often made of stone and ceramics and as such can be found in large quantities in good condition for study. [12] 
 Manos  and  metates  were the tools of choice for grinding nixtamalized maize ( nixtamal ). It was also used to grind sauce ingredients like peppers, though different sets of  manos  and  metates  would likely have been used to avoid getting other flavors in maize dough ( masa ).
 The  metate  is a stone slab that can be slightly concave.  Nixtamal  was placed on top of the  metate  and the  mano , effectively a rough cylindrical stone, was rolled over it, grinding the  nixtamal .
 The  mano  and  metate  were tools that would have been used every day, since ground  nixtamal  usually goes bad within a day.
 Ethnographies of 20th-century indigenous communities seem to indicate that women could have spent between four and eight hours a day at a  metate  grinding  nixtamal , but women in a 2007 study at  Xaltocan  insisted that an experienced woman could grind all she needed for the day in only an hour; regardless, use of a  metate  for grinding is considered tedious work. [13] [14] 
 The  mano  and  metate  remained as the grinding tool of choice in central Mexico, as it tends to grind finer than European-style mills, and tortillas made from  masa  ground on a  mano  and  metate  are still considered of a higher quality, if much more labor-intensive. [15]  However, some argue that the reason women used to and still do grind  nixtamal  by hand is because it was a way for men to limit the amount of free time women have in an effort to prevent extramarital affairs. [16] 
 The  molcajete  is another grinding tool. It is a bowl made of porous  basalt  rock, and an accompanying basalt cylinder was used to grind foods into the  molcajete . It looks and functions very similarly to a western  mortar and pestle . The fact that a  molcajete  will hold whatever is prepared in it means it would have been ideal for preparing sauces that would spill off the sides of a  metate , and  molcajetes  could also be used as serving vessels. [17] 
 Comals  are a type of ceramic griddle with a smooth top and a porous bottom used for cooking various types of tortillas, as well as for non-maize foods like peppers and roasted squash. It is possible that  comales  could also have been used as makeshift pot lids for the sake of convenience. [17] 
 There are several references to frying in the accounts of Spanish chroniclers, but the only specification of the Aztec type of frying appears to be some kind of cooking that was done with syrup, not cooking fat. This is corroborated by the fact that no evidence for large-scale extraction of vegetable oils exist and that no cooking vessels suited for frying have been found by archaeologists. [18] 
 
 Foods [ edit ] 
   Spirulina could be harvested off the surface of lakes with nets or shovels and was then dried as cakes which could be eaten with corn tortilla or as a condiment. 
   This drawing is a remake of the  corn tortilla   glyph  found in the  Codex Mendoza [19] 
 Aztec staple foods included  maize ,  beans  and  squash  to which were often added chilis,  nopales  and tomatoes, all prominent parts of the Mexican diet to this day. They harvested  acocils , a small and abundant crayfish of  Lake Texcoco , as well as  Spirulina  algae, which was made into a sort of cake called  tecuitlatl  and was rich in  flavonoids . [20]  Although the Aztecs' diet was mostly vegetarian, the Aztecs consumed insects such as  grasshoppers   chapulín   [t͡ʃaˈpolin]  (singular) or  chapulines   [t͡ʃapoˈlimeʔ]  ( plural ),  maguey worm , ants, larvae, etc. Insects have a higher protein content than meat, and even now they are considered a delicacy in some parts of Mexico. [21] 
 
 Cereals [ edit ] 
   An Aztec woman blowing on maize before putting in the cooking pot, so that it will not "fear the fire".  Florentine Codex , late 16th century. 
 Maize  was the single most important staple of the Aztecs. It was consumed at every meal by all social classes, and played a central role in Aztec mythology. To some of the first Europeans, the Aztecs described maize as "precious, our flesh, our bones". [22] 
 It came in a vast number of varieties of various sizes, shapes and colors; yellow, reddish, white with stripes of color, black, with or without speckles and a blue-husked variant that was considered to be particularly precious. Other local and regional varieties must have also existed but few were recorded. Maize was revered to such an extent that women blew on maize before putting it into the cooking pot so that it would not fear the fire, and any maize that was dropped on the ground was picked up rather than being wasted. One of the Aztec informants of the Spanish Franciscan missionary and chronicler  Bernardino de Sahagún  explained the practice in the following way:
 
 Our sustenance suffers, it lies weeping. If we should not gather it up, it would accuse us before our Lord. It would say: O our Lord, this vassal picked me not up when I lay scattered on the ground. Punish him. Or perhaps we should starve. [23] 
 A process called  nixtamalization  was used all over America where maize was the staple. The word is a compound of the  Nahuatl  words  nextli  ("ashes") and  tamalli  ("unformed corn dough;  tamal "), and the process is still in use today. Dry maize grain is soaked and cooked in an  alkaline  solution, usually  limewater . This releases the  pericarp , the outer hull of the grains and makes the maize easier to grind.
 The process transforms maize from a simple source of  carbohydrates  into a considerably more complete nutritional package; it increases the amount of  calcium ,  iron ,  copper ,  zinc  that are added through the alkalide or the vessel used in the process and  niacin ,  riboflavin  and more  protein  already present in the corn that is not digestible to humans are made available through the process. [24] 
 The inhibited growth of certain  mycotoxins  (toxic fungi) is another benefit of nixtamalization. If the processed maize, the  nextamalli , is allowed to ferment, further nutrients, including  amino acids  such as  lysine  and  tryptophan  are made available.
 Together with beans, vegetables, fruit, chilis and salt nixtamalized corn can form a healthy and diverse diet. [24] 
 
 Spices [ edit ] 
 A great number of herbs and spices were available to the Aztecs in seasoning food. Among the most important,  chili peppers  come in a wide variety of species and cultivars, some domesticated and many of them wild. These included a great range of heat intensity depending on the amount of capsaicin present, with some being mild and others being very piquant.
 The chilis were often dried and ground for storage and use in cooking, some roasted beforehand to impart different tastes. Flavors varied significantly from one type to another, including sweet, fruity, earthy, smoky, and fiery hot. [25] 
 Native species of plants used as seasonings produced flavors similar to Old World spices that often proved to be more easily accessible in cooking after the Spanish conquest.  Culantro  or Mexican coriander provides a much stronger flavor than its Old World parallel, cilantro, and its leaves can be easier to dry.  Mexican oregano  and Mexican anise likewise produce flavors reminiscent of their Mediterranean counterparts, while  allspice  has an aroma somewhere in between nutmeg, cloves, and cinnamon.
 The bark of  canella  or white cinnamon has a soft, delicate flavor that might have eased the acceptance of the more pungent cinnamon of Ceylon into modern Mexican cuisine.
 Before the arrival of onions and garlic, subtler but similar wild plants such as Kunth's onion and other southern-ranging species of the genus  Allium , as well as the fragrant leaves of  garlic vine  may have been used.
 Other flavorings available included  mesquite ,  vanilla ,  achiote ,  epazote ,  hoja santa ,  popcorn flower ,  avocado  leaf, and other indigenous plants.
 
 Drink [ edit ] 
   A painting from  Codex Mendoza  showing an elderly Aztec woman drinking pulque. 
 Alcohol [ edit ] 
 Many different alcoholic beverages were made from fermented maize, honey, pineapple, cactus fruit and other plants. The most common was  octli  which was made from  maguey  sap. It is today known as  pulque , an  Antillean  term. It was drunk by all social classes, though some nobles made a point of not downing such a humble beverage. Drinking was tolerated, even for children at some occasions, but becoming intoxicated was not. The penalties could be very stiff, and were stricter for the elite. [26] 
 The first transgression of a commoner would be punished by tearing his house down and sending him off to live in the field like an animal. A noble would generally not get a second chance and could be executed for overindulging in alcohol. Getting intoxicated appeared to have been more tolerated for elderly people; Spanish translations of the Codex Mendoza note that there were specific circumstances that allowed the elderly to get intoxicated:
 
 It is shown how, according to the laws and customs of the lose of seventy years of age, man or woman, if such old persons had children or grandchildren. These had license and freedom to use it. [7] 
 This did not prevent the occasional tragedy of nobles who became alcoholics and drank themselves into poverty, squalor and an early death. An informant of Sahagún told the sad story of a former  tlacateccatl , a general and commander of over 8,000 troops:
 
 He drank up all his land; he sold it all ... Tlacateccatl, a valiant warrior, a great warrior, and a great nobleman, sometimes, somewhere on the road where there was travel, lay fallen, drunk, wallowing in ordure. [27] 
 Ātōle [ edit ] 
 Ātōle  ( [aːˈtoːlːi] ), maize gruel, accounted for a considerable amount of the daily calorie intake. The basic recipe for  ātōle  was eight parts water and six parts maize with lime that was cooked until it softened and then ground. The mixture was then boiled until it thickened.
 There were many variations of  ātōle : a mixture of 1/10 maguey syrup made  nequātōle ; adding chili ground with salt and tomato would make  iztac ātōle ; letting maize dough sour for 4–5 days and then adding more fresh dough with chili and salt would make  xocoātōle .
 Beans, baked corn tortillas with the crust cut off, toasted maize, chia, amaranth and honey could also be added and there was  pinolli , ground toasted maize that was carried by travelers in sacks which could be mixed with water on the road for an instant meal. [28] 
 
 Cacao [ edit ] 
 Cacao had immense symbolic value. It was a rare luxury and an import that could not be grown within the boundaries of the  Aztec Empire . There are no detailed descriptions of how cacao solids were prepared, but there are a number of allusions to the fact that it was eaten in some form.
 Cacao beans were among the most valuable commodities and could be used as a form of payment, although of somewhat low value; 80-100 beans could be used to buy a small mantle or a canoe-full of fresh water if one lived on the salty part of the lakes around Tenochtitlan. Nevertheless, beans were frequently counterfeited by filling empty cacao shells with dirt or mud. [29] 
 Cacao was commonly drunk as  cacahuatl , "cacao water", [30]  and was the beverage of warriors and nobles. It was considered a potent intoxicant and something that was drunk with great solemnity and gravity and was described as something "not drunk unthinkingly" by the Spanish chronicler  Sahagún .
 Chocolate could be prepared in a huge variety of ways and most of them involved mixing hot or tepid water with toasted and ground cacao beans, maize and any number of flavorers such as chili, honey, vanilla and a wide variety of spices. [31] 
 The ingredients were mixed and beaten with a beating stick or aerated by pouring the chocolate from one vessel to another. If the cacao was of high quality, this produced a rich head of foam. The head could be set aside, the drink further aerated to produce another head, which was also set aside and then placed on top of the drink along with the rest of the foam before serving. [32] 
 
 Dietary norms [ edit ] 
 The Aztecs stressed moderation in all aspects of life. European authors and chroniclers were often impressed by what they perceived as exemplary frugality, simplicity and moderation.  Juan de Palafox y Mendoza , the bishop of  Puebla  and viceroy of  New Spain  in the 1640s reported:
 
 I have seen them eat with great deliberation, silence, and modesty, so that one knows that the patience shown in all of their habits is shown in eating as well, and they do not allow themselves to be rushed by hunger or the urge to satisfy it. [33] 
 Fasting [ edit ] 
 The primary meaning of an Aztec fast was to abstain from salt and chilis and all members of Aztec society engaged in fasting to some extent. There were no regular exceptions from the fast, something that shocked the first Europeans who came into contact with the Aztecs. Though fasting was common in Europe, there were permanent exceptions for the women and small children, the sick or frail and the elderly. Before the New Fire ceremony, which occurred every 52 years, some priests fasted for a whole year; the other priests 80 days and lords 8 days. [34] 
 Commoners engaged in fasts, but less rigorously. There was also a permanent contingent of fasters in  Tehuacan . Along with various ascetic rigors like sleeping on a stone pillow, they fasted for periods of four years on one 50-gram corn tortilla (about 2 ounces) per day. The only respite came every 20 days, when they were allowed to eat whatever they wanted. [34] 
 Even rulers such as  Moctezuma  were expected to cut down on their otherwise luxurious lifestyle and did so with considerable conviction and effort. At times he abstained from luxuries and sex with women and ate only cakes of  michihuauhtli  and seeds of  amaranth  or  goosefoot . The lord's chocolate was also replaced with water mixed from parched bean powder. This can be contrasted with the fasts of many European nobles and clergy that, while obeying the letter of the religious regulation by replacing meat and animal products with fish, were still luxurious feasts in their own right. [35] 
 During the fourteenth month, called  Quecholli , ceremonies in honor of the hunting god  Mixcoatl  there would be a large hunt as part of the ritual. To prepare for the hunt Aztecs would fast for five days. The fasting was done, according to Sahagun, "for the deer, so that it would be a successful hunt."
 During the celebrations of the god  Tezcatlipoca , his priests fasted for ten, five, or seven days continuously before the main feasts. They were known as "those who do penance."
 During celebrations of  Huitzilopoctli  it was noted by Friar Duran: "I have been assured that they became so weak because of the terrible eight-day fast that for another eight days they were not themselves, nor were they satisfied with eating. Many became gravely ill, and the lives of many pregnant women were in danger."
 During festivals in honor of  Chicomecoatl , there would be a drastic back and forth of gorging and fasting. So much so that people would become ill. [7] 
 
 Food and politics [ edit ] 
 Bernal Diaz del Castillo  comments on how the ruler of Tenochtitlan was served food:
 
 His cooks had more than thirty styles of dishes made according to their fashion and usage, and they put them on small low clay braziers so that they would not get cold ... if it was cold they made him a fire of glowing coals made from the bark of certain trees ... the odor of the bark ... was most fragrant ... they put the tablecloths of white fabric ... They served him on Cholula pottery, some red and some black ... and from time to time they brought him some cups of fine gold, with a certain drink made of cacao. [7] 
 Sahagun provides a list of the different types of  tlaquetzalli , a chocolate drink served to Aztec lords:
 
 The ruler was served his chocolate, with which he finished [his repast] - green, made of tender cacao; honeyed chocolate made with ground-up dried flowers - with green vanilla pods; bright red chocolate; orange-colored chocolate; rose-colored chocolate; black chocolate; white chocolate." [7] 
 Aztec expansion was targeted in ways to gain or maintain access to foodstuffs need for ceremony and everyday life. The leader's ability to acquire food needed for ritual was important for his political success. [7] 
 
 Cannibalism [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Cannibalism in pre-Columbian America 
   A scene depicting ritualistic cannibalism being practiced in the  Codex Magliabechiano , folio 73r. 
 The Aztecs practiced ritualistic  cannibalism . Victims, usually prisoners of war, were sacrificed in public on top of temples and pyramids by cutting out their hearts. The bodies were then thrown down to the ground where they were dismembered. The pieces were then distributed to the elite, which were mostly warriors and priests. The meat was consumed in the form of stews flavored only with salt and eaten with corn tortillas, but without the otherwise ubiquitous chili. [36] 
 The veintena  Tlacaxipehualiztli  was one of intense human sacrifice, it was noted by Sahagun that "it was the time when all captives died, all those taken, all those who were made captive, the men, the women, all the children." It began with the sacrifice of captured warriors, the flesh of the sacrificed warriors would be taken to the residence of the Aztec who had captured the warrior. The capturer was forbidden to feast on the flesh of the sacrificed, however his family would eat it. A stew called  tlacatlaolli  was prepared out of dried maize and into each serving would be placed a piece of the flesh of the captive. [7] 
 In the late 1970s the anthropologist  Michael Harner  suggested that the Aztecs had resorted to large-scale, organized cannibalism to make up for a supposed  protein  deficiency in the diet. This idea gained limited support from some scholars, but has been shown to be based on unfounded assumptions about eating habits, agriculture and demographics, making it a highly unlikely scenario. [36] 
 
 See also [ edit ] 
 
 Mesoamerica portal Food portal History portal 
 Mexican cuisine 
 Maya cuisine 
 Moctezuma's Table 
 Muisca cuisine 
 Inca cuisine 
 Domesticated plants of Mesoamerica 
 References [ edit ] 
 
 
 ^   "La calabaza en la historia" .  Arqueología Mexicana  (in Spanish). 2016-07-18 . Retrieved  2020-05-10 . 
 
 ^   Smith, Michael Ernest,  The Aztecs  Wiley Blackwell, 2nd ed. 2002,  ISBN   978-0631230168   [1]  p.63 
 
 ^   Carrasco, 447-450 
 
 ^   Coe,  111 
 
 ^   Coe, 100-103 
 
 ^   Coe, 74-81 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   e   f   g   h   i   Morán, Elizabeth (2016).  Sacred consumption: food and ritual in Aztec art and culture . Austin: University of Texas Press. 
 
 ^   Rodríguez-Alegría, 101 
 
 ^   Coe, 109 
 
 ^   Coe, 149; 117-19 
 
 ^   Rodríguez-Alegría, p. 99 
 
 ^  a   b   Rodríguez-Alegría, 100 
 
 ^   Rodríguez-Alegría, 102 
 
 ^   Rodríguez-Alegría, 108-109 
 
 ^   Rodríguez-Alegría, 111 
 
 ^   Bauer, Arnold J. 1990. Millers and Grinders: Technology and Household Economy in Mesoamerica.  Agricultural History  64 (1):1–17. 
 
 ^  a   b   Rodríguez-Alegría, 104 
 
 ^   Coe, 36 
 
 ^   Mursell, I. (n.d.). Aztec children's clothes.  Mexicalore.  Retrieved September 8, 2012, from  link 
 
 ^   Cowgill, George L. 2001. "Central Mexico Classic." In Encyclopedia of Prehistory: Volume 5: Middle America, edited by Peter N. Peregrine and Melvin Ember, 25. Boston, MA: Springer US. doi:10.1007/978-1-4615-0525-9_2. 
 
 ^   Ortiz de Montellano, 102-106 
 
 ^   Coe, 89 
 
 ^   Quoted in Coe, 88 
 
 ^  a   b   Cambridge World History of Food , 108-110 
 
 ^   Bosland, Paul (1999).  "Chiles: A Gift from a Fiery God" .  HortScience .  34  (5): 810.  doi : 10.21273/HORTSCI.34.5.809 . 
 
 ^   Coe, 84-87 
 
 ^   Quoted in Coe, 85 
 
 ^   Coe, 117-118 
 
 ^   Civitello, Linda (2011).  Cuisine and Culture: A History of Food and People . Hoboken, New Jersey: John Wiley & Sons. p. 112.  ISBN   978-0-470-41195-7 . 
 
 ^   Sophie D. Coe; Michael D. Coe (28 June 2013).  The True History of Chocolate . Thames & Hudson. p. 121.  ISBN   978-0-500-77093-1 . 
 
 ^   The full list of cacao flavorers is very extensive, but some of the common ones were  uei nacaztli  ( Cymbopetalum penduliflorum );  teonacaztli  ( Chiranthodendron pentadactylon ), which had the flavor of "black pepper with a resinous bitterness" and was commonly used at banquets;  mecaxochitl  ( Piper amalgo ), a relation of  black pepper ;  yolloxochitl  (the flower of  Magnolia mexicana ) which had the taste of ripe  melon ;  piztle  (the seeds of  Calocarpum mammosum ), with the flavor of bitter  almonds ;  pochotl  (the seeds of Ceipa spp.), described as "sweet and tasty"; and  allspice . One of the most common recipes consisted of  mecaxochitl ,  uei nacaztli , vanilla, softened maize and cacao mixed with tepid water, and was drunk immediately after preparation. 
 
 ^   Coe, Sophie Dobzhansky; Coe, Michael D. (2007).  The True History of Chocolate . Thames and Hudson. pp.  86 –87.  ISBN   9780500286968 . 
 
 ^   Quoted in Coe, 83 
 
 ^  a   b   Coe, 83-84 
 
 ^   Coe, 70 
 
 ^  a   b   Ortiz de Montellano, 85-86 
 
 
 Sources [ edit ] 
 Bosland, Paul. (1999). "Chiles: A Gift from a Fiery God". HortScience. 34(5): 810. 
 Cambridge World History of Food  (2000), 2 vol. editors Kiple, Kenneth F. and Coneè Ornelas  ISBN   0-521-40216-6 
 Carrasco, Davíd. 1995. "Cosmic Jaws: We Eat the Gods and the Gods Eat Us." Journal of the American Academy of Religion 63 (3): 429–63. 
 Civitello, Linda (2011).  Cuisine and Culture: A History of Food and People.  Hoboken, New Jersey:  John Wiley & Sons . p. 112.  ISBN   978-0-470-41195-7 . 
 Coe, Sophie D.  (1994)  America's first cuisines   ISBN   0-292-71159-X 
 "From Grinding Corn to Dishing Out Money: A Long-Term History of Cooking in Xaltocan, Mexico." In  The Menial Art of Cooking: Archaeological Studies of Cooking and Food Preparation , edited by Rodríguez-Alegría Enrique and Graff Sarah R., 99–118.  University Press of Colorado , 2012.  
 Ortiz de Montellano, Bernard R. (1990)  Aztec medicine, health, and nutrition   ISBN   0-8135-1562-9 
 v t e Cuisines Continental 
 African 
 North 
 West 
 list 
 Americas 
 Caribbean 
 North 
 South 
 list 
 Asian 
 Caucasian 
 Central 
 Indian subcontinent 
 Levantine 
 list 
 European 
 Balkan 
 Central 
 Eastern 
 list 
 Oceanic 
 Intercontinental
 Global 
 Latin American 
 Mediterranean 
 Middle Eastern 
 National  and regional 
 Afghan 
 Albanian 
 Algerian 
 American 
 Californian 
 Floribbean 
 Hawaiian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Lowcountry (South Carolina) 
 New England 
 New Mexico 
 Pacific Northwest 
 Pennsylvania Dutch 
 Puerto Rican 
 Southern US 
 Southwest US 
 Texas 
 Angolan 
 Argentine 
 Armenian 
 Australian 
 Austrian 
 Azerbaijani 
 Bahraini 
 Bangladeshi 
 Barbadian 
 Belarusian 
 Belgian 
 Belizean 
 Beninese 
 Bhutanese 
 Bolivian 
 Bosnian-Herzegovinian 
 Botswana 
 Brazilian 
 British 
 Channel Islands 
 English 
 Gibraltarian 
 Northern Irish 
 Saint Helena 
 Scottish 
 Welsh 
 Bruneian 
 Bulgarian 
 Burkinabé 
 Burmese 
 Burundian 
 Cambodian 
 Cameroonian 
 Canadian 
 Acadian 
 Québécois 
 Central African Republic 
 Chadian 
 Chilean 
 Chinese 
 Cantonese 
 Hong Kong 
 Macanese 
 Tibetan 
 Xinjiang 
 Colombian 
 Congolese 
 Corsican 
 Croatian 
 Cuban 
 Cypriot 
 Czech 
 Danish 
 Faroese 
 Greenlandic 
 Djiboutian 
 Dominican 
 Dominican Republic 
 Dutch 
 East Timorese 
 Ecuadorian 
 Egyptian 
 Emirati 
 Equatorial Guinean 
 Eritrean 
 Estonian 
 Ethiopian 
 Fijian 
 Filipino 
 Finnish 
 French 
 Occitan 
 French Guianan 
 Gabonese 
 Gambian 
 Georgian 
 German 
 Ghanaian 
 Greek 
 Cretan 
 Epirotic 
 Greek Macedonian 
 Heptanesean 
 Guatemalan 
 Guinea-Bissauan 
 Guinean 
 Haitian 
 Honduran 
 Hungarian 
 Icelandic 
 Indian 
 Arunachalese 
 Assamese 
 Bengali 
 Bihari 
 Goan 
 Gujarati 
 Himachal Pradesh 
 Kashmiri 
 Jharkhandi 
 Karnataka 
 Kerala 
 Maharashtrian 
 Manipuri 
 Meghalayan 
 Mizo 
 Naga 
 Odia 
 Punjabi 
 Rajasthani 
 Sikkimese 
 Sindhi 
 Tamil 
 Telangana 
 Telugu 
 Indonesian 
 Acehnese 
 Balinese 
 Banjar 
 Batak 
 Betawi 
 Indo 
 Javanese 
 Madurese 
 Makassar 
 Minahasan 
 Minangkabau 
 Palembangese 
 Sundanese 
 Iranian 
 Iraqi 
 Irish 
 Israeli 
 Italian 
 Abruzzese 
 Ligurian 
 Lombard 
 Lucanian 
 Neapolitan 
 Roman 
 Sardinian 
 Sicilian 
 Venetian 
 Ivorian 
 Jamaican 
 Japanese 
 Okinawan 
 Jordanian 
 Kazakh 
 Kenyan 
 Korean 
 North Korean 
 South Korean 
 Kosovan 
 Kuwaiti 
 Kyrgyz 
 Lao 
 Latvian 
 Lebanese 
 Lesotho 
 Liberian 
 Libyan 
 Liechtensteiner 
 Lithuanian 
 Luxembourg 
 Macedonian 
 Malagasy 
 Malawian 
 Malaysian 
 Sabahan 
 Sarawakian 
 Maldivian 
 Malian 
 Maltese 
 Mauritanian 
 Mauritian 
 Mexican 
 Moldovan 
 Monégasque 
 Mongolian 
 Montenegrin 
 Moroccan 
 Mozambican 
 Namibian 
 Nauruan 
 Nepalese 
 New Zealand 
 Nicaraguan 
 Niger 
 Nigerian 
 Niuean 
 Norwegian 
 Omani 
 Pakistani 
 Palestinian 
 Panamanian 
 Peruvian 
 Polish 
 Portuguese 
 Qatari 
 Romanian  (incl.  Transylvanian Saxon ) 
 Russian 
 Bashkir 
 Chechen 
 Circassian 
 Komi 
 Mordovian 
 Sakha 
 Tatar 
 Udmurt 
 Yamal 
 Rwandan 
 Saint Lucian 
 Salvadoran 
 Sammarinese 
 São Tomé and Príncipe 
 Saudi Arabian 
 Senegalese 
 Serbian 
 Seychellois 
 Sierra Leonean 
 Singaporean 
 Slovak 
 Slovenian 
 Somali 
 South African 
 Spanish 
 Andalusian 
 Asturian 
 Balearic 
 Basque 
 Canarian 
 Cantabrian 
 Catalan 
 Extremaduran 
 Galician 
 Manchegan 
 Valencian 
 Sri Lankan 
 Sudanese 
 Swazi 
 Swedish 
 Swiss 
 Syrian 
 Taiwanese 
 Tajik 
 Tanzanian 
 Zanzibari 
 Thai 
 Togolese 
 Tunisian 
 Turkish 
 Turkmen 
 Trinidadian and Tobagonian 
 Ugandan 
 Ukrainian 
 Uruguayan 
 Uzbek 
 Venezuelan 
 Vietnamese 
 Western Saharan 
 Yemeni 
 Zambian 
 Zimbabwean 
 Ethnic 
 Ainu 
 Arab 
 Indonesian 
 Aromanian 
 Assyrian 
 Balochi 
 Berber 
 Cajun 
 Chinese 
 American 
 Canadian 
 Chifa 
 Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Crimean Tatar 
 Greek American 
 Hazaragi 
 Indian 
 Anglo-Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Indigenous American 
 Inuit 
 Italian American 
 Kurdish 
 Livonian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Malay 
 Ossetian 
 Parsi 
 Pashtun 
 Peranakan 
 Romani 
 Sámi 
 Soul food 
 Sylheti 
 Transylvanian Saxon 
 Yup'ik 
 Religious 
 Buddhist 
 Christian 
 Goan Catholic 
 Mangalorean Catholic 
 Mennonite 
 Hindu 
 Islamic 
 Chinese 
 Ital 
 Jain 
 Jewish 
 American 
 Ashkenazi 
 Bukharan 
 Ethiopian 
 Mizrahi 
 Sephardic 
 Syrian 
 Ritual slaughter 
 Sikh 
 Historical 
 Ancient Egyptian 
 Ancient Greek 
 Ancient Israelite 
 Ancient Roman 
 Antebellum America 
 Aztec 
 Byzantine 
 Early modern European 
 Historical Chinese 
 Historical Indian subcontinent 
 Historical North Indian and Pakistani 
 History of agriculture 
 History of alcoholic drinks 
 History of bread 
 History of seafood 
 History of vegetarianism 
 Historical Argentine 
 Historical Japanese 
 Inca 
 Mayan 
 Muisca 
 Mughal 
 Medieval 
 Ottoman 
 Peasant 
 Soviet 
 Thirteen Colonies 
 Styles 
 Classique 
 Fast food 
 Fusion 
 New American 
 Eurasian 
 Haute 
 Molecular gastronomy 
 Note by Note 
 Nouvelle 
 Lists 
 List of cuisines 
 List of historical cuisines 
 Lists of prepared foods 
 Related 
 Cookbook 
 Cooking 
 Culinary arts 
 Drink 
 Food 
 history 
 Diet 
 Meal preparation 
 
   Food portal 
   Drink portal 
   Category 
   Commons 
   Cookbook 
   WikiProject 
   Outline 
 
  
NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw2407
Cached time: 20230311123244
Cache expiry: 1814400
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc, no‐toc‐conversion]
CPU time usage: 0.510 seconds
Real time usage: 0.660 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2961/1000000
Post‐expand include size: 87597/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 3587/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 16/100
Expensive parser function count: 8/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 48796/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.231/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 7642941/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/400
 
 
Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  441.312      1 -total
 28.84%  127.278      1 Template:Reflist
 23.49%  103.656      1 Template:Cuisines
 23.00%  101.480      1 Template:Navbox
 15.14%   66.810      1 Template:Cite_web
 12.70%   56.050      1 Template:More_citations_needed
 11.76%   51.905      1 Template:Ambox
 10.78%   47.564      1 Template:Short_description
  6.90%   30.459      5 Template:ISBN
  5.98%   26.371      2 Template:Pagetype
 
  Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:idhash:10909992-0!canonical and timestamp 20230311123243 and revision id 1143596282. Rendering was triggered because: page-view
  
 esi <esi:include src="/esitest-fa8a495983347898/content" />  
 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Aztec_cuisine&oldid=1143596282 " 
 Categories :  Aztec society Mesoamerican cuisine Native American cuisine Cannibalism in North America Mexican cuisine Mesoamerican diet and subsistence Hidden categories:  CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from February 2016 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2020 Articles with unsourced statements from November 2015 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  This page was last edited on 8 March 2023, at 18:51  (UTC) . 
 Text is available under the  Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0 ;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the  Terms of Use  and  Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the  Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. 
 
 
 Privacy policy 
 About Wikipedia 
 Disclaimers 
 Contact Wikipedia 
 Mobile view 
 Developers 
 Statistics 
 Cookie statement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
