
 
 
 Jump to content 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle sidebar 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Create account Log in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Personal tools 
 
 
 
 
   Create account   Log in 
 
 
 
 
		Pages for logged out editors  learn more 
 
 
 Contributions Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Navigation 
 
 
 Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate 
 
 
 
 
 Contribute 
 
 
 Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file 
 
 
 
 
 Tools 
 
 
 What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item 
 
 
 
 
 Print/export 
 
 
 Download as PDF Printable version 
 
 
 
 
 In other projects 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons Wikibooks 
 
 
 
 
 Languages 
 
 On this Wikipedia the language links are at the top of the page across from the article title.  Go to top . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CentralNotice  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Contents 
 move to sidebar 
 hide 
 
 
 
 
 (Top) 
 
 
 
 
 
 1 History 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 Meals 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 Cereals 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4 Vegetables 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5 Soups 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6 Meat 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 7 Dumplings 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8 Dairy foods 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 9 Beverages 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 10 Minority cuisines 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 11 Potatoes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 12 Salads 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 13 Fish 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 14 Side dishes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 15 References 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 16 Further reading 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 17 External links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
						Toggle the table of contents
					 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle the table of contents 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Belarusian cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 27 languages 
 
 
 
 Azərbaycanca Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Català Čeština Cymraeg Deutsch Ελληνικά Español فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Italiano עברית Jawa ქართული 日本語 Polski Português Русский Српски / srpski Svenska Українська 中文 
 Edit links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Article Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 English 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 More 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
 
 
 Culinary traditions of Belarus 
 This article  needs additional citations for  verification .  Please help  improve this article  by  adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources:   "Belarusian cuisine"  –  news   ·   newspapers   ·   books   ·   scholar   ·   JSTOR   ( January 2009 )  ( Learn how and when to remove this template message ) 
   Draniki  in a traditional crockery dish. 
   A meal at a cafe in  Vitebsk 
 Belarusian cuisine  shares many similarities with cuisines of other  Eastern ,  Central 
and  Northeastern European  countries, based predominantly on  meat  and various  vegetables  typical for the region.
 
 
 History [ edit ] 
 Belarus cuisine has predominantly  Slavic  roots. Along with a  Ruthenian  influence, it  is also linked with  Lithuanian  and  Polish  because of the long intermingling of these three peoples; first within the  Grand Duchy of Lithuania  (11th-15th centuries) and later within the  Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth  (16th-17th centuries). Though the Belarusian nobility, like the Polish elite, borrowed much from  Italian ,  German , and  French  cuisines, this influence hardly made itself felt in the diet of the peasant majority. [ citation needed ]  Still, some of the borrowed dishes spread throughout the society, such as  lazanki  (a mixture of flour  dumplings  and stewed meat, related to Italian  lasagna ) and, above all, various dishes made of grated  potatoes , typical for German cuisine.
 The political upheavals of the 20th century completely wiped out the former privileged classes and many traditional upper and middle class dishes went down the path of oblivion. The very idea of a separate Belarusian cuisine was treated with suspicion. Only after World War II did it occur to the communist authorities that the proclaimed ‘flourishing of national culture’ should also be evident in the cuisine. The only source permitted for such a culinary reconstruction was the heritage of the poorest peasants as of the 1880s, a time when primitive rural lifestyle was already on the wane. Chefs were instructed by the Party to create the new Belarusian cuisine from scratch. Dish names, recipes, "authentic" kitchenware – all were reinvented anew, as though ten centuries of history had never existed. Only the sudden advent of independence in 1991 brought an opportunity to restore these lost traditions, and a great deal still remains to be done here.
 Modern Belarusian cuisine is still heavily influenced by its recent Soviet past, and many local restaurants feature Russian or Soviet dishes rather than true specialties of local cuisine. Some Belarusians may have more interest in  Italian ,  Chinese , and  Japanese cuisine  than in their own culinary heritage. [ citation needed ]  However,  draniki  (both plain and stuffed), boršč, chaładnik, mačanka, zrazy, cold meat rolls, eggs stuffed with mushrooms,  hałubcy , fried raw pork sausage and  bliny  are likely to be found everywhere, as well as sour rye bread.
 
 Meals [ edit ] 
 A traditional peasant or merchant's dinner consisted of just two dishes: soup and a main course. A special kind of pot, the sparysh, with two compartments, was used by farmers' children to bring lunch to their father working in the fields. Prior to  World War II ,  salads  or other snacks were not very common, and recipes based on Russian models tended to appear in modern Belarusian postwar cookbooks.  Fresh white cheese  and various kinds of cold meats (usually smoked) were available, however, at least on holidays.
 
 Cereals [ edit ] 
 Since  wheat  does not grow well in a cold and wet climate,  Belarusians  were always fond of a kind of somewhat sour  rye bread , and the most traditional hard drink, the local  vodka  or  harelka  ( Belarusian :  гарэлка ), was distilled primarily from a rye malt.
 Like other  Slavic peoples , Belarusians could boast of a huge variety of  bliny  (pancakes) of various thickness, plain and filled, made mostly of wheat or  buckwheat  flour, but also using  oatmeal  (tsadaviki).
 Various kinds of  cereal  especially  barley ,  oatmeal  and  buckwheat  were common. Belarus was the likely centre of Europe's buckwheat culture, and dishes made with this healthy grain used to be very popular: various kinds of  buns ,  cakes  and dumplings which, except for the well-known " kasha ", no longer exist today.
 
 Vegetables [ edit ] 
 The main  vegetables  were  cabbage  (often made into  sauerkraut ) and  beets , while  turnips ,  swedes ,  parsnip  and  carrots  both stewed and boiled (with the addition of a small amount of  milk ) were somewhat less popular. As elsewhere in Europe,  legumes  were the main source of  protein , mainly in the form of kamy (puree of  peas  or  beans  with melted lard).
 
 Soups [ edit ] 
 The word  soup  was not known in  Belarus  until the 18th century when the nobility borrowed it from German, but soup as a type of dish clearly existed centuries earlier. The old word for most traditional Belarusian soups was  poliŭka  ( Belarusian :  поліўка ), except for those named after the vegetable that was the main ingredient:  kapusta  (cabbage soup),  buraki  (beet soup),  gryžanka  (swede soup). For a typical  poliŭka  the major ingredients ( fish  or  mushrooms  during fasts) were first boiled with  spices ; cereals such as barley or  millet  were boiled in the stock, and then flour blended with water, bread  kvass , beet juice or  buttermilk  was added to the stock. Black  poliŭka , made with  goose  or  pork  blood, is closely related to the  Swedish  "black soup"  svartsoppa . Offering a matchmaker black  poliŭka  was the polite way for the bride's parents to decline a young man's proposal. Like the Ukrainians, Russians and  Poles , Belarusians are fond of  borscht , a thick and rich beet and cabbage soup made with grains, potato and meat. Soups are much more authentic, both hot ( shchi ,  boršč ,  sorrel soup ) and especially cold sour soups which provide cooling relief during the hot summer.
 The Belarusian  chaladnik  ( Belarusian :  халаднік ), a  cold borscht  made of beets, beet leaves or  sorrel  and served with  sour cream , hard-boiled  eggs , and boiled potatoes, has been a popular dish also in  Polish  and  Lithuanian  cuisines since the late 18th century.
 
 Meat [ edit ] 
   Wrapped  palyandvitsa 
   Sliced  palyandvitsa 
 Meat was in rather scarce supply for most people, and was primarily eaten only on the main  Christian  holidays. Avid consumers of pork, Belarusians are less partial to  mutton  and  beef . Most common was raw pork  sausage  – a pig intestine stuffed with minced or chopped meat seasoned with salt, pepper, and garlic. Its common name – "finger-stuffed sausage" ( Belarusian :  каўбаса, «пальцам пханая»  or in short пальцоўка) – provided a graphic description of the primitive production technology. [1]   Kishkа  ( Belarusian :  кішка ), or  kryvyanka  ( Belarusian :  крывянка ), was a local  blood sausage  ( Belarusian :  крывяная каўбаса ) made of  pig ’s blood and buckwheat grain. Škalondza ( Belarusian :  шкалондза ), or  kindziuk  ( Belarusian :  кіндзюк ), a particular kind of round sausage made of pig stomach filled with pork minced with spices [2]  – a relative of the Lithuanian  skilandis  – was known throughout the country. Borrowed from Italian cuisine by nobility in the 16th century, cold meat rolls,  salcesons  and balerons were common to all of society by the 19th century, and are still very popular. Smoked goose breast  pauguski  ( Belarusian :  паўгускі ), a local Belarusian and Lithuanian delicacy, was once the pride of middle-class cuisine, but no longer exists today.
 Veraščaka  ( Belarusian :  верашчака ), an 18th-century thick meat gravy with pieces of meat and sausage used as a dip or sauce for thick pancakes, is still one of the most popular specialties of Belarusian restaurants today, although it is now generally called  mačanka  ( Belarusian :  мачанка , a dip). Also popular are  zrazy , chopped pieces of beef rolled into a sausage shape and filled with vegetable, mushroom, eggs, potato etc. Pork dishes are usually fried or stewed, garnished with cheese or mushrooms. Beef steaks are also quite frequent, but mutton, once very popular, is almost entirely limited to Caucasian or Central Asian restaurants, although still quite a few eat it today.
 
 Dumplings [ edit ] 
 Kalduny , small boiled dumplings related to  Russian   pelmeni  and Italian  ravioli , were produced in endless combinations of dough, filling and sauce. Especially popular were  kalduny Count Tyshkevich  (filled with a mixture of fried local mushrooms and smoked  ham ). In the late 19th century kalduny began to be made with grated potato rather than with a flour-based dough and the former huge variety of fillings shrank considerably. [ citation needed ]  Today, kalduny have to struggle vigorously to regain their former popularity, now overtaken by the Russian pelmeni. [ citation needed ] 
 
 Dairy foods [ edit ] 
 The main  dairy foods  include a kind of  fresh white cheese  ( Belarusian :  тварог ) and  sour cream  ( Belarusian :  смятана ), which is widely used both in cooking and as a garnish. Only in the mid-19th century was fermented  cheese  ( Belarusian :  сыр ) borrowed from the  Netherlands  and  Switzerland , and the local version of  Edam  was very popular for decades in the  Russian Empire . Sour  butter  from the former  Dzisna county  was exported to Britain, where it continued to be the most expensive variety up to  World War I . Today, however, these traditions have become a thing of the past.
 
 Beverages [ edit ] 
   A mug of  kvass , a  fermented beverage  made from black rye or rye  bread 
 The traditional hard drink is  vodka  or  harelka  ( Belarusian :  гарэлка ), including varieties made from  birch sap  ( biarozavik ,  Belarusian :  бярозавік ) or flavored with forest  herbs  ( zubrovka ,  Belarusian :  зуброўка ).  Mead  and similar alcoholic drinks made of  honey  and  spices  were very common up until the 19th century and then more or less disappeared until the latest  revival of the national cuisine. A notable example in this group is  krambambula  ( Belarusian :  крамбамбуля ), vodka diluted with water, mixed with honey, and flavored with spices (nutmeg, cinnamon, cloves, red and black pepper). In the 18th century this drink competed with French champagne in Belarus and only wealthy people could afford it. Today it is enjoying a popular revival, as is evident from the appearance of  krambambula  recipes and histories on the Internet. [3] [4] 
 Kvass  traditionally was and still remains the main local non-alcoholic drink, although it is increasingly made with  sugars  and artificial flavorings rather than with genuine rye malt and natural flavorings.  Kompot  is also a relatively popular beverage, normally made of dried or fresh fruit, boiled, and then cooled. Every small town boasts a local variety of  mineral water . Belarusians prefer carbonated water.
 Тraditional liquid desserts that accompany a meal include  saladucha  ( Belarusian :  саладуха ), a thick liquid made of  rye  flour and  honey  that was popular in the 18th century, and  kissel , the traditional jelly drink of Eastern Europe made from the pulp of forest berries or cooked fruits, originally thickened with oatmeal (now replaced by  potato starch flour  or  cornstarch ).
 
 Minority cuisines [ edit ] 
   Belarusian  potato babka 
 Belarusian cuisine owes much to  Jewish cooking . In the 19th century, Jewish influence was especially noticeable in bringing in potato dishes of German origin, such as  babka . This was a two-way gastronomic street, for the famous  bulbe latkes , the potato pancakes of the East European Jews, may have been borrowed from the Belarusian  draniki .
 Another important minority ethnic group which influenced Belarusian cuisine were the  Lipka Tatars , whose  Tatar cuisine  was especially strong in various cakes with fillings, mutton and vegetable dishes.
 
 Potatoes [ edit ] 
 The potato became so common in the 19th century – there are some 300+ dishes recorded in Belarus – that it came to be considered the core of the national cuisine. In the  Russian Empire [5]  and  Soviet Union , Belarusians were sometimes called  bulbashi , a pejorative conjugation of the Belarusian word for potato.
 
 Salads [ edit ] 
 Typical salads are made of a fairly short list of ingredients, combining boiled beef or  chicken , potato, beet, carrot,  apple ,  herring , diced cheese, canned  peas  and  corn , canned fish, ‘crab fingers’,  onions  and mushrooms, generously seasoned with  mayonnaise  or  sunflower oil . One of the most typical local salads is the "Belaya Vezha" salad (named after the  Belaya Vezha Forest ), which combines boiled chicken meat with fried  mushrooms ,  onions , and  pickled cucumbers , mixed with mayonnaise and garnished with chopped  hard-boiled egg . [6]  Fresh  vegetable  salads are also widely available:  tomatoes  (also mixed with  cucumbers ) and onions seasoned with sour cream;  radishes  with  dill  and sunflower oil (or sour cream); shredded cabbage salad seasoned with sunflower oil or mayonnaise (similar to coleslaw); and  pickled cabbage  with  caraway seeds  or  cranberries  with onions seasoned with sunflower oil are common.
 
 Fish [ edit ] 
 Historically, Belarusians had little access to seafood, and this is still evident in the cuisine. The most common sea fish (after herring, which has been the most common appetizer all along the  Baltic  coast and its vicinity ever since the 14th century) are  hake  and  cod  and there are relatively few dishes with such fish. Much more traditional and common are lake fish, notably  zander , cooked in a wide variety of ways, and  carp  (especially the famous stuffed carp, the  gefilte fish  of Jewish cuisine).  Eels , smoked or stuffed, are the specialty of the lake country in the northwestern part of Belarus, adjacent to  Latvia  and Lithuania.
 
 Side dishes [ edit ] 
 Side dishes  are usually boiled, fried or  mashed potatoes ,  buckwheat kasha ,  rice  or  pasta . Meat dishes are frequently served with bliny or draniki stacked in round clay pots.
 
 References [ edit ] 
 
 
 ^   "Finger-stuffed" sausage   Archived  June 30, 2008, at the  Wayback Machine : history and description 
 
 ^   Kindziuk  recipe and description 
 
 ^   Krambambula : modern recipe  (in Russian) 
 
 ^   History of  krambambula   (in Russian) 
 
 ^   b-g.by/society/pochemu-belorusov-nazyivayut-bulbashami-eto-nasmeshka-ili-kompliment/amp/ 
 
 ^   "Belaya Vezha" salad   Archived  August 26, 2011, at the  Wayback Machine : recipe  (in Russian) 
 
 
 Further reading [ edit ] 
 Dembińska M. Konsumcja zywnościowa w Polsce średniowiecznhej. Wrocław, 1963 
 Kuchowicz Z. Obyczaje staropolskie XVII-XVIII ww. Łódź, 1975 
 Lemnis M., Vitry H.  W staropolskiej kuchni i przy polskim stole. Warsawa, 1979 
 Kowecka E. W salonie i w kuchni. Warsawa, 1989 
 Похлебкин В. Национальные кухни наших народов. М.,1991 
 Литовская кухня. Мн.,1991 
 Белорусская кухня. Мн.,1993 
 Літоўская гаспадыня. Мн.,1993 
 Зайкоўскі Э.М., Тычка Г.К. Старадаўняя беларуская кухня. Мн.,1995 
 Puronas V. Nuo mamutų iki cepelinų. Vilnius, 1999 
 Навагродскі Т. Традыцыі народнага харчавання беларусаў. Мн.,2000 
 Белы А. In laudem cerevisiae (на хвалу піва). Спадчына. 2000. No. 1 
 Bockenheim K. Przy polskim stole. Wrocław, 2003 
 Fiedoruk A. Kuchnia podlaska w rozhoworach i recepturach opisana. Białystok, 2003 
 Вялікае княства Літоўскае: Энцыклапедыя. У 2 т. Т.1. Мн.:БелЭн,2005.  ISBN   985-11-0314-4 
 Bely, Alexander. The Belarusian Cookbook. NY, 2009.  ISBN   0-7818-1209-7 
 Национальная кухня России 
 External links [ edit ] 
 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons has media related to  Cuisine of Belarus . 
 
 Cuisine of Belarus  on the  official website of the Republic of Belarus   Archived  2020-04-02 at the  Wayback Machine 
 Tasty Belarus 
 Belarusian cuisine dishes 
 Portals :   Belarus   Food 
 v t e Belarus   articles History 
 Neuri 
 Kievan Rus' 
 Principality of Polotsk 
 Principality of Turov 
 Grand Duchy of Lithuania 
 Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth 
 Russian Empire 
 Russification 
 Belarus National Republic 
 Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic 
 West Belarus 
 Annexation of Western Belarus 
 Republic of Belarus 
 Geography 
 Cities 
 Protected areas 
 Biosphere Reserves 
 National parks 
 Rivers 
 Geology 
 Extreme points 
 Politics 
 Administrative divisions 
 Censorship 
 Constitution 
 Elections 
 Central Election Commission 
 Foreign relations 
 Government 
 Human rights 
 Law enforcement 
 State Security Committee 
 Ministry of Internal Affairs 
 Internal Troops 
 Militsiya 
 Presidential Security Service 
 Military 
 Parliament 
 Political parties 
 President 
 Prime Minister 
 Union State of Russia and Belarus 
 Economy 
 Agriculture 
 Banking 
 Central bank 
 Ruble  (currency) 
 Telecommunications 
 Energy 
 Industry 
 International sanctions 
 Stock exchange 
 Transport 
 Society 
 Demographics 
 Belarusians 
 Education 
 Healthcare 
 Language 
 Religion 
 Culture 
 Awards and decorations 
 Belarusian names 
 Cuisine 
 Folk dance 
 Languages 
 Literature 
 Music 
 Cinema 
 Media 
 National symbols 
 Public holidays 
 World Heritage Sites 
 Outline Index Bibliography 
 Category 
 Portal 
 v t e European cuisine Sovereign states European Union 
 Austria 
 Belgium 
 Bulgaria 
 Croatia 
 Cyprus 
 Czech Republic 
 Denmark 
 Estonia 
 Finland 
 France 
 Germany 
 Greece 
 Hungary 
 Republic of Ireland 
 Italy 
 Latvia 
 Lithuania 
 Luxembourg 
 Malta 
 Netherlands 
 Poland 
 Portugal 
 Romania 
 Slovakia 
 Slovenia 
 Spain 
 Sweden 
 Other 
 Albania 
 Andorra 
 Armenia 
 Azerbaijan 
 Belarus 
 Bosnia and Herzegovina 
 Georgia 
 Iceland 
 Kazakhstan 
 Liechtenstein 
 Moldova 
 Monaco 
 Montenegro 
 North Macedonia 
 Norway 
 Russia 
 San Marino 
 Serbia 
 Switzerland 
 Turkey 
 Ukraine 
 United Kingdom 
 Vatican City 
 States with limited recognition 
 Abkhazia 
 Kosovo 
 Nagorno-Karabakh 
 Northern Cyprus 
 South Ossetia 
 Transnistria 
 Dependencies  and other territories 
 Faroe Islands 
 Gibraltar 
 Guernsey 
 Isle of Man 
 Jersey 
 
 v t e Cuisines Continental 
 African 
 North 
 West 
 list 
 Americas 
 Caribbean 
 North 
 South 
 list 
 Asian 
 Caucasian 
 Central 
 Indian subcontinent 
 Levantine 
 list 
 European 
 Balkan 
 Central 
 Eastern 
 list 
 Oceanic 
 Intercontinental
 Global 
 Latin American 
 Mediterranean 
 Middle Eastern 
 National  and regional 
 Afghan 
 Albanian 
 Algerian 
 American 
 Californian 
 Floribbean 
 Hawaiian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Lowcountry (South Carolina) 
 New England 
 New Mexico 
 Pacific Northwest 
 Pennsylvania Dutch 
 Puerto Rican 
 Southern US 
 Southwest US 
 Texas 
 Angolan 
 Argentine 
 Armenian 
 Australian 
 Austrian 
 Azerbaijani 
 Bahraini 
 Bangladeshi 
 Barbadian 
 Belarusian 
 Belgian 
 Belizean 
 Beninese 
 Bhutanese 
 Bolivian 
 Bosnian-Herzegovinian 
 Botswana 
 Brazilian 
 British 
 Channel Islands 
 English 
 Gibraltarian 
 Northern Irish 
 Saint Helena 
 Scottish 
 Welsh 
 Bruneian 
 Bulgarian 
 Burkinabé 
 Burmese 
 Burundian 
 Cambodian 
 Cameroonian 
 Canadian 
 Acadian 
 Québécois 
 Central African Republic 
 Chadian 
 Chilean 
 Chinese 
 Cantonese 
 Hong Kong 
 Macanese 
 Tibetan 
 Xinjiang 
 Colombian 
 Congolese 
 Corsican 
 Croatian 
 Cuban 
 Cypriot 
 Czech 
 Danish 
 Faroese 
 Greenlandic 
 Djiboutian 
 Dominican 
 Dominican Republic 
 Dutch 
 East Timorese 
 Ecuadorian 
 Egyptian 
 Emirati 
 Equatorial Guinean 
 Eritrean 
 Estonian 
 Ethiopian 
 Fijian 
 Filipino 
 Finnish 
 French 
 Occitan 
 French Guianan 
 Gabonese 
 Gambian 
 Georgian 
 German 
 Ghanaian 
 Greek 
 Cretan 
 Epirotic 
 Greek Macedonian 
 Heptanesean 
 Guatemalan 
 Guinea-Bissauan 
 Guinean 
 Haitian 
 Honduran 
 Hungarian 
 Icelandic 
 Indian 
 Arunachalese 
 Assamese 
 Bengali 
 Bihari 
 Goan 
 Gujarati 
 Himachal Pradesh 
 Kashmiri 
 Jharkhandi 
 Karnataka 
 Kerala 
 Maharashtrian 
 Manipuri 
 Meghalayan 
 Mizo 
 Naga 
 Odia 
 Punjabi 
 Rajasthani 
 Sikkimese 
 Sindhi 
 Tamil 
 Telangana 
 Telugu 
 Indonesian 
 Acehnese 
 Balinese 
 Banjar 
 Batak 
 Betawi 
 Indo 
 Javanese 
 Madurese 
 Makassar 
 Minahasan 
 Minangkabau 
 Palembangese 
 Sundanese 
 Iranian 
 Iraqi 
 Irish 
 Israeli 
 Italian 
 Abruzzese 
 Ligurian 
 Lombard 
 Lucanian 
 Neapolitan 
 Roman 
 Sardinian 
 Sicilian 
 Venetian 
 Ivorian 
 Jamaican 
 Japanese 
 Okinawan 
 Jordanian 
 Kazakh 
 Kenyan 
 Korean 
 North Korean 
 South Korean 
 Kosovan 
 Kuwaiti 
 Kyrgyz 
 Lao 
 Latvian 
 Lebanese 
 Lesotho 
 Liberian 
 Libyan 
 Liechtensteiner 
 Lithuanian 
 Luxembourg 
 Macedonian 
 Malagasy 
 Malawian 
 Malaysian 
 Sabahan 
 Sarawakian 
 Maldivian 
 Malian 
 Maltese 
 Mauritanian 
 Mauritian 
 Mexican 
 Moldovan 
 Monégasque 
 Mongolian 
 Montenegrin 
 Moroccan 
 Mozambican 
 Namibian 
 Nauruan 
 Nepalese 
 New Zealand 
 Nicaraguan 
 Niger 
 Nigerian 
 Niuean 
 Norwegian 
 Omani 
 Pakistani 
 Palestinian 
 Panamanian 
 Peruvian 
 Polish 
 Portuguese 
 Qatari 
 Romanian  (incl.  Transylvanian Saxon ) 
 Russian 
 Bashkir 
 Chechen 
 Circassian 
 Komi 
 Mordovian 
 Sakha 
 Tatar 
 Udmurt 
 Yamal 
 Rwandan 
 Saint Lucian 
 Salvadoran 
 Sammarinese 
 São Tomé and Príncipe 
 Saudi Arabian 
 Senegalese 
 Serbian 
 Seychellois 
 Sierra Leonean 
 Singaporean 
 Slovak 
 Slovenian 
 Somali 
 South African 
 Spanish 
 Andalusian 
 Asturian 
 Balearic 
 Basque 
 Canarian 
 Cantabrian 
 Catalan 
 Extremaduran 
 Galician 
 Manchegan 
 Valencian 
 Sri Lankan 
 Sudanese 
 Swazi 
 Swedish 
 Swiss 
 Syrian 
 Taiwanese 
 Tajik 
 Tanzanian 
 Zanzibari 
 Thai 
 Togolese 
 Tunisian 
 Turkish 
 Turkmen 
 Trinidadian and Tobagonian 
 Ugandan 
 Ukrainian 
 Uruguayan 
 Uzbek 
 Venezuelan 
 Vietnamese 
 Western Saharan 
 Yemeni 
 Zambian 
 Zimbabwean 
 Ethnic 
 Ainu 
 Arab 
 Indonesian 
 Aromanian 
 Assyrian 
 Balochi 
 Berber 
 Cajun 
 Chinese 
 American 
 Canadian 
 Chifa 
 Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Crimean Tatar 
 Greek American 
 Hazaragi 
 Indian 
 Anglo-Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Indigenous American 
 Inuit 
 Italian American 
 Kurdish 
 Livonian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Malay 
 Ossetian 
 Parsi 
 Pashtun 
 Peranakan 
 Romani 
 Sámi 
 Soul food 
 Sylheti 
 Transylvanian Saxon 
 Yup'ik 
 Religious 
 Buddhist 
 Christian 
 Goan Catholic 
 Mangalorean Catholic 
 Mennonite 
 Hindu 
 Islamic 
 Chinese 
 Ital 
 Jain 
 Jewish 
 American 
 Ashkenazi 
 Bukharan 
 Ethiopian 
 Mizrahi 
 Sephardic 
 Syrian 
 Ritual slaughter 
 Sikh 
 Historical 
 Ancient Egyptian 
 Ancient Greek 
 Ancient Israelite 
 Ancient Roman 
 Antebellum America 
 Aztec 
 Byzantine 
 Early modern European 
 Historical Chinese 
 Historical Indian subcontinent 
 Historical North Indian and Pakistani 
 History of agriculture 
 History of alcoholic drinks 
 History of bread 
 History of seafood 
 History of vegetarianism 
 Historical Argentine 
 Historical Japanese 
 Inca 
 Mayan 
 Muisca 
 Mughal 
 Medieval 
 Ottoman 
 Peasant 
 Soviet 
 Thirteen Colonies 
 Styles 
 Classique 
 Fast food 
 Fusion 
 New American 
 Eurasian 
 Haute 
 Molecular gastronomy 
 Note by Note 
 Nouvelle 
 Lists 
 List of cuisines 
 List of historical cuisines 
 Lists of prepared foods 
 Related 
 Cookbook 
 Cooking 
 Culinary arts 
 Drink 
 Food 
 history 
 Diet 
 Meal preparation 
 
   Food portal 
   Drink portal 
   Category 
   Commons 
   Cookbook 
   WikiProject 
   Outline 
 
 Authority control : National libraries  
 Israel 
 United States 
 
  
NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw2406
Cached time: 20230311124005
Cache expiry: 1814400
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [show‐toc, no‐toc‐conversion]
CPU time usage: 0.787 seconds
Real time usage: 0.983 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 18508/1000000
Post‐expand include size: 159377/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 16887/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 16/100
Expensive parser function count: 31/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 0/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 39917/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.381/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 19545668/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/400
 
 
Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  786.806      1 -total
 40.82%  321.154      3 Template:Navbox
 21.03%  165.433      1 Template:European_topic
 18.43%  145.015      1 Template:Belarus_topics
 18.14%  142.715      1 Template:Country_topics
 13.28%  104.511     20 Template:Lang-be
 12.89%  101.404     55 Template:Iso2country
  7.00%   55.049      1 Template:More_citations_needed
  6.40%   50.369      1 Template:Ambox
  6.10%   47.963      1 Template:Short_description
 
  Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:idhash:3587279-0!canonical and timestamp 20230311124004 and revision id 1138319835. Rendering was triggered because: page-view
  
 esi <esi:include src="/esitest-fa8a495983347898/content" />  
 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Belarusian_cuisine&oldid=1138319835 " 
 Category :  Belarusian cuisine Hidden categories:  Webarchive template wayback links Articles with Russian-language sources (ru) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from January 2009 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2007 Articles with unsourced statements from June 2010 Articles containing Belarusian-language text Articles with unsourced statements from October 2020 Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with J9U identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  This page was last edited on 9 February 2023, at 01:38  (UTC) . 
 Text is available under the  Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0 ;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the  Terms of Use  and  Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the  Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. 
 
 
 Privacy policy 
 About Wikipedia 
 Disclaimers 
 Contact Wikipedia 
 Mobile view 
 Developers 
 Statistics 
 Cookie statement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
