
 
 
 Jump to content 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle sidebar 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Create account Log in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Personal tools 
 
 
 
 
   Create account   Log in 
 
 
 
 
		Pages for logged out editors  learn more 
 
 
 Contributions Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Navigation 
 
 
 Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate 
 
 
 
 
 Contribute 
 
 
 Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file 
 
 
 
 
 Tools 
 
 
 What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item 
 
 
 
 
 Print/export 
 
 
 Download as PDF Printable version 
 
 
 
 
 In other projects 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons Wikibooks 
 
 
 
 
 Languages 
 
 On this Wikipedia the language links are at the top of the page across from the article title.  Go to top . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CentralNotice  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Contents 
 move to sidebar 
 hide 
 
 
 
 
 (Top) 
 
 
 
 
 
 1 History 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 Belgian cuisine 
 
 
				Toggle Belgian cuisine subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 2.1 Appetizers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.2 Savory dishes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.3 Sweet dishes and desserts 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 Belgian fries 
 
 
				Toggle Belgian fries subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 3.1 Sauces 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4 Beer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5 Jenever 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6 Chocolate 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 7 Gallery 
 
 
				Toggle Gallery subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 7.1 Appetizers and light fare 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 7.2 Main dishes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 7.3 Sweet dishes and desserts 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8 See also 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 9 References 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 10 Further reading 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 11 External links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
						Toggle the table of contents
					 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle the table of contents 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Belgian cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 28 languages 
 
 
 
 العربية Čeština Deutsch Español Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Jawa ქართული Lietuvių Magyar Македонски Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Русский Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 
 Edit links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Article Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 English 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 More 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
 
 
 Culinary traditions of Belgium 
   Moules-frites , one of Belgium's national dishes 
   Carbonade flamande , another of Belgium's national dishes 
 Part of  a series  on the Culture of Belgium 
 History 
 People 
 Languages 
 Mythology and folklore 
 Mythology 
 folklore 
 
 Cuisine 
 Festivals 
 Religion 
 Art 
 Literature 
 Music and performing arts 
 Music 
 
 Media 
 Radio 
 Television 
 Cinema 
 
 Sport 
 Monuments 
 World Heritage Sites 
 
 Symbols 
 Flag 
 Coat of arms 
 
 
   Belgium portal v t e 
 Belgian  cuisine  is widely varied with significant regional variations, while also reflecting the cuisines of neighbouring  France ,  Germany  and the  Netherlands . It is sometimes said that Belgian food is served in the quantity of German cuisine but with the quality of French food. [1] [2]  Outside the country, Belgium is best known for its chocolate, waffles, fries and beer.
 Though Belgium has many distinctive national dishes, many internationally popular foods like  hamburgers  and  spaghetti bolognese  are also popular in Belgium, and most of what Belgians eat is also eaten in neighbouring countries. "Belgian cuisine" therefore usually refers to dishes of Belgian origin, or those considered typically Belgian.
 Belgian cuisine traditionally prizes regional and seasonal ingredients. Ingredients typical in Belgian dishes include  potatoes ,  leeks ,  grey shrimp ,  white asparagus ,  Belgian endive  and  local beer , in addition to common European staples including meat, cheese and butter. Belgians typically eat four meals a day, with a light breakfast, medium lunch, a snack, and a large dinner.
 Belgium has a plethora of local dishes and products. Examples include  waterzooi  from  Ghent ,  couque  biscuit  from the town of  Dinant , and  tarte au riz  from  Verviers . While their local origins are acknowledged, most such dishes are enjoyed throughout Belgium.
 
 
 History [ edit ] 
 This section  needs expansion . You can help by  adding to it .   ( November 2018 ) 
 This section  does not  cite  any  sources .  Please help  improve this section  by  adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and  removed .   ( December 2021 )  ( Learn how and when to remove this template message ) 
 See also:  History of Belgium 
 Belgian cuisine was influenced by that of the  Roman Empire , and later that of France, Germany and the Netherlands.
 Little is known about early Belgian cuisine. It can only be assumed that it was similar to that of other early European tribes. The ancient Belgians probably foraged, kept animals like sheep and cattle, grew root vegetables, hunted for animals such as the  wild boar , fished, and foraged for berries and herbs. Beer was brewed as well, although not with  hops  (a later discovery). 
 Later, under the  Roman Empire , many more foods were presumably introduced to Belgium, such as  cabbage  and other  brassicas , as well as many fruits such as  apples ,  pears  and  grapes . Belgium was known to be a large supplier of ham and pork for many cities in the Roman Empire. [ citation needed ] 
 
 Belgian cuisine [ edit ] 
 Appetizers [ edit ] 
   Chicons au gratin 
 Tartines/Boterhammen : slices of rustic bread and an uncovered spread, often  pâté  or soft cheese, served on a  cutting board . Typical spreads include  Americain ,  pâté , and  saucisson . 
 Jambon d'Ardenne  [ fr ] / Ardeense ham : particularly smoked  ham  and  pâté , often made of  game  such as  wild boar . The forested  Ardennes  region in the south of Belgium is renowned for this type of food. 
 Salade liégeoise  [ fr ] / Luikse salade : a potato salad with green beans, bacon, onions and vinegar. It is usually associated with  Liège . 
 Croquettes aux crevettes [fr] / Garnaalkroketten : a traditional Belgian dish, these  croquettes  have a thick and creamy  bechamel  filling mixed with  grey shrimp . Often served with a slice of  lemon  and fried  parsley . 
 Tomate aux crevettes  [ fr ] / Tomaat-garnaal : a Belgian culinary specialty, composed of a hollow, unhunted tomato stuffed with peeled  grey shrimps  and mixed with  mayonnaise . 
 Savory dishes [ edit ] 
   Varieties of coiled  boudin  (blood sausage) on sale at a Belgian  Christmas market 
 Moules-frites / Mosselen met friet :  mussels  cooked or steamed with onions and celery served with  Belgian fries . The recipe has often been referred to as the country's national dish [3]  but is also popular in the neighboring  Nord  region of France. 
 Carbonade flamande / Vlaamse karbonaden/stoofvlees : a Belgian beef stew, similar to the French  beef bourguignon , but made with  Belgian beer  instead of red  wine . Served with bread or fries and  mustard . Usually accompanied by a beer. This is also considered one of the national dishes, along with  moules-frites . 
 Steak-frites / Biefstuk met friet : a very common and popular dish served in brasseries throughout Europe consisting of steak paired with fries. 
 Waterzooi : a rich stew and soup of chicken or fish, vegetables, cream, and eggs, usually associated with  Ghent . 
 Chicons au gratin / Gegratineerd witloof :  Belgian endives  au  gratin  in  béchamel sauce  with cheese. Often the endives are wrapped with ham. 
 Kip met frieten en appelmoes / Poulet avec des frites et compote : dish consisting of chicken, fries, and  compote , which is very common in and around  Brussels . 
 Konijn in geuze / Lapin à la gueuze : rabbit in  gueuze , which is a spontaneously fermented Belgian beer from the area in and around Brussels. 
 Filet américain : very finely minced ground beef eaten raw and cold. It is spread on a sandwich or bread with and sometimes topped with a sauce, usually  sauce américaine , and served with fries. When served as a dinner, it is mixed with onions and capers like  steak tartare , but it retains the name  américain . 
 Paling in 't groen / Anguilles au vert :  eel  in a green sauce of mixed herbs (including  chervil  and  parsley ). Served with bread or fries. Usually accompanied by a beer or (sometimes) an  Alsace wine . 
 Pêche au thon  [ fr ] / Perzik met tonijn : halved canned or fresh  peaches  stuffed with a mix of  tuna  and  mayonnaise , i.e.  tuna salad . 
 Boudin / Pens : a type of sausage in which the meat, or blood, is mixed with fine  breadcrumbs  that is often eaten with potatoes and  apple sauce , sometimes eaten raw or barbecued. 
 Stoemp : a  potato  that is mashed with vegetables (usually carrots or cabbages), often served with  sausages . 
 Vol-au-vent : a small hollow case of  puff pastry  filled with chicken, mushrooms, small meatballs cooked in a white sauce, and typically served with fries. 
 Boulets à la Liégeoise / Luikse balletjes : two big meatballs into a sweet and sour sauce called  sauce  lapin , served with fries. 
 Lokerse paardenworst : minced  horse  sausages with peeled tomatoes, onion, celery, herbs, originally from  Lokeren 
 Sweet dishes and desserts [ edit ] 
   Waffles 
 Gaufres / Wafels : Belgian waffles, sometimes eaten as a street snack and sold by ice-cream vans. Among the better-known styles are the  Gaufre de Liège  or  Liège waffle ,  Brussels waffle , and the  stroopwafel . 
 Speculoos : a  shortcrust   cinnamon  biscuit, traditionally baked for consumption on or just before  Saint Nicholas Day  (Dutch:  Sinterklaas , French:  la Saint-Nicolas ) on 6 December. 
 Croustillons / Smoutebollen : deep-fried balls of dough, eaten at fairgrounds or on special occasions like the  October fair . 
 Rijstevlaai / Tarte au riz  : a  pie  with a filling based on  rice pudding , native to  Verviers . 
 Sirop de Liège / Luikse siroop : a jam or jelly-like spread made of evaporated fruit juices. 
 Cuberdon : a cone-shaped purple candy made of  gum arabic , originally from  Ghent . 
 Lacquements : thin  wafer , made from  wheat , cut in two horizontally, filled and coated with sugar candy  syrup  flavoured with  orange blossom . Generally eaten during the October fair in  Liège  and the Sinksenfoor in  Antwerp . 
 Aalsterse vlaai : a regional pie from  Aalst , with well-known variations in the area around Aalst, such as  Wetteren  ( Wetterse vlaai ) [4]  and Kalken ( Kalkense vlaai ). A key ingredient are  mastellen , a type of sandwich local to Aalst. 
 Belgian fries [ edit ] 
   A typical assortment of meats offered at a Belgian  friterie . 
   Belgian  frites  wrapped in a traditional paper cone, served with  mayonnaise  and  curry ketchup , with a small plastic fork on top and a  frikandel  on the side. 
 Fries , deep-fried chipped potatoes, are very popular in  Belgium , where they are thought to have originated. The earliest evidence of the dish comes from a book entitled  Curiosités de la table dans les Pays-Bas-Belgiques  written in 1781, which described how inhabitants of  Namur ,  Dinant  and  Andenne  around the river  Meuse  had eaten fried potatoes since around 1680. Though they are usually known as "French fries" in the  United States , it is argued that American soldiers during the  First World War  called them "French fries" because the Belgian soldiers who introduced them to the dish spoke French. [5] 
 In Belgium, fries are sold at fast-food stands or in dedicated fast-food restaurants called  friteries ,  frietkot , or  frituur  (loosely: “fry shack”). They are often served with a variety of sauces and eaten either on their own or in the company of other snacks. Traditionally, they are served in a  cornet de frites  (French) or  puntzak  [ nl ]  (Flemish), a cone-shaped white piece of thick paper then wrapped in a piece of thin (and coloured) paper, with the sauce on the top. Larger portions are often served in cardboard trays for practicality's sake. Other street foods like  frikandel ,  gehaktbal  or  kroket  are sold alongside. In some cases, the fries are served in the form of a baguette sandwich along with their sauce and meat; this is known as a  mitraillette . In areas with immigration, the same combination is also available in a wrap called a  dürüm  instead of on a baguette.
 The vast majority of Belgian households have a  deep fryer , allowing them to make their own fries and other deep-fried foods at home. Supermarkets sell a range of liquid and solid animal- and plant-based fats for use in home deep fryers; beef fat is particularly prized.
 In June 2017 the  European Commission  issued a recommendation to limit the chemical  acrylamide —a natural result of frying some foods at high temperatures—from reaching consumers, due to its alleged  carcinogenic  properties. The document proposed a change in the preparation of Belgian fries to prevent the formation of acrylamide, by blanching them before frying, as opposed to the traditional method of double frying. This led to a wave of protests from several Belgian politicians, who viewed it as an assault on the country's culture and gastronomical tradition.
 
 Sauces [ edit ] 
 Traditionally, fries are usually served with  mayonnaise  in Belgium. Friteries and other fast-food establishments tend to offer a number of different sauces for the fries and meats, including  aïoli  and  sauce américaine  but also much more elaborate varieties, including  béarnaise sauce . There are frequently over a dozen options, and most of them are mayonnaise-based, so the varieties include:
 
 Aïoli / Looksaus : garlic mayonnaise. 
 Sauce andalouse : mayonnaise with tomato paste and peppers. 
 Sauce americaine : mayonnaise with tomato, chervil, onions, capers, crustacean stock, and celery. 
 Bicky sauce: a commercial brand made from mayonnaise, white cabbage, tarragon, dough, cucumber, onion, mustard, and dextrose. 
 Brazilian sauce: mayonnaise with pureed  pineapple , tomato, and spices. 
 Cocktail sauce : one of several types of cold or room temperature sauces often served as part of the dish(es) referred to as a seafood cocktail or as a condiment with other seafood. 
 Curry ketchup : a spiced variant on ketchup and a common sauce in Belgium, Germany, Denmark, and the Netherlands. 
 Curry mayonnaise : mayonnaise with either turmeric, cumin, ginger, and fresh or dried hot chili peppers. 
 Joppiesaus : a commercial brand made from mayonnaise, spices, onion, and curry powder. 
 Ketchup : a sweet and tangy sauce typically made from tomatoes, sweetener, and vinegar with assorted seasonings and spices. 
 Mammoet sauce: mayonnaise with tomato, onion, glucose, garlic, and  soy sauce . 
 Mayonnaise : a thick cold sauce or dressing usually used in sandwiches and composed salads. 
 Pepper sauce : mayonnaise or hot sauce with black pepper. 
 Relish —a cooked and pickled product made of chopped vegetables, fruits, or herbs, and is a food item typically used as a condiment, in particular, to enhance a staple. 
 Sauce  lapin : a sauce made from  sirop de Liège , cooked with raisins, onions, prunes, and cloves, typically served with  boulets à la Liégeoise . 
 Sauce Riche : a pink, tartar-based sauce. 
 Samurai sauce : mayonnaise with Tunisian chili, spices, tomatoes, and bell peppers. 
 Tartar sauce : a mayonnaise or  aïoli -based sauce of French origin, and is typical of a rough consistency due to the addition of diced gherkins or other varieties of pickles. 
 Zigeuner sauce : a "gypsy" sauce of tomatoes, paprika, and  chopped bell peppers, borrowed from  Germany . 
 Occasionally, warm sauces are offered by  friteries , including  Hollandaise sauce , Provençale sauce, béarnaise sauce, or even a  carbonade flamande . Most of the sauces above are also readily available in supermarkets. The use of these sauces is not limited to fries; they are used on a variety of other dishes as well.
 
 Beer [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Beer in Belgium 
   Chimay   Tripel , a  Trappist beer  with its own glass 
 For a comparatively small country, Belgium produces a very large number of beers in a range of different styles—in fact, it has more distinct types of beer per capita than anywhere else in the world. In 2011, there were 1,132 different varieties of beer being produced in the country. [6]  The brewing tradition in Belgium can be traced back to the early  Middle Ages  and 6  Trappist Monasteries  still produce beer, which was initially used to fund their upkeep. [7] 
 On average, Belgians drink 157 litres of beer each year, down from around 260 each year in 1900. [7]  Most beers are bought or served in bottles, rather than cans, and almost every style of beer has its own particular, uniquely shaped glass or other drinking-vessel. [2]  Using the correct glass is considered to improve its flavour.
 The varied nature of Belgian beers makes it possible to match them against each course of a meal, for instance:
 
 Wheat beer  with seafood or fish. 
 Blonde  or  Tripel  beers with eel, chicken or white meat 
 Dubbel  or other dark beers with dark meat 
 Fruit  Lambics  with dessert 
 A number of traditional Belgian dishes use beer as an ingredient. One is  carbonade , a stew of beef cooked in beer, similar to  beef bourguignon . The beer used is typically the regional speciality:  lambic  in  Brussels ,  De Koninck  in  Antwerp , so that the taste of the dish varies. Another is rabbit in  gueuze . The Trappist monastery at  Chimay  also manufactures cheese that is "washed" with beer to enhance its flavour. [8] 
 
 Jenever [ edit ] 
   Bottles of  jenever  for sale in  Hasselt , including two in traditional clay bottles 
 Jenever , also known as  genièvre ,  genever ,  peket   or  Dutch gin , is the national spirit of Belgium from which  gin  evolved. While beer may be Belgium's most famous alcoholic beverage, jenever has been the country's traditional and national spirit for over 500 years. [9]  Jenever is a " Protected Product of Origin ", having received eleven different  appellations  or AOCs from the European Union, and can only be crafted in Belgium, the Netherlands and a few areas in France and Germany.  Most of the jenever AOC's are exclusive to Belgium making Belgian jenever (Belgian genever) one of the best-kept secrets in the liquor industry.
 For centuries jenever has been bottled in jugs handcrafted from  clay . Its iconic shape is recognizable and unique to jenever. [10]  Traditionally the Belgians serve jenever in completely full shot glasses that have just been pulled from the freezer. The first step to drinking the jenever properly is to keep the glass on the table, bend down and take the first sip without holding the glass. Once this traditional first sip is completed one can drink the rest of the drink normally.
 
 Chocolate [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Belgian chocolate 
   Belgian  pralines 
 Belgium is famed for its high quality chocolate and over 2,000 [11]   chocolatiers , both small and large. Belgium's association with chocolate goes back as far as 1635 [11]  when the country was under  Spanish occupation . By the mid-18th century, chocolate had become extremely popular in upper and middle class circles, particularly in the form of  hot chocolate , including with  Charles-Alexander of Lorraine , the Austrian governor of the territory. [12]  From the early 20th century, the country was able to import large quantities of  cocoa  from its African colony, the  Belgian Congo . Both the  chocolate bar  and  praline  are inventions of the Belgian chocolate industry. [13]  Today, chocolate is very popular in Belgium, with 172,000 tonnes produced each year, and widely exported. [11] 
 The composition of Belgian chocolate has been regulated by law since 1884. In order to prevent adulteration of the chocolate with low-quality fats from other sources, a minimum level of 35% pure cocoa was imposed. [14]  Adherence to traditional manufacturing techniques also serves to increase the quality of Belgian chocolate. In particular, vegetable-based fats are not used. [15]   Many firms produce chocolates by hand, which is laborious and explains the prevalence of small, independent chocolate outlets, which are popular with tourists. Famous chocolate companies, like  Neuhaus  and  Guylian , strictly follow traditional (and sometimes secret) recipes for their products.
 Seafood pralines (pralines shaped like sea shells or fish) are popular with tourists and are sold all over Belgium.
 Famous Belgian chocolatiers are  Côte d'or ,  Leonidas ,  Guylian ,  Neuhaus , ...
 
 Gallery [ edit ] 
 
 Appetizers and light fare [ edit ] 
 
 
 
 
 A bowl of  grey shrimp  as a snack.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Jambon d'Ardenne  [ fr ]  ham hanging from a rack.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dried Ardenne sausage.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The usual  Herve cheese .
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The  Trappist beer ,  Chimay Brewery , and  Grand Cru  cheese.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Belgian endives  in a market.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sirop de Liège  on a slice of bread.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 An assortment of sauces.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pêches au thon  [ fr ]  / Perziken met tonijn 
 
 
 
 
 Main dishes [ edit ] 
 
 
 
 
 Chicken  waterzooi 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hutsepot 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Carbonade flamande  / Stoverij  with fries and salad
 
 
 
 
 
 
 A  mitraillette 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Stoemp  with  cod 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Oiseau sans tête  /  blinde vink  [ fr ;  nl ] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Paling in 't groen 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Filet américain 
 
 
 
 
 Sweet dishes and desserts [ edit ] 
 
 
 
 
 Rijstevlaai 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mattentaart  [ nl ] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Smoutebollen 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cuberdon  candies
 
 
 
 
 
 
 A  cougnou   Christmas  bread
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pain d'épices  /  ontbijtkoek  spiced bread
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Speculoos  cookies
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fresh  Liège waffles 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Galettes campinoises 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 A  couque de Dinant  biscuit
 
 
 
 
 See also [ edit ] 
 
 Belgium portal Food portal 
 
 Belgian beer 
 Guylian 
 Chicory 
 French fries 
 French cuisine 
 Friterie 
 Mussel 
 Pierre Wynants  -  chef 
 Stoemp 
 Waffle 
 Waterzooi 
 Chocolatier Neuhaus 
 Leonidas Chocolatier 
 
 References [ edit ] 
 
 
 ^   "Belgian cuisine - General" . www.belgium.alloexpat.com. Archived from  the original  on 31 January 2013 . Retrieved  14 February  2013 . 
 
 ^  a   b   Michael Jackson's Great Beers of Belgium , Michael Jackson,  ISBN   0-7624-0403-5 
 
 ^   Malgieri, Nick.  "A National Obsession: Belgium's Moules Frites" . saveur.com . Retrieved  13 November  2012 . 
 
 ^   "Wetterse vlaai" . Het Nieuwsblad . Retrieved  11 April  2020 . 
 
 ^   Cumo, Christopher Martin (2015).  Foods that Changed History: How Foods Shaped Civilization from the Ancient World to the Present: How Foods Shaped Civilization from the Ancient World to the Present . ABC-CLIO. p.  154 .  ISBN   978-1-4408-3537-7 . 
 
 ^   "500 nieuwe bieren in 4 jaar" .  De Standaard . 18 October 2011 . Retrieved  10 March  2013 . 
 
 ^  a   b   "Brewed force" .  The Economist . 17 December 2011 . Retrieved  10 March  2013 . 
 
 ^   "Le Chimay à la Bière : fruity and intense" . Chimay. Archived from  the original  on 2013-05-10 . Retrieved  10 March  2013 . 
 
 ^   "Belgian Genever" . Flemish Lion . Retrieved  18 April  2014 . 
 
 ^   Jenever book "Genever: 500 Years of History in a Bottle" 
 
 ^  a   b   c   Savage, Maddy (31 December 2012).  "Is Belgium still the capital of chocolate?" .  BBC . Retrieved  14 February  2013 . 
 
 ^   Mercier, Jacques (2008).  The Temptation of Chocolate . Brussels: Lannoo. p. 87.  ISBN   978-2873865337 . 
 
 ^   Mercier, Jacques (2008).  The Temptation of Chocolate . Brussels: Lannoo. p. 101.  ISBN   978-2873865337 . 
 
 ^   Mercier, Jacques (2008).  The Temptation of Chocolate . Brussels: Lannoo. p. 94.  ISBN   978-2873865337 . 
 
 ^   Hardy, Christophe.  "A brief history of Belgian Chocolate" . Puratos. Archived from  the original  on 2012-11-26 . Retrieved  14 February  2013 . 
 
 
 Further reading [ edit ] 
 Analysis and context 
 Scholliers, Peter; Geyzen, Anneke (Spring 2010). "Upgrading the Local: Belgian Cuisine in Global Waves".  Gastronomica: The Journal of Critical Food Studies .  10  (2): 49–54.  doi : 10.1525/gfc.2010.10.2.49 .  PMID   21539048 . 
 Scholliers, Peter (2009).  Food Culture in Belgium . Westport: Greenwood Press.  ISBN   978-0-313-34490-9 . 
 Recipes 
 Elkon, Juliette (1996).  A Belgian Cookbook . New York: Hippocrene Books.  ISBN   0-7818-0461-2 . 
 Gordon, Enid; Shirley, Midge (1983).  The Belgian Cookbook . London: Macdonald.  ISBN   0-356-09501-0 . 
 Blais, Denis; Plisnier, Andre (1998).  Belgo Cookbook . London: Phoenix Illustrated.  ISBN   0-75380-490-5 . 
 External links [ edit ] 
 Traditional Belgian cuisine and beer pairing    (in English)  from  BeerTourism.com 
 v t e Belgium   articles History 
 Gallia Belgica 
 Prince-Bishopric of Liège 
 Burgundian Netherlands 
 Southern Netherlands 
 Spanish Netherlands 
 Austrian Netherlands 
 Brabant Revolution 
 United Kingdom of the Netherlands 
 Long nineteenth century 
 Belgian Revolution 
 Crisis of 1870 
 Empire 
 World War I 
 invasion 
 occupation 
 World War II 
 invasion 
 occupation 
 Royal Question 
 Congo Crisis 
 State reform 
 Geography 
 Climate 
 Extreme points 
 Lakes 
 Mountains 
 Rivers 
 Subdivisions 
 Politics 
 Constitution 
 Elections 
 Executive 
 Foreign relations 
 Human rights 
 LGBT 
 Law 
 enforcement 
 Judiciary 
 Military 
 Monarchy 
 Parliament 
 Political parties 
 Prime Minister 
 Economy 
 2008–2009 financial crisis 
 Banking 
 Central bank 
 Communications 
 Energy 
 Tourism 
 Trade unions 
 Transport 
 Science and technology 
 Society 
 Demographics 
 People 
 list 
 Religion 
 Education 
 Honours 
 Crime 
 Languages 
 Media 
 Healthcare 
 Culture 
 Architecture 
 Art 
 Cinema 
 Comics 
 Cuisine 
 Flag 
 Literature 
 Music 
 Public holidays 
 Sport 
 Television 
 World Heritage Sites 
 Outline Index 
 Category 
 Portal 
 v t e European cuisine Sovereign states European Union 
 Austria 
 Belgium 
 Bulgaria 
 Croatia 
 Cyprus 
 Czech Republic 
 Denmark 
 Estonia 
 Finland 
 France 
 Germany 
 Greece 
 Hungary 
 Republic of Ireland 
 Italy 
 Latvia 
 Lithuania 
 Luxembourg 
 Malta 
 Netherlands 
 Poland 
 Portugal 
 Romania 
 Slovakia 
 Slovenia 
 Spain 
 Sweden 
 Other 
 Albania 
 Andorra 
 Armenia 
 Azerbaijan 
 Belarus 
 Bosnia and Herzegovina 
 Georgia 
 Iceland 
 Kazakhstan 
 Liechtenstein 
 Moldova 
 Monaco 
 Montenegro 
 North Macedonia 
 Norway 
 Russia 
 San Marino 
 Serbia 
 Switzerland 
 Turkey 
 Ukraine 
 United Kingdom 
 Vatican City 
 States with limited recognition 
 Abkhazia 
 Kosovo 
 Nagorno-Karabakh 
 Northern Cyprus 
 South Ossetia 
 Transnistria 
 Dependencies  and other territories 
 Faroe Islands 
 Gibraltar 
 Guernsey 
 Isle of Man 
 Jersey 
 
 v t e Cuisines Continental 
 African 
 North 
 West 
 list 
 Americas 
 Caribbean 
 North 
 South 
 list 
 Asian 
 Caucasian 
 Central 
 Indian subcontinent 
 Levantine 
 list 
 European 
 Balkan 
 Central 
 Eastern 
 list 
 Oceanic 
 Intercontinental
 Global 
 Latin American 
 Mediterranean 
 Middle Eastern 
 National  and regional 
 Afghan 
 Albanian 
 Algerian 
 American 
 Californian 
 Floribbean 
 Hawaiian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Lowcountry (South Carolina) 
 New England 
 New Mexico 
 Pacific Northwest 
 Pennsylvania Dutch 
 Puerto Rican 
 Southern US 
 Southwest US 
 Texas 
 Angolan 
 Argentine 
 Armenian 
 Australian 
 Austrian 
 Azerbaijani 
 Bahraini 
 Bangladeshi 
 Barbadian 
 Belarusian 
 Belgian 
 Belizean 
 Beninese 
 Bhutanese 
 Bolivian 
 Bosnian-Herzegovinian 
 Botswana 
 Brazilian 
 British 
 Channel Islands 
 English 
 Gibraltarian 
 Northern Irish 
 Saint Helena 
 Scottish 
 Welsh 
 Bruneian 
 Bulgarian 
 Burkinabé 
 Burmese 
 Burundian 
 Cambodian 
 Cameroonian 
 Canadian 
 Acadian 
 Québécois 
 Central African Republic 
 Chadian 
 Chilean 
 Chinese 
 Cantonese 
 Hong Kong 
 Macanese 
 Tibetan 
 Xinjiang 
 Colombian 
 Congolese 
 Corsican 
 Croatian 
 Cuban 
 Cypriot 
 Czech 
 Danish 
 Faroese 
 Greenlandic 
 Djiboutian 
 Dominican 
 Dominican Republic 
 Dutch 
 East Timorese 
 Ecuadorian 
 Egyptian 
 Emirati 
 Equatorial Guinean 
 Eritrean 
 Estonian 
 Ethiopian 
 Fijian 
 Filipino 
 Finnish 
 French 
 Occitan 
 French Guianan 
 Gabonese 
 Gambian 
 Georgian 
 German 
 Ghanaian 
 Greek 
 Cretan 
 Epirotic 
 Greek Macedonian 
 Heptanesean 
 Guatemalan 
 Guinea-Bissauan 
 Guinean 
 Haitian 
 Honduran 
 Hungarian 
 Icelandic 
 Indian 
 Arunachalese 
 Assamese 
 Bengali 
 Bihari 
 Goan 
 Gujarati 
 Himachal Pradesh 
 Kashmiri 
 Jharkhandi 
 Karnataka 
 Kerala 
 Maharashtrian 
 Manipuri 
 Meghalayan 
 Mizo 
 Naga 
 Odia 
 Punjabi 
 Rajasthani 
 Sikkimese 
 Sindhi 
 Tamil 
 Telangana 
 Telugu 
 Indonesian 
 Acehnese 
 Balinese 
 Banjar 
 Batak 
 Betawi 
 Indo 
 Javanese 
 Madurese 
 Makassar 
 Minahasan 
 Minangkabau 
 Palembangese 
 Sundanese 
 Iranian 
 Iraqi 
 Irish 
 Israeli 
 Italian 
 Abruzzese 
 Ligurian 
 Lombard 
 Lucanian 
 Neapolitan 
 Roman 
 Sardinian 
 Sicilian 
 Venetian 
 Ivorian 
 Jamaican 
 Japanese 
 Okinawan 
 Jordanian 
 Kazakh 
 Kenyan 
 Korean 
 North Korean 
 South Korean 
 Kosovan 
 Kuwaiti 
 Kyrgyz 
 Lao 
 Latvian 
 Lebanese 
 Lesotho 
 Liberian 
 Libyan 
 Liechtensteiner 
 Lithuanian 
 Luxembourg 
 Macedonian 
 Malagasy 
 Malawian 
 Malaysian 
 Sabahan 
 Sarawakian 
 Maldivian 
 Malian 
 Maltese 
 Mauritanian 
 Mauritian 
 Mexican 
 Moldovan 
 Monégasque 
 Mongolian 
 Montenegrin 
 Moroccan 
 Mozambican 
 Namibian 
 Nauruan 
 Nepalese 
 New Zealand 
 Nicaraguan 
 Niger 
 Nigerian 
 Niuean 
 Norwegian 
 Omani 
 Pakistani 
 Palestinian 
 Panamanian 
 Peruvian 
 Polish 
 Portuguese 
 Qatari 
 Romanian  (incl.  Transylvanian Saxon ) 
 Russian 
 Bashkir 
 Chechen 
 Circassian 
 Komi 
 Mordovian 
 Sakha 
 Tatar 
 Udmurt 
 Yamal 
 Rwandan 
 Saint Lucian 
 Salvadoran 
 Sammarinese 
 São Tomé and Príncipe 
 Saudi Arabian 
 Senegalese 
 Serbian 
 Seychellois 
 Sierra Leonean 
 Singaporean 
 Slovak 
 Slovenian 
 Somali 
 South African 
 Spanish 
 Andalusian 
 Asturian 
 Balearic 
 Basque 
 Canarian 
 Cantabrian 
 Catalan 
 Extremaduran 
 Galician 
 Manchegan 
 Valencian 
 Sri Lankan 
 Sudanese 
 Swazi 
 Swedish 
 Swiss 
 Syrian 
 Taiwanese 
 Tajik 
 Tanzanian 
 Zanzibari 
 Thai 
 Togolese 
 Tunisian 
 Turkish 
 Turkmen 
 Trinidadian and Tobagonian 
 Ugandan 
 Ukrainian 
 Uruguayan 
 Uzbek 
 Venezuelan 
 Vietnamese 
 Western Saharan 
 Yemeni 
 Zambian 
 Zimbabwean 
 Ethnic 
 Ainu 
 Arab 
 Indonesian 
 Aromanian 
 Assyrian 
 Balochi 
 Berber 
 Cajun 
 Chinese 
 American 
 Canadian 
 Chifa 
 Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Crimean Tatar 
 Greek American 
 Hazaragi 
 Indian 
 Anglo-Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Indigenous American 
 Inuit 
 Italian American 
 Kurdish 
 Livonian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Malay 
 Ossetian 
 Parsi 
 Pashtun 
 Peranakan 
 Romani 
 Sámi 
 Soul food 
 Sylheti 
 Transylvanian Saxon 
 Yup'ik 
 Religious 
 Buddhist 
 Christian 
 Goan Catholic 
 Mangalorean Catholic 
 Mennonite 
 Hindu 
 Islamic 
 Chinese 
 Ital 
 Jain 
 Jewish 
 American 
 Ashkenazi 
 Bukharan 
 Ethiopian 
 Mizrahi 
 Sephardic 
 Syrian 
 Ritual slaughter 
 Sikh 
 Historical 
 Ancient Egyptian 
 Ancient Greek 
 Ancient Israelite 
 Ancient Roman 
 Antebellum America 
 Aztec 
 Byzantine 
 Early modern European 
 Historical Chinese 
 Historical Indian subcontinent 
 Historical North Indian and Pakistani 
 History of agriculture 
 History of alcoholic drinks 
 History of bread 
 History of seafood 
 History of vegetarianism 
 Historical Argentine 
 Historical Japanese 
 Inca 
 Mayan 
 Muisca 
 Mughal 
 Medieval 
 Ottoman 
 Peasant 
 Soviet 
 Thirteen Colonies 
 Styles 
 Classique 
 Fast food 
 Fusion 
 New American 
 Eurasian 
 Haute 
 Molecular gastronomy 
 Note by Note 
 Nouvelle 
 Lists 
 List of cuisines 
 List of historical cuisines 
 Lists of prepared foods 
 Related 
 Cookbook 
 Cooking 
 Culinary arts 
 Drink 
 Food 
 history 
 Diet 
 Meal preparation 
 
   Food portal 
   Drink portal 
   Category 
   Commons 
   Cookbook 
   WikiProject 
   Outline 
 
 Authority control : National libraries  
 Israel 
 United States 
 Japan 
 
  
NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw2408
Cached time: 20230311123616
Cache expiry: 1814400
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc, no‐toc‐conversion]
CPU time usage: 0.910 seconds
Real time usage: 1.164 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 19923/1000000
Post‐expand include size: 183383/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 15399/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 16/100
Expensive parser function count: 63/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 112119/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.424/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 19543922/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/400
 
 
Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  920.753      1 -total
 33.37%  307.230      3 Template:Navbox
 16.97%  156.287      1 Template:European_topic
 14.99%  138.045      1 Template:Reflist
 11.50%  105.876      1 Template:Culture_of_Belgium
 11.21%  103.185      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 10.74%   98.934     55 Template:Iso2country
  9.79%   90.158      1 Template:Belgium_topics
  9.61%   88.489      1 Template:Country_topics
  9.25%   85.127      1 Template:In_lang
 
  Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:idhash:211974-0!canonical and timestamp 20230311123614 and revision id 1143229748. Rendering was triggered because: page-view
  
 esi <esi:include src="/esitest-fa8a495983347898/content" />  
 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Belgian_cuisine&oldid=1143229748 " 
 Category :  Belgian cuisine Hidden categories:  Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles to be expanded from November 2018 All articles to be expanded Articles using small message boxes Articles needing additional references from December 2021 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2023 Articles with J9U identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers Articles with NDL identifiers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  This page was last edited on 6 March 2023, at 15:56  (UTC) . 
 Text is available under the  Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0 ;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the  Terms of Use  and  Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the  Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. 
 
 
 Privacy policy 
 About Wikipedia 
 Disclaimers 
 Contact Wikipedia 
 Mobile view 
 Developers 
 Statistics 
 Cookie statement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
