
 
 
 Jump to content 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle sidebar 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Create account Log in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Personal tools 
 
 
 
 
   Create account   Log in 
 
 
 
 
		Pages for logged out editors  learn more 
 
 
 Contributions Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Navigation 
 
 
 Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate 
 
 
 
 
 Contribute 
 
 
 Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file 
 
 
 
 
 Tools 
 
 
 What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item 
 
 
 
 
 Print/export 
 
 
 Download as PDF Printable version 
 
 
 
 
 In other projects 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons 
 
 
 
 
 Languages 
 
 On this Wikipedia the language links are at the top of the page across from the article title.  Go to top . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CentralNotice  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Contents 
 move to sidebar 
 hide 
 
 
 
 
 (Top) 
 
 
 
 
 
 1 Culinary influences 
 
 
				Toggle Culinary influences subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 1.1 Mughal influence 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.2 Influence of widows 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.3 Partition of Bengal 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 Characteristics 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 Regional specialties 
 
 
				Toggle Regional specialties subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 3.1 Chittagong 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.1.1 Mezban 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.2 Dhaka 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.3 Kolkata 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.3.1 Influences 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.3.2 Adda 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.4 Sylhet 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4 Utensils 
 
 
				Toggle Utensils subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 4.1 Historical 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.2 Contemporary 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5 Meals 
 
 
				Toggle Meals subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 5.1 Main course 
 
 
 
 
 
 5.1.1 Fish 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5.1.2 Sweets 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5.1.3 Roshogolla 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5.1.4 Darbesh 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5.1.5 Pantua 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5.1.6 Other sweets 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6 Beverages 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 7 Gallery 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8 See also 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 9 References 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 10 Further reading 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
						Toggle the table of contents
					 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle the table of contents 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bengali cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 9 languages 
 
 
 
 অসমীয়া বাংলা हिन्दी Italiano Jawa ქართული Lietuvių Polski Simple English 
 Edit links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Article Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 English 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Read View source View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 More 
 
 
 
 Read View source View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
 
 
 
 
 Cuisine of the Bengal region 
 This article has multiple issues.  Please help  improve it  or discuss these issues on the  talk page .  ( Learn how and when to remove these template messages ) 
 
 The  neutrality  of this article is  disputed .  Relevant discussion may be found on the  talk page . Please do not remove this message until  conditions to do so are met .   ( May 2014 )  ( Learn how and when to remove this template message ) 
 This article  needs additional citations for  verification .  Please help  improve this article  by  adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources:   "Bengali cuisine"  –  news   ·   newspapers   ·   books   ·   scholar   ·   JSTOR   ( June 2012 )  ( Learn how and when to remove this template message ) 
 
  ( Learn how and when to remove this template message ) 
 
 
   Pabda jhaal, a Bengali fish curry 
 Bengali cuisine  ( Bengali :  বাঙ্গালী রন্ধনপ্রণালী ) is the culinary style of  Bengal , a region in the eastern part of the  Indian subcontinent  encompassing  Bangladesh  and the  Indian states  of  West Bengal ,  Tripura , as well as the  Barak Valley  in  Assam . [1]  The cuisine has been shaped by the region's diverse  history  and climate. It is known for its varied use of flavours including  mustard oil , as well as the spread of its confectioneries and desserts. [2]  There is a strong emphasis on rice as a staple, [3]  with fish traditionally the most common protein. Freshwater fish are preferred to seafish, although  barramundi , known as  bhetki , is also common. [4]  Although less popular than fish, Bengalis have eaten a variety of meats since pre-colonial times, ranging from pigs and deer to hedgehogs and turtles. In more recent times, lentils have begun to form a significant part of the diet. [5]  Many Bengali food traditions draw from social activities, such as  adda , or the  Mezban .
 
   A traditional Bengali lunch, consisting of bhaat (rice), aloo bhaja (fried potato), begun bhaja (fried eggplant), dal (lentils), chingri machher malaikari (prawn in coconut gravy), mutton, chatni, papad, and mishti(sweets). 
 
 Culinary influences 
 Mughal influence 
 Muslims conquered Bengal around the mid-thirteenth century, bringing with them  Persian  and  Arabic  cuisine. [6]  Such dishes as  biryani ,  korma  and  bhuna  had once been meals of the higher courts, but the cooks of the Mughals brought their recipes to the lower and middle classes. [7]  The influence was reinforced during the rule of the  British Raj , where Kolkata became the place of refuge for many prominent exiled  Nawabs , notably the family of  Tipu Sultan  from  Mysore  and  Wajid Ali Shah , the ousted  Nawab of Awadh . The exiles brought with them hundreds of cooks and  masalchis  (spice mixers), and as their royal patronage and wealth diminished, they became interspersed into the local population. These cooks came with the knowledge of a very wide range of spices (most notably  jafran  and  mace ), the extensive use of  ghee , and marinating meat with yoghurt and chilli. [8] 
 
   Catla kalia 
   Mutton chaap 
 In  Bangladesh , this food has become common fare for the population while in West Bengal, they have remained the food of professional chefs. Further innovations include  chap  (ribs slow cooked on a  tawa ),  rezala  (meat in a thin yogurt and cardamom gravy) and  kathi  roll (kebabs in a wrap). [8] 
 The Mughals had a particular fixation on meat, bringing  mutton  and  beef  into mainstream Bengali cuisine as well as already known kinds of meat like chicken and venison. [7] 
 Furthermore, traditional desserts had been primarily based on  rice pastes  and  jaggery , but under Mughal influence moved towards significantly increased use of milk, cream, and sugar along with expensive spices such as cardamom and saffron. [7] 
 
 Influence of widows 
 In Hindu tradition, widows were not allowed to eat foods that would not be classified as "bitter", necessitating experiment and innovation. [9]  While most Bengali  castes  ate meat and fish, this was barred for widows. Widows also could not use "heating" foods such as  shallot  and  garlic , but  ginger  was allowed. This style found a core place in Bengali curries in general, both vegetarian and non-vegetarian. Expensive spices such as  saffron ,  cinnamon  or  cloves  were used very sparingly—if at all. Nuts, dry fruits, milk and milk products (such as  cream ,  ghee  or  curd ) were similarly scarce. [10]  These economic and social restrictions influenced Bengali widows to create a brand new set of meals that utilized only vegetables and cheap spices.
 
   Khaashir Mangsho er Torkari  – Traditional Bengali mutton curry 
 Partition of Bengal 
 The large-scale displacement along religious lines as a result of the  partition  led to changes in meal-taking, as to adhere to religious restrictions. In  Bangladesh  (former  East Bengal  and  East Pakistan ),  Mughlai food  is common, and includes foods that are less popular in West Bengal, such as beef  kebab . Additionally, sweets such as  zarda  and firni-payesh are eaten. In rural Bangladesh, many people eat  makna  fried, popped, or raw. [11] [12] 
 During the colonial period, many Western food shops were established in Kolkata, making puff pastries, channa, chocolate, and chips especially popular. Dishes such as chop, gravy cutlet, sponge  rasogolla , and  ledikeni . [11]  As a result of a multi-cultural community, Kolkata city's cuisine continuously changes, and takes heavy influence from Chinese and European palates. [12] [13] 
 
 Characteristics 
 Bengali cuisine can be subdivided into four different types of dishes,  charbya  ( Bengali :  চর্ব্য ), or food that is chewed, such as rice or fish;  choṣya  ( Bengali :  চোষ্য ), or food that is sucked, such as ambal and tak;  lehya  ( Bengali :  লেহ্য ), or foods that are meant to be licked, like  chutney ; and  peya  ( Bengali :  পেয় ), which includes drinks, mainly milk. [14] 
 
 Regional specialties 
 Main articles:  Bangladeshi cuisine ,  List of Bangladeshi dishes , and  List of Bangladeshi spices 
   Bangladeshi biriyani 
 Different parts of Bengal are famed for certain dishes, food items and ingredients. For example,  South Bengali  districts around the  Sundarbans  boast of the expensive  chui jhal  chilli, which they peel and chop into small pieces to be cooked in their dishes and give off a strong aroma. On the other hand,  North Bengal   are the homes of many Bengali desserts such as the  Mishti doi  of  Bogra , the Kachagolla of  Natore  and the  Chomchom  of  Porabari . However, other regions also have famous desserts like the  Balish Mishti  (pillow-sweet) of  Netrokona , the  Monda  of  Muktagachha , the  Red Yoghurt  of  Nabadwip  and the famed  Roshmolai  of  Comilla .
 
 Chittagong 
 Chittagonian culinary tradition is mostly known for  Mezban  and mixed rice dishes like  kala bhuna , which has shoulder pieces of beef and traditional spices.  Dried fish  ( shutki ) is more available in the Chittagong region than in other parts of Bengal. [15] 
 
 Mezban 
 Main article:  Mezban 
   Traditional Mezban cooking in Chittagong, Bangladesh. 
 Mezban  (locally known as  Mejjan ) is the Bengali word for special occasion feasts in the  Chittagong  region of Bangladesh. [16]  Historically Mezbani is a traditional regional feast where people are invited to enjoy a meal with  white rice  and  beef , besides other dishes rich in animal fat and dairy. [17]  It is held on the occasions such as death anniversary, birth anniversary, celebrating successes, launching of a new business, entry into a new house, the birth of a child, marriage,  aqiqah  and  circumcision ,  ear piercing  of girls and naming of the newborn. [16] [17]  The invitation of the Mezban ceremony generally remains open for all and various people to different places and neighbourhoods convey the invitation for the feast. In urban areas, attending a mezban is by invitation only. Usually, the consumption of food at Mezbani takes place from morning to afternoon. [16] 
 Beef-based dishes are preferred by Bengali Muslims and are a symbol of social prestige for a Mezban feast. [17]  The rich and the poor arrange feasts on various occasions as much as circumstances allow them. It has a distinct style of cooking and proper Mezban meat demands a certain skill; [17]  for example: [16]  The unique beef curry served in this feast is known as  Mezbani gosht , that carries a distinctive recipe, knowledge of which is essentially confined within the Chittagonian cooks. [18] 
 Fish is used instead of beef while cooking Mezban in Hindu tradition. The Hindu community of Chittagong organises Mezbani each year under the banner of "Chittagong Parishad", with curries made from fish, vegetable and dried fish. [16] 
 
 Dhaka 
 Bakarkhani being made in Dhaka, Bangladesh. They can be seen lining the walls of the  tandoor . Shahi jilapi  is a very popular sweetmeat in  Ramadan Cold  borhani  is drunk with hot meals Khichuri  is considered a rich gourmet delicacy. 
 Dhakaiya food is one of the most notable regional cuisines. The rich culinary customs are influenced by  Mughlai ,  Central Asian ,  Armenian ,  Hindustani  and native Bengali cuisines. However, it also has dishes unique to Dhaka. [19]  The  Nawabs of Dhaka  had brought Mughlai cuisine to Bengal, that were wholly retained by Dhaka's culinary community. Due to the high costs of producing Mughlai food, the recipes were limited to the elite classes in colonial India, and slowly expanded as Bangladesh's economy grew. The main focus on lamb, mutton, beef, yoghurt, and mild spices define the taste of the style. Such dishes as kebab; stuffed breads;  kacchi biriyani ; roast lamb, duck, and chicken;  patisapta ; Kashmiri tea; and  korma  are still served at special occasions like  Eid  and weddings. [12] [20]  Due to the high class of the food, using an excess amount of expensive ingredients like ghee, and making the food melt in one's mouth were essential to the feel of the food. [21] 
 Old Dhaka boasts a variation of the famous  pilaf  - the Morog Polao - in which the rice is cooked after and the chicken pieces are cut. Other  polaos  include  ilish polao  and  rui polao . Dhakaiyas are noted for introducing  paneer  and boiled eggs to  khichuri . [19]   Dhakai bakarkhani  is a thick, biscuit-like  flat-bread  which is a traditional street-food snack, famed for its quality and taste. It is mainly dished up with tea. [22] [23]  Dhakaiyas proudly hold a heritage of creating the best  khili paan  using various herbs and spices. They also offer a khili paan for diabetic patients called the "paan afsana". [24]   Haji biryani  is a dish, invented by a restaurateur in 1939, made with highly seasoned rice,  goat's meat  and number of spices and nuts. The restaurant has become an integral part of Dhakaiya culture. [25] 
 
 Kolkata 
   Kolkatar Rosogolla 
   The First rice Grain in Mouth Ceremony for babies is a traditional Kolkatan tradition 
 In Kolkata, many local street vendors own small shops from which they sell their own homemade goods. [26]  Items like cheeses ( paneer ) can be eaten as is, or can be made into sweet  sandesh ,  rosogolla , or  chanar payesh . Milk is especially used in Kolkata's various types of payesh, differing in use of different grains and additives like dates, figs, and berries. [27] [28]  In addition to European foodstuffs like chocolate, Kolkata takes culinary influence from its Chinese diaspora. [29]   Phuchka , also copied by the rest of India as  panipuri , is a common kind of Bengali street food made with a fried dough casing and a potato and chickpea filling, usually found in small stalls alongside  bhelpuri ,  masala chai ,  ghugni  and  chaat  stalls. [30] 
 
 Influences 
   Chinese pork roll in Kolkata 
 During the 19th century many Odia cooks migrated to Bengal to work in the households of affluent Kolkata families. They were also hired to cook in weddings and other family ceremonies. Introduction of  Odia  cooks into their kitchens brought in subtle but significant changes to Kolkata's cuisine. Many of Kolkata's classic dishes were originally from Odisha but were refined in Kolkata kitchens by Odia cooks. In fact some researchers say that dishes like  kanika  (Bengali  mishti pulao ) were first introduced to Kolkata kitchens by  Odia  cooks although this is contested by other researchers. [31] [32]  Even to this date most of the cooks in Kolkata kitchens and hotels are Odia cooks. [33] 
 The  Chinese of Kolkata  originally settled into a village called  Achipur  south of  Kolkata  in the late 18th century, later moving into the city and finally into its present home in  Tangra  at the eastern edge of Kolkata. [34]  The Chinese-origin people of Kolkata form a substantial and successful community with a distinct identity. [35]  With this identity came Chinese food, available at almost every street corner in Kolkata at present, due to the taste, quick cooking procedure, and no similarity with the original Chinese recipe other than the use of soy sauce. They were mostly  Cantonese  tradesmen and sailors who first settled down here and decided to cook with whatever items they had at hand. [36] 
 Calcuttan immigrants to other countries have started carrying this abroad as well; [35]  Indian Chinese restaurants have appeared in many places in the United States and UK. [37] 
 Indian Chinese food has been given a second boost in popularity since the 1950s when a large number of Tibetans migrated into Indian Territory, following the  14th Dalai Lama 's flight. [38]  Tibetans brought their own taste preferences to add to the genre, such as the popular  momo  (a kind of dumpling) or  thukpa  (a hearty noodle soup). Tibetans and Nepali immigrants found ready employment in the many kitchens that can now be found on virtually every street in Kolkata. [39] [40] 
 
 Adda 
 Main article:  Adda (South Asian) 
 Adda ( Bengali :  আড্ডা ) is a traditional Bengali means of socialising over food during the work day. Food taken during adda consists usually of mishti or  sweetmeats , tea, and coffee, although heartier meats such as fried fish may be brought out as well.
 
The adda saw a rise during the colonial era among the  Bhadralok   guild members  to meet and talk about a range of topics: [41] "You could be discussing Charles and Camilla's marriage this moment, and the next moment you're swinging over to the latest cricket series between India and Pakistan, and then swing back to the recent controversy over  Tagore ." [42]   Being a hobby for artisans, women were largely secluded from adda, a sentiment that has begun to disappear with the democratization of adda and women occupying a larger space in social life. For this reason, adda was seen as a refuge "...from the home, a neutral rendezvous away from both the perceived drudgery of the workplace and domesticity". [41] 
 In the post-colonial era, the adda has been fading due to the more rigid structure of work and exploitative perceptions of unnecessary laziness. This has inspired a sizeable movement of Bengalis who believe it integral to the idea of  lyadh , or doing nothing to relax and recharge. [41]  However, adda does still exist, being attended during vacation time or after work at clubs or coffee shops. The tradition even has an equivalent to the Greek  symposium , as students may meet for a study session over food or have a teacher teach in a more relaxed environment. [43] 
 
 Sylhet 
 Sylhet  boasts a variation of the famous  pilaf  dish –  Akhni  – in which the rice is cooked after and the chicken pieces are cut. Commonly consumed varieties of meat include beef,  chicken ,  Mutton  and duck/goose in dishes such as  Hash O Bash . They also proudly hold the heritage of  Beef Hatkora , a rice dish consisting of a wild citrus fruit not found in other parts of Bengal. [44] 
 During the British period, biscuits and  loaves  were introduced in Sylhet and received popularity within the Muslim community. The middle-class  Hindus  of  Cachar  and Sylhet however were very suspicious of biscuits and breads as they believed they were baked by Muslims. In one occasion, a few Hindus in Cachar caught some Englishman eating biscuits with tea which caused an uproar. The information reached the Hindus of Sylhet and a little rebellion occurred. In response to this, companies started to advertise their bread as "machine-made" and "untouched by (Muslim) hand" to tell Hindus that the breads were "safe for consumption". This incident is mentioned in  Bipin Chandra Pal 's autobiography and he mentions how gradually culinary habits of Hindus eventually changed. [45] 
 
 
 
 
 
 A softer style of  khichuri  is consumed in  Sylhet .
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Srimangal  is famous for the  Seven Color Tea 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lotar Shutki Shira  (fermented fish curry)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Chicken tikka masala  was said to have been invented by a British-Bengali chef from Sylhet.
 
 
 
 
 Utensils 
   Different utensils used in a Bengali household. Clockwise from left:  korai ,  tawa ,  hari , tea pan and a  dekchi  or  deg .     From left, 3 hatas, 3 khuntis and a jhanjri 
   A classical beef curry dish with potatoes served on a plate with flowery engravings. This style of plate is popular among all Bengalis. 
 Bengali food is often served on plates which have a distinct flowery pattern often in blue or pink. Another characteristic of Bengali food is the use the  boti  (also called  dao  or  da ). It is a long curved blade on a platform held down by one or both feet; both hands are used to hold whatever is being cut and move it against the blade, which faces the user. This method gives effective control over the cutting process, and can be used to cut anything from prawns to large pumpkins. [46] 
 A  korai  is a cooking vessel for most Bengali sauces and stir-fry. The dekchi (a flat-bottomed pan) is used generally for larger amounts of cooking or for making rice. It comes with a thin flat lid which is used also to strain out the starch while finishing up cooking rice. The tawa is used to make  roti  and  paratha . [47]  The other prominent cooking utensil is a hari, which is a round-bottomed pot-like vessel. The three mentioned vessels all come in various sizes and in various metals and alloys. [48] 
 A flat metal spatula, khunti, is used often, along with hata (scoop with a long handle), jhanjri (round-shaped sieve-like spatula to deep-fry food), the shanrashi (pincers to remove vessels from the fire), the ghuntni (wooden hand blender) for puréeing dal, the wooden  belun chaki  (round pastry board and rolling pin), and the  shil nora , which is a rough form of a mortar and pestle or grinding stone. The kuruni is used only to grate coconuts. [49] 
 Silverware is not a part of traditional Bengali cookery. [49] 
 
 Historical 
   Paan  and  supari  are a typical meal concluder. 
 Bengalis usually eat sitting on the floor with food served on a  dostorkhan . They historically ate without silverware, [50]  with a large banana or plantain leaf serving as the plate, or with plates made from dried  sal  leaves sewn together.
 It is customary to offer guests food and drink appropriate to the time of their visit. At meals, guests are served first, with the possible exception of very old or very young members of the host family. Within the family, serving starts with the senior males (those of highest social rank or eldest). School-age children are served before wives, daughter-in-laws, and the cook, who are the last to eat. [50] 
 
 Contemporary 
 Prior to colonisation, adherence to meal order was a marker of social status, but with British and Portuguese influence and the growth of the middle class, this has slowly disappeared. Courses are frequently skipped or combined with everyday meals. [43] [ failed verification ]  Meals were usually served course by course to the diners by the youngest housewives, but increasing influence of nuclear families and urbanisation has replaced this. [51] [ self-published source ]  It is common to place everything on platters in the centre of the table, and each diner serves themselves. Ceremonial occasions such as weddings used to have elaborate serving rituals, but professional catering and buffet-style dining is now commonplace. However, large family occasions and more lavish ceremonial feasts may still abide by these rules. [51] [52] 
 
 Meals 
 This section  needs additional citations for  verification .  Please help  improve this article  by  adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.   ( June 2020 )  ( Learn how and when to remove this template message ) 
 Daily meals are usually simple, geared to balance nutrition and making extensive use of vegetables. The courses progress broadly from lighter to richer and heavier and go through various tastes and taste cleansers. Rice remains common throughout the meal and is the main constituent of the meal, until the  chaţni  ( chutney ) course. [53] 
 
 Main course 
 Fish 
   A traditional Bengali fish meal – rice with  m acher jhol  (literally translated to "fish's gravy"). Bengalis eat copious amounts of fish and typically look for freshwater and brackish fish when making meals. They also temper it with  phoron . [54]  Popular fish curries include  boal ,  rohu ,  ilish , and  pabda .
 One tradition includes the left side of the cidal fish being cooked in oil. [55]  Bengali Vaishnavas avoid all types of fish, eggs and meat.
 
   Shorshe maach 
   Mishti doi 
 Sweets 
   Minimalist depiction of Bengali sweets 
 Bengali sweets have a long history. The Portuguese friar  Sebastien Manrique , travelling in the region in the 17th century, noted the multitude of milk-based foods and sweets prepared in traditional ways. [56]   Falooda ,  shahi jilapi  and  shemai  are popular sweet foods and desserts.
 
 Roshogolla 
 Roshogolla , a Bengali traditional sweet, is one of the most widely consumed sweets in India. It spread to Bengal in 1868. Chhana based sweets were introduced in Eastern India from about the 18th century; as the process and technology involved in synthesizing "Chhana" was introduced to the Indians by the Dutch in the 1790s. The cottage cheese "schmierkase" was also known as Dutch cheese. [57]  The earlier versions of Rossogolla lacked binding capacity of the modern avatar that is well known and highly acclaimed today. This was due to the fact that the know-how involved in synthesizing such a sweet was unknown before being experimentally developed by  Nobin Chandra Das  and then constantly improved and further standardized by his successors. Furthermore, the "chhana" manufactured in those days was a coarse and granular variety and had low binding capacity. It was made by  citric  and  ascorbic acid  from natural fruit extracts. This type of "chhana" cannot be worked on to compact into any regular and firm shape for the purpose of sweet-making, leave alone making Rossogolla. This is because of a documented technological issue –  lactic acid  (extracted from  whey ) used to curdle  milk  now was introduced to India in the late 18th century by Dutch and Portuguese colonists (along with  acetic acid ). [58]  It is this method that creates the fine, smooth modern "chhana" with high binding capacity – which is now the staple raw material for  Bengali   confectioners . At present,  Nobin Chandra Das  is referred to have invented the spongy variant of rossogolla. [59] 
 
 Darbesh 
 Laddu  (or as it is known as "darbesh" in Bengal) is a very common sweet in West Bengal and Bangladesh, as well as the rest of the subcontinent, especially during celebrations and festivities. [60] [61]  They are usually made out of flour,  ghee /butter/oil and sugar. Alternative recipes can be made of coconut shavings and  jaggery , raisins, chopped nuts, oatmeal,  khoa ,  nutmeg , cardamom, or poppy seeds, among other ingredients. [62] [63] [64] [65]  The sweet dates back to the year 4 BCE, where it was used for medicinal purposes and to keep the hormones of 9-11-year-old girls' hormones "in check". [66] 
 
 Pantua 
 Pantua  is similar to  gulab jamun , and could be called a Bengali variant of that dish. [67] 
 
 Other sweets 
   Bhim Chandra Nag, one of the prestigious sweet shops in Kolkata, founded by Paran Chandra Nag in 1826 at  Bowbazar . 
 Several varieties of  doi  such as  mishţi doi , fruit-floured doi like  aam doi ,  custards , and rice pudding ( khir  or  firni ) [68]  are also popular in West Bengal.
 Shôndesh ,  chhanar jilapi ,  kalo jam ,  raghobshai , "pantua", "jolbhora shondesh", [69]  "roshbhora", "lord chomchom",  payesh ,  bundiya ,  nalengurer shôndesh ,  malpoa ,  shor bhaja ,  langcha ,  babarsa , and a variety of others are examples of sweets in Bengali cuisine.
 
 Beverages 
 Common beverages include  shorbot ,  lachhi ,  ghol ,  matha ,  falooda  and  Rooh Afza . The two main types of Bengali tea are  dudh cha  (milk tea) and  masala cha .  Srimangal , the tea capital of Bengal, is famed for the  Seven Color Tea  whilst Dhaka is famed for the  borhani . Traditional fruit juices ( rosh ) are also drunk such as  sugarcane juice ,  mango juice ,  palm fruit juice ,  date juice  as well as  basil seed  or  tukma -based drinks.
 
 Gallery 
 
 
 
 
 Bengali New Year Menu
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bengali Non-vegetarian meal
 
 
 
 
 
 
 A fancy arrangement of Bengali food
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bengali vegetarian meal
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Prosad thali
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bengali Fish Thali
 
 
 
 
 See also 
 Bangladeshi cuisine 
 List of Bangladeshi dishes 
 List of Bangladeshi spices 
 Chaunk 
 References 
 
 
 ^   Jane Hinchey (2019).  Bangladesh . Redback Publishing. p. 9.  ISBN   9781925630831 . 
 
 ^   Joe Bindloss (2022).  Lonely Planet India . Lonely Planet. p. 802.  ISBN   9781837580330 . 
 
 ^   Utsa Ray (2015).  Culinary Culture in Colonial India . Cambridge University Press. p. 151.  ISBN   9781107042810 . 
 
 ^   Colleen Taylor Sen (2004).  Food Culture in India . Greenwood Publishing Group. p. 117.  ISBN   9780313324871 . 
 
 ^   Ghulam Murshid (2018).  Bengali Culture Over a Thousand Years . Niyogi Books. p. 428. 
 
 ^   Pearce, Melissa (10 July 2013).  "Defining Bengali Cuisine: The Culinary Differences of West Bengal and Bangladesh" .  Culture Trip . Retrieved  1 September  2019 . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   "Mughalnama: changing the contours of Mughlai cuisine in India" .  ANI . Retrieved  14 May  2022 . 
 
 ^  a   b   "All That You Ever Wanted To Know About Mughlai Cuisine!" .  culturalindia.net . Retrieved  1 September  2018 . 
 
 ^   Nair, Rukmini.  "Are we what we eat?" . Retrieved  28 November  2011 . 
 
 ^   Banerji, Chitrita  (Winter 1995).  "What Bengali Widows Cannot Eat" .  Granta  (52). Archived from  the original  on 20 December 2011 . Retrieved  28 November  2011 . 
 
 ^  a   b   "Food Habits" .  Banglapedia . Retrieved  10 March  2019 . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   "Historical Sketch | Bengal Cuisine" .  bengalcuisine.in . Retrieved  10 March  2019 . 
 
 ^   Pearce, Melissa (10 July 2013).  "Defining Bengali Cuisine: The Culinary Differences of the Bengal Region" .  Culture Trip . Retrieved  10 March  2019 . 
 
 ^   "Our Food Their Food: A Historical Overview of the Bengali Platter | Sahapedia" .  sahapedia.org . Retrieved  10 March  2019 . 
 
 ^   "Coastal cuisines of Bangladesh" .  Dhaka Tribune . 24 March 2019 . Retrieved  8 April  2019 . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   e   Ahmad Mamtaz (2012).  "Mezban" .  In  Islam, Sirajul ; Miah, Sajahan;  Khanam, Mahfuza ; Ahmed, Sabbir (eds.).  Banglapedia: the National Encyclopedia of Bangladesh  (Online ed.). Dhaka, Bangladesh: Banglapedia Trust,  Asiatic Society of Bangladesh .  ISBN   984-32-0576-6 .  OCLC   52727562 . Retrieved  11 March  2023 . 
 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   Fayeka Zabeen Siddiqua (10 October 2013).  "Majestic Mezban" .  The Daily Star .  Archived  from the original on 4 August 2018 . Retrieved  23 July  2019 . 
 
 ^   "Palate from the port" . The Daily Star. 5 January 2016 . Retrieved  12 July  2020 . 
 
 ^  a   b   Ray, Utsa (5 January 2015).  Culinary Culture in Colonial India .  Cambridge University  Press. pp. 210–215. 
 
 ^   "The Nawabs of Dhaka And Their Regal Cuisine" .  KIXP . 26 February 2015 . Retrieved  10 March  2019 . 
 
 ^   Anand, Shilpa Nair (7 May 2018).  "Food of the Nawabs" .  The Hindu .  ISSN   0971-751X . Retrieved  10 March  2019 . 
 
 ^   "Old Dhaka Bakarkhani – A Legendary Bread" . 19 October 2013. 
 
 ^   "Bakarkhani: delight in every bite" .  Daily Sun . 24 April 2016 . Retrieved  17 September  2018 . 
 
 ^   Ara, Shifat (18 February 2014).  "Gourmet Paan" .  The Daily Star (Bangladesh) . 
 
 ^   Mydans, Seth (8 July 1987).  "For a secret stew recipe, time is running out" .  The New York Times . Retrieved  30 April  2015 . 
 
 ^   Chitty, Tom (8 November 2018).  "Kolkata: A city of arts, culture and cuisine" .  cnbc.com . Retrieved  9 April  2019 . 
 
 ^   "Bengali Choshir Payesh Recipe | Choshir Paayesh" .  Debjanir Rannaghar . 13 January 2018 . Retrieved  9 April  2019 . 
 
 ^   "Aamer Payesh Or Mango Rice Pudding Or Aam Kheer | PeekNCook" .  Moumita Ghosh Recipe Blog PeekNCook . Retrieved  9 April  2019 . 
 
 ^   "Calcutta Cuisine - Cuisine of Kolkata India - Bengali Traditional Food - What to Eat in Calcutta India" .  kolkata.org.uk . Retrieved  9 April  2019 . 
 
 ^   Dugar, Divya (12 June 2015).  "Kolkata food: A dining guide to restaurants and dishes" .  CNN Travel . Retrieved  9 April  2019 . 
 
 ^   "Alexis Foundation" . Archived from  the original  on 10 October 2019 . Retrieved  10 October  2019 . 
 
 ^   "Is Odisha India's most underrated food destination?" .  Condé Nast Traveller India . 15 December 2017. 
 
 ^   Mitra, Bishwabijoy.  "Odia cooks to bring back forgotten Bengali recipes - Times of India" .  The Times of India . 
 
 ^   "Bengali cuisine,Historical influences,Characteristics of Bengali cuisine,Cooking styles,Common Bengali Recipe Styles,Culinary Influences,Bengali meals,Mishţi (sweets),Snacks" .  beautifulbengal.com . Retrieved  27 September  2019 . 
 
 ^  a   b   Biswas, Soumendra Nath (2009).  "Chapter I" .  Developing Food as a marketing tool for the growth of hospitality and tourism industry in India with special reference to West Bengal  (PhD). University of Burdwan.  hdl : 10603/61925 . 
 
 ^   "Know All About The Famous Bengali Culinary Style Popular in the Eastern Part of the Indian Subcontinent" .  www.culturalindia.net . Retrieved  27 September  2019 . 
 
 ^   Biswas, Soumendra Nath (2009).  "Chapter VII" .  Developing Food as a marketing tool for the growth of hospitality and tourism industry in India with special reference to West Bengal  (PhD). University of Burdwan.  hdl : 10603/61925 . 
 
 ^   "Tandoori momo: how Tibetan refugees reshaped Indian cuisine" .  South China Morning Post . 9 July 2017 . Retrieved  27 September  2019 . 
 
 ^   "Lip-Smacking Street Food Places in Kolkata That Should Be on Every Foodies List!" .  www.holidify.com . Retrieved  27 September  2019 . 
 
 ^   Deepak, Sharanya (27 April 2017).  "Inside the Birthplace of Indian-Chinese Cuisine" .  Vice . Retrieved  27 September  2019 . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   Chakravarti, Sudeep (December 2017).  "A brief history of Adda—the Bengali fine art of discussion" .  Quartz India . Retrieved  17 February  2020 . 
 
 ^   Trachtenberg, Peter (15 May 2005).  "The Chattering Masses" .  The New York Times .  ISSN   0362-4331 . Retrieved  17 February  2020 . 
 
 ^  a   b   Chakrabarty, Dipesh  (2001).  " Adda , Calcutta: Dwelling in Modernity" .  In  Gaonkar, Dilip Parameshwar  (ed.).  Alternative Modernities . Duke University Press. pp. 124–126.  ISBN   978-0-8223-2714-1 . 
 
 ^   Nevins, Debbie; Mariam, Whyte (15 July 2018).  Bangladesh . Cavendish Square Publishing, LLC. p. 126. 
 
 ^   Ray, Utsa (5 January 2015).  Culinary Culture in Colonial India .  Cambridge University  Press. 
 
 ^   WildFilmsIndia (19 February 2015),  Women cut vegetables at a Bengali wedding in India, using a Boti or Dao ,  archived  from the original on 17 November 2021 , retrieved  31 March  2019 
 
 ^   "www.CookingInIndia.com ~ Your Desi(Indian) Kitchen on the Net" . 8 April 2008. Archived from  the original  on 8 April 2008 . Retrieved  15 June  2019 . 
 
 ^   "Pots, Pans and Griddles - Gourmet Online" . 14 October 2008. Archived from  the original  on 14 October 2008 . Retrieved  15 June  2019 . 
 
 ^  a   b   "traditional indian cooking utensils - Indian Recipes, Indian Food and Cooking - FiveTastes.com" .  fivetastes.com . Retrieved  15 June  2019 . 
 
 ^  a   b   Shrestha, Nanda R.; Paul, Bimal K. (2002).  Nepal and Bangladesh: A Global Studies Handbook . ABC-CLIO. p. 287.  ISBN   978-1-57607-285-1 . 
 
 ^  a   b   McElroy, Linda.  "Customs and Cuisine of Bangladesh | Dining for Women" .  Dining for Women . Retrieved  27 September  2019 . 
 
 ^   Scroope, Chara (2017).  "Bangladeshi Culture - Etiquette" .  Cultural Atlas . Retrieved  27 September  2019 .  Plates are taken to a main dish for serving rather than passing food around the table. 
 
 ^   Sen, Collen Taylor  (1997).  "The Portuguese Influence on Bengali Cuisine" .  In Harlan Walker (ed.).  Food on the Move: Proceedings of the Oxford Symposium on Food and Cookery, 1996 . Prospect Books. pp.  288 –293.  ISBN   978-0-907325-79-6 . 
 
 ^   Momin, Sajeda (2001).  The Statesman Good Food Guide to Kolkata .  Nachiketa Publication  – via  Google Books . 
 
 ^   Saha, Sanghamitra (1998).  A Handbook of West Bengal . International School of Dravidian Linguistics.  ISBN   978-81-85692-24-1 . 
 
 ^   Krondl, Michae (August 2010). "The Sweetshops of Kolkata".  Gastronomica . University of California Press.  10  (3): 58–65.  doi : 10.1525/gfc.2010.10.3.58 .  JSTOR   10.1525/gfc.2010.10.3.58 . 
 
 ^   "History of Rossogolla" . Retrieved  24 August  2015 . 
 
 ^   "The Origin of Rossogolla" . Retrieved  24 August  2015 . 
 
 ^   "History of Rasgulla" . Retrieved  24 August  2015 . 
 
 ^   "Sweet shops make hay in Diwali shine" .  The New Indian Express . Retrieved  18 February  2019 . 
 
 ^   Dundoo, Sangeetha Devi (31 October 2013).  "As good as home" .  The Hindu .  ISSN   0971-751X . Retrieved  18 February  2019 . 
 
 ^   "Dinkache ladoo, Gund ladoo, Gond Ladoo, Gond Ka Laddu.....Easy Recipes on CuisineCuisine.com" .  cuisinecuisine.com . Retrieved  18 February  2019 . 
 
 ^   Collingham, Lizzie (6 February 2006).  Curry: A Tale of Cooks and Conquerors . Oxford University Press.  ISBN   9780198038504 . 
 
 ^   Krondl, Michael (1 October 2011).  Sweet Invention: A History of Dessert . Chicago: Chicago Review Press. p. 17.  ISBN   9781569769546 . 
 
 ^   "Oatmeal Laddu" .  Living Foodz . Retrieved  18 February  2019 . 
 
 ^   "Food Story: The journey of ladoo from a medicine to the much-loved Indian sweet" .  The Indian Express . 16 October 2014 . Retrieved  18 February  2019 . 
 
 ^   Charmaine O'Brien (3 February 2003).  Flavours of Delhi: A Food Lover's Guide . Penguin Books Limited. p. 145.  ISBN   978-93-5118-237-5 . 
 
 ^   "Notun Gurer Payesh/Traditional Bengali Rice Pudding | Remembering My Dida" .  IshitaUnblogged . 30 May 2012 . Retrieved  18 February  2019 . 
 
 ^   Sen, Collen Taylor  (2000).  " Sandesh : An Emblem of Bengaliness" .  In Harlan Walker (ed.).  Milk-- Beyond the Dairy: Proceedings of the Oxford Symposium on Food and Cookery 1999 . Prospect Books. p. 308.  ISBN   978-1-903018-06-4 . 
 
 
 Further reading 
 Ray, Krishnendu (2004).  The migrant's table: meals and memories in Bengali-American households . Temple University Press.  ISBN   1-59213-096-8 . Retrieved  14 October  2011 . 
 v t e Cuisines Continental 
 African 
 North 
 West 
 list 
 Americas 
 Caribbean 
 North 
 South 
 list 
 Asian 
 Caucasian 
 Central 
 Indian subcontinent 
 Levantine 
 list 
 European 
 Balkan 
 Central 
 Eastern 
 list 
 Oceanic 
 Intercontinental
 Global 
 Latin American 
 Mediterranean 
 Middle Eastern 
 National  and regional 
 Afghan 
 Albanian 
 Algerian 
 American 
 Californian 
 Floribbean 
 Hawaiian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Lowcountry (South Carolina) 
 New England 
 New Mexico 
 Pacific Northwest 
 Pennsylvania Dutch 
 Puerto Rican 
 Southern US 
 Southwest US 
 Texas 
 Angolan 
 Argentine 
 Armenian 
 Australian 
 Austrian 
 Azerbaijani 
 Bahraini 
 Bangladeshi 
 Barbadian 
 Belarusian 
 Belgian 
 Belizean 
 Beninese 
 Bhutanese 
 Bolivian 
 Bosnian-Herzegovinian 
 Botswana 
 Brazilian 
 British 
 Channel Islands 
 English 
 Gibraltarian 
 Northern Irish 
 Saint Helena 
 Scottish 
 Welsh 
 Bruneian 
 Bulgarian 
 Burkinabé 
 Burmese 
 Burundian 
 Cambodian 
 Cameroonian 
 Canadian 
 Acadian 
 Québécois 
 Central African Republic 
 Chadian 
 Chilean 
 Chinese 
 Cantonese 
 Hong Kong 
 Macanese 
 Tibetan 
 Xinjiang 
 Colombian 
 Congolese 
 Corsican 
 Croatian 
 Cuban 
 Cypriot 
 Czech 
 Danish 
 Faroese 
 Greenlandic 
 Djiboutian 
 Dominican 
 Dominican Republic 
 Dutch 
 East Timorese 
 Ecuadorian 
 Egyptian 
 Emirati 
 Equatorial Guinean 
 Eritrean 
 Estonian 
 Ethiopian 
 Fijian 
 Filipino 
 Finnish 
 French 
 Occitan 
 French Guianan 
 Gabonese 
 Gambian 
 Georgian 
 German 
 Ghanaian 
 Greek 
 Cretan 
 Epirotic 
 Greek Macedonian 
 Heptanesean 
 Guatemalan 
 Guinea-Bissauan 
 Guinean 
 Haitian 
 Honduran 
 Hungarian 
 Icelandic 
 Indian 
 Arunachalese 
 Assamese 
 Bengali 
 Bihari 
 Goan 
 Gujarati 
 Himachal Pradesh 
 Kashmiri 
 Jharkhandi 
 Karnataka 
 Kerala 
 Maharashtrian 
 Manipuri 
 Meghalayan 
 Mizo 
 Naga 
 Odia 
 Punjabi 
 Rajasthani 
 Sikkimese 
 Sindhi 
 Tamil 
 Telangana 
 Telugu 
 Indonesian 
 Acehnese 
 Balinese 
 Banjar 
 Batak 
 Betawi 
 Indo 
 Javanese 
 Madurese 
 Makassar 
 Minahasan 
 Minangkabau 
 Palembangese 
 Sundanese 
 Iranian 
 Iraqi 
 Irish 
 Israeli 
 Italian 
 Abruzzese 
 Ligurian 
 Lombard 
 Lucanian 
 Neapolitan 
 Roman 
 Sardinian 
 Sicilian 
 Venetian 
 Ivorian 
 Jamaican 
 Japanese 
 Okinawan 
 Jordanian 
 Kazakh 
 Kenyan 
 Korean 
 North Korean 
 South Korean 
 Kosovan 
 Kuwaiti 
 Kyrgyz 
 Lao 
 Latvian 
 Lebanese 
 Lesotho 
 Liberian 
 Libyan 
 Liechtensteiner 
 Lithuanian 
 Luxembourg 
 Macedonian 
 Malagasy 
 Malawian 
 Malaysian 
 Sabahan 
 Sarawakian 
 Maldivian 
 Malian 
 Maltese 
 Mauritanian 
 Mauritian 
 Mexican 
 Moldovan 
 Monégasque 
 Mongolian 
 Montenegrin 
 Moroccan 
 Mozambican 
 Namibian 
 Nauruan 
 Nepalese 
 New Zealand 
 Nicaraguan 
 Niger 
 Nigerian 
 Niuean 
 Norwegian 
 Omani 
 Pakistani 
 Palestinian 
 Panamanian 
 Peruvian 
 Polish 
 Portuguese 
 Qatari 
 Romanian  (incl.  Transylvanian Saxon ) 
 Russian 
 Bashkir 
 Chechen 
 Circassian 
 Komi 
 Mordovian 
 Sakha 
 Tatar 
 Udmurt 
 Yamal 
 Rwandan 
 Saint Lucian 
 Salvadoran 
 Sammarinese 
 São Tomé and Príncipe 
 Saudi Arabian 
 Senegalese 
 Serbian 
 Seychellois 
 Sierra Leonean 
 Singaporean 
 Slovak 
 Slovenian 
 Somali 
 South African 
 Spanish 
 Andalusian 
 Asturian 
 Balearic 
 Basque 
 Canarian 
 Cantabrian 
 Catalan 
 Extremaduran 
 Galician 
 Manchegan 
 Valencian 
 Sri Lankan 
 Sudanese 
 Swazi 
 Swedish 
 Swiss 
 Syrian 
 Taiwanese 
 Tajik 
 Tanzanian 
 Zanzibari 
 Thai 
 Togolese 
 Tunisian 
 Turkish 
 Turkmen 
 Trinidadian and Tobagonian 
 Ugandan 
 Ukrainian 
 Uruguayan 
 Uzbek 
 Venezuelan 
 Vietnamese 
 Western Saharan 
 Yemeni 
 Zambian 
 Zimbabwean 
 Ethnic 
 Ainu 
 Arab 
 Indonesian 
 Aromanian 
 Assyrian 
 Balochi 
 Berber 
 Cajun 
 Chinese 
 American 
 Canadian 
 Chifa 
 Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Crimean Tatar 
 Greek American 
 Hazaragi 
 Indian 
 Anglo-Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Indigenous American 
 Inuit 
 Italian American 
 Kurdish 
 Livonian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Malay 
 Ossetian 
 Parsi 
 Pashtun 
 Peranakan 
 Romani 
 Sámi 
 Soul food 
 Sylheti 
 Transylvanian Saxon 
 Yup'ik 
 Religious 
 Buddhist 
 Christian 
 Goan Catholic 
 Mangalorean Catholic 
 Mennonite 
 Hindu 
 Islamic 
 Chinese 
 Ital 
 Jain 
 Jewish 
 American 
 Ashkenazi 
 Bukharan 
 Ethiopian 
 Mizrahi 
 Sephardic 
 Syrian 
 Ritual slaughter 
 Sikh 
 Historical 
 Ancient Egyptian 
 Ancient Greek 
 Ancient Israelite 
 Ancient Roman 
 Antebellum America 
 Aztec 
 Byzantine 
 Early modern European 
 Historical Chinese 
 Historical Indian subcontinent 
 Historical North Indian and Pakistani 
 History of agriculture 
 History of alcoholic drinks 
 History of bread 
 History of seafood 
 History of vegetarianism 
 Historical Argentine 
 Historical Japanese 
 Inca 
 Mayan 
 Muisca 
 Mughal 
 Medieval 
 Ottoman 
 Peasant 
 Soviet 
 Thirteen Colonies 
 Styles 
 Classique 
 Fast food 
 Fusion 
 New American 
 Eurasian 
 Haute 
 Molecular gastronomy 
 Note by Note 
 Nouvelle 
 Lists 
 List of cuisines 
 List of historical cuisines 
 Lists of prepared foods 
 Related 
 Cookbook 
 Cooking 
 Culinary arts 
 Drink 
 Food 
 history 
 Diet 
 Meal preparation 
 
   Food portal 
   Drink portal 
   Category 
   Commons 
   Cookbook 
   WikiProject 
   Outline 
 
 v t e   Cuisine of Bangladesh Regional cuisines Sylhet 
 Main article 
 Alu chat 
 Beef Hatkhora 
 Chicken tikka masala 
 Chunga Pitha 
 Citrus macroptera 
 Duck Bamboo Curry 
 Forash 
 Handesh 
 Hutki shira 
 Nunor Bora 
 Phall 
 Seven Color Tea 
 Soft Khichuri 
 Thoikor Tenga 
 Tusha Shinni 
 Cumilla and Chittagong 
 Main article 
 Bela biscuit 
 Durus kura 
 Mezban 
 North Bengal (Rangpur and Rajshahi) 
 Main article 
 Kalai Ruti 
 Sholka 
 Pelka 
 Shidol 
 Dim Telani 
 Other 
 Fast food 
 Bangladeshi Chinese 
 Tribal cuisines Garo/Mandi 
 Main article 
 Thaingjaba 
 Nakham 
 Bengali 
 Main article 
 Akhni 
 Alu gosht 
 Alur Dom 
 Beef Satkara 
 Bhorta 
 Begun bhorta 
 Alu Bharta 
 Bini/biran bhat 
 Biryani 
 Chacchari 
 Chatni 
 Chicken korai 
 Chicken tikka 
 Chingri malai curry 
 Chira 
 Dal 
 Durus kura 
 Fried fish 
 Gosht 
 Hash O Bash 
 Hutki Shira 
 Jalfrezi 
 Kala bhuna 
 Kebab 
 Seekh kebab 
 Shami kebab 
 Keema Motor 
 Khichra 
 Khichuri 
 Norom khichuri 
 Kofta 
 Korma 
 Machh bhaja 
 Machher Jhol 
 Mezban 
 Mogoz bhuna 
 Murgi musollom 
 Mutton curry 
 Nihari 
 Panta bhat 
 Paya 
 Polao 
 Ponir 
 Posondo 
 Roast chicken 
 Roust 
 Shak 
 Shorba 
 Shukto 
 Shorshe ilish 
 Tandoori chicken 
 Tehari 
 Tikka 
 Torkari 
 Zorda polao 
 Chakma cuisines 
 Snidol 
 Bicchuri 
 Hebang 
 Pachon Tone 
 Bini Pitha 
 Other 
 Mundi 
 Nappi 
 Hangro 
 Maroi 
 Ingredients / types of food 
 Main dishes 
 Soups and stews 
 Desserts 
 Bread 
 Spices 
 Pitha 
 confectionery ‎ 
 Drinks 
 Snack foods 
 Condiments 
 Preparation and cooking 
 Handi 
 Karahi 
 Tava 
 Other 
 Related cuisines 
 Bengali cuisine 
 Afghani 
 Bhutanese 
 Iranian 
 Indian 
 Pakistani 
 Nepalese 
 Sri Lankan 
 Tibetan 
 See also 
 History 
 Etiquette 
 Bangladeshi chefs 
 
   Category 
   Commons 
   Cookbook 
   Bangladesh portal 
   Food portal 
 
 v t e   Cuisine of India Regional cuisines North India 
 Main article 
 Awadhi 
 Bhojpuri 
 Punjabi 
 Kumauni 
 Mughlai 
 Kashmiri 
 Rajasthani 
 Uttar Pradeshi 
 South India 
 Main article 
 Andhra 
 Chettinad 
 Karnataka 
 Kerala 
 Tamil 
 Hyderabadi 
 Udupi 
 Mangalorean 
 Mangalorean Catholic 
 Saraswat 
 East/ North East India 
 Bihari 
 Maithil 
 Bengali 
 Assamese 
 Jharkhandi 
 Meghalayan 
 Manipuri 
 Naga 
 Sikkimese 
 Tripuri 
 Arunachali 
 Odia 
 West India 
 Goan 
 Gujarati 
 Marathi 
 Agri & Koli 
 Malvani & Konkani 
 Sindhi 
 Parsi 
 Other 
 Fast food 
 Anglo-Indian 
 Indian Chinese 
 Indian Indonesian 
 Indian Singaporean 
 Jain (Satvika) 
 Malaysian Indian 
 Ingredients / types of food 
 Main dishes 
 Soups and stews 
 Desserts 
 Bread 
 Drinks 
 Snack foods 
 Spices 
 Condiments 
 Preparation and cooking 
 Handi 
 Karahi 
 Tava 
 Tandoor 
 Uruli 
 Other 
 Related cuisines 
 Afghani 
 Bangladeshi 
 Bhutanese 
 Iranian 
 Pakistani 
 Nepalese 
 Sri Lankan 
 Tibetan 
 See also 
 History 
 Etiquette 
 Indian chefs 
 
   Category 
   Commons 
   Cookbook 
   India portal 
   Food portal 
 
 v t e State of  West Bengal Capital :  Kolkata State symbols 
 Emblem :  Emblem of West Bengal 
 Animal :  Fishing cat 
 Bird :  White-throated kingfisher 
 Flower :  Night-flowering jasmine (Shiuli) 
 Tree :  Devil's tree (Saptaparni) 
 Fish:  Ilish 
 History 
 Gauda Kingdom 
 Shashanka 
 Pala Empire 
 Sena dynasty 
 Mallabhum 
 Cooch Behar State 
 Sher Shah Suri 
 Mughal Empire 
 Nawabs of Bengal and Murshidabad 
 East India Company 
 Battle of Plassey 
 Bengal Presidency 
 Great Bengal famine of 1770 
 Indian Rebellion of 1857 
 Bengali Renaissance 
 Bardhaman Raj 
 Nadia Raj 
 Jhargram Raj 
 Sovabazar Raj 
 Panchkot Raj 
 Partition of Bengal (1905) 
 Revolutionary movement for Indian independence 
 Anushilan Samiti 
 Jugantar 
 Bengal famine of 1943 
 Direct Action Day 
 Noakhali riots 
 Partition of Bengal (1947) 
 Bangladesh Liberation War 
 Naxalite movement 
 Geography 
 Darjeeling Himalayan hill region 
 Terai 
 North Bengal plains 
 Dooars 
 Rarh region 
 Sundarbans 
 Western plateau and high lands 
 Ganges Delta 
 Climate 
 Sandakphu (Highest point) 
 Protected areas of West Bengal 
 Rivers of West Bengal 
 Ganga 
 Damodar River 
 Brahmaputra 
 Teesta 
 Hooghly River 
 Khoai 
 Tiger Hill, Darjeeling 
 Siliguri Corridor 
 Governance 
 Chief Ministers 
 Governor 
 Legislative Assembly 
 Human Rights Commission 
 Political parties  ( All India Trinamool Congress 
 Communist Party (Marxist) 
 Indian National Congress 
 Bharatiya Janata Party ) 
 Parliamentary constituencies 
 Assembly constituencies 
 CID West Bengal 
 Kolkata Police 
 Rights groups 
 Matua Mahasangha 
 Bangla Pokkho 
 Division  and  Districts Burdwan division 
 Birbhum 
 Hooghly 
 Paschim Bardhaman 
 Purba Bardhaman 
 Jalpaiguri division 
 Alipurduar 
 Cooch Behar 
 Darjeeling 
 Jalpaiguri 
 Kalimpong 
 Malda division 
 Dakshin Dinajpur 
 Berhampore  (declared) 
 Malda 
 Murshidabad 
 Uttar Dinajpur 
 Medinipur division 
 Bankura 
 Bishnupur  (declared) 
 Jhargram 
 Paschim Medinipur 
 Purba Medinipur 
 Purulia 
 Presidency division 
 Basirhat  (declared) 
 Howrah 
 Ichamati  (declared) 
 Kolkata 
 Nadia 
 North 24 Parganas 
 Ranaghat  (declared) 
 Sundarbans  (declared) 
 South 24 Parganas 
 Cities and  towns 
 Alipore 
 Asansol 
 Berhampore 
 Balurghat 
 Bankura 
 Barasat 
 Bardhaman 
 Bishnupur 
 Hugli-Chuchura 
 Cooch Behar 
 Darjeeling 
 Durgapur 
 Haldia 
 Howrah 
 Jalpaiguri 
 Jaynagar Majilpur 
 Kalimpong 
 Kharagpur 
 Kolkata 
 Krishnanagar 
 Kurseong 
 Malda 
 Midnapore 
 Murshidabad 
 Purulia 
 Raiganj 
 Siliguri 
 Siuri 
 Tamluk 
 List of cities in West Bengal by population 
 Cities and towns by district 
 Culture 
 Bengali Renaissance 
 Bengali calendars 
 Patachitra 
 Chalchitra 
 Arts of West Bengal 
 Baul 
 Bhadu 
 Gombhira 
 Chhau dance 
 Cuisine 
 Rabindra Sangeet 
 Rabindra Nritya Natya 
 Holi 
 Dol Purnima 
 Prostitution in Kolkata 
 Pahela Baishakh 
 Durga Puja 
 Bhai Phonta 
 Raksha Bandhan 
 Ratha Yatra 
 Architecture of Bengal 
 Bengal temples 
 Bengali language 
 Bengali literature 
 Feluda 
 Lalmohan Ganguly 
 Professor Shonku 
 Tarini Khuro 
 Kakababu 
 Kiriti Roy 
 Pather Panchali (novel) 
 Tollywood (Bengali cinema) 
 Jatra 
 Ghosts in Bengali culture 
 GI product 
 Baluchari sari 
 Banglar Rosogolla 
 Bankura horse 
 Bengal Patachitra 
 Chhau mask 
 Darjeeling tea 
 Dhaniakhali Sari 
 Dhokra 
 Fazli (mango) 
 Gobindobhog 
 Himsagar 
 Jaynagarer Moa 
 Madurkathi 
 Manasa chali 
 Mihidana 
 Nakshi kantha 
 Sonagachi 
 Santiniketan Leather Goods 
 Sitabhog 
 Tulaipanji 
 Demographics 
 Bengali people 
 Bihari people 
 Economy of West Bengal 
 Gurkha 
 Adivasi 
 Rajbanshi 
 Anglo-Indian 
 Ethnic communities in Kolkata 
 List of West Bengal districts ranked by literacy rate 
 Anti-Bengali sentiment in India 
 People 
 Rabindranath Tagore 
 Satyajit Ray 
 Kazi Nazrul Islam 
 Anil Kumar Gain 
 Ritwik Ghatak 
 Subhas Chandra Bose 
 Jamini Roy 
 Nandalal Bose 
 Jagadish Chandra Bose 
 Meghnad Saha 
 Bankim Chandra Chatterjee 
 Sarat Chandra Bose 
 Jnanadanandini Devi 
 Abanindranath Tagore 
 Satyendranath Tagore 
 Satyendranath Dutta 
 Ram Mohan Roy 
 Ishwar Chandra Vidyasagar 
 Rani Rashmoni 
 Ramakrishna Paramahamsa 
 Swami Vivekananda 
 Sarada Devi 
 Dwarkanath Tagore 
 Sukumar Ray 
 Upendrakishore Ray Chowdhury 
 Lokenath Brahmachari 
 Michael Madhusudan Dutta 
 Sarat Chandra Chattopadhyay 
 Sister Nivedita 
 Mother Teresa 
 Amartya Sen 
 Bibhutibhushan Bandyopadhyay 
 Nihar Ranjan Gupta 
 Image gallery at Wikimedia Commons 
 Authority control : National libraries  
 Israel 
 United States 
 
 Portals :   Food   Bangladesh   India 
  
NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw2373
Cached time: 20230311165357
Cache expiry: 1814400
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [no‐toc‐conversion, vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.260 seconds
Real time usage: 1.533 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 5244/1000000
Post‐expand include size: 325170/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 10466/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 15/100
Expensive parser function count: 25/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 251898/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.711/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 18320608/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/400
 
 
Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1146.244      1 -total
 39.83%  456.514      1 Template:Reflist
 15.36%  176.028      8 Template:Navbox
 13.91%  159.497     38 Template:Cite_web
 13.52%  154.977      4 Template:Ambox
 11.62%  133.142     16 Template:Cite_book
 10.11%  115.866      1 Template:Cuisine
  9.60%  109.984      6 Template:Lang-bn
  8.58%   98.347      1 Template:Multiple_issues
  4.03%   46.173      1 Template:POV
 
  Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:idhash:519163-0!canonical and timestamp 20230311165356 and revision id 1143950119. Rendering was triggered because: page-view
  
 esi <esi:include src="/esitest-fa8a495983347898/content" />  
 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Bengali_cuisine&oldid=1143950119 " 
 Categories :  Bengali cuisine Indian cuisine by state or union territory North Indian cuisine Bangladeshi cuisine South Asian cuisine Hidden categories:  Wikipedia semi-protected pages Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia neutral point of view disputes from May 2014 All Wikipedia neutral point of view disputes Articles needing additional references from June 2012 All articles needing additional references Articles with multiple maintenance issues Use British English from September 2013 Use dmy dates from October 2021 Articles containing Bengali-language text Pages using multiple image with auto scaled images All articles with failed verification Articles with failed verification from December 2020 All articles with self-published sources Articles with self-published sources from December 2020 Articles needing additional references from June 2020 Articles with J9U identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  This page was last edited on 10 March 2023, at 22:30  (UTC) . 
 Text is available under the  Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0 ;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the  Terms of Use  and  Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the  Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. 
 
 
 Privacy policy 
 About Wikipedia 
 Disclaimers 
 Contact Wikipedia 
 Mobile view 
 Developers 
 Statistics 
 Cookie statement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
