
 
 
 Jump to content 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle sidebar 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Create account Log in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Personal tools 
 
 
 
 
   Create account   Log in 
 
 
 
 
		Pages for logged out editors  learn more 
 
 
 Contributions Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Navigation 
 
 
 Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate 
 
 
 
 
 Contribute 
 
 
 Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file 
 
 
 
 
 Tools 
 
 
 What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item 
 
 
 
 
 Print/export 
 
 
 Download as PDF Printable version 
 
 
 
 
 In other projects 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons Wikibooks Wikivoyage 
 
 
 
 
 Languages 
 
 On this Wikipedia the language links are at the top of the page across from the article title.  Go to top . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CentralNotice  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Contents 
 move to sidebar 
 hide 
 
 
 
 
 (Top) 
 
 
 
 
 
 1 Cuisine by Brazilian region 
 
 
				Toggle Cuisine by Brazilian region subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 1.1 Regional cuisines 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.2 Southeast Brazil's cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.3 North Brazil's cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.4 Center-West Brazil's cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.5 Northeast Brazil's cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.6 Southern Brazil's cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 Popular dishes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 Drinks 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4 Typical and popular desserts 
 
 
				Toggle Typical and popular desserts subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 4.1 Typical cakes ( bolos ) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.2 Other popular and traditional desserts 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5 Daily meals 
 
 
				Toggle Daily meals subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 5.1 Restaurant styles 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5.2 Vegetarian 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6 See also 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 7 References 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8 External links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
						Toggle the table of contents
					 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle the table of contents 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Brazilian cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 27 languages 
 
 
 
 العربية Azərbaycanca Български Čeština Deutsch Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Italiano עברית ქართული Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Русский Simple English Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 
 Edit links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Article Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 English 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 More 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
 
 
 Culinary traditions of Brazil 
 Part of a series on Brazilian cuisine 
Types of food 
 Main dishes 
 Desserts 
 Drinks 
 
See also 
 Etiquette 
 Cookbook: Cuisine of Brazil 
 
   Brazil portal v t e 
 Part of  a series  on the Culture of Brazil 
Society 
 Brazilians 
 Folklore 
 Demographics 
 History 
 Immigration 
 Languages 
 Portuguese 
 Holidays 
 Religion 
 Women 
 
Topics 
 Art 
 Architecture 
 Cinema 
 Cuisine 
 Dance 
 Literature 
 Poetry 
 Media
 Newspapers 
 Radio 
 Television 
 Music 
 Monuments 
 Painting 
 Pornography 
 Sports 
 Video gaming 
 
Symbols 
 Flag 
 Coat of arms 
 Anthem 
 Miss Brazil 
 World Heritage Sites 
 
   Brazil portal v t e 
   Bife à parmegiana, one of the most traditional dishes of Brazil. 
 Brazilian cuisine   is the set of cooking practices and traditions of  Brazil , and is characterized by  European ,  Amerindian ,  African , and Asian ( Lebanese ,  Chinese  and, most recently,  Japanese)  influences. [1]  It varies greatly by region, reflecting the country's mix of native and immigrant populations, and its continental size as well. This has created a national cuisine marked by the preservation of regional differences. [2] 
 Ingredients first used by native peoples in Brazil include  cashews ,  cassava ,  guaraná ,  açaí ,  cumaru ,  and  tucupi . From there, the many waves of immigrants brought some of their typical dishes, replacing missing ingredients with local equivalents. For instance, the European immigrants (primarily from  Portugal ,  Italy ,  Spain ,  Germany ,  Netherlands ,  Poland , and  Ukraine ), were accustomed to a wheat-based diet, and introduced  wine ,  leafy vegetables , and  dairy  products into Brazilian cuisine. When  potatoes  were not available, they discovered how to use the native sweet  manioc  as a replacement. [3]  Enslaved Africans also had a role in developing Brazilian cuisine, especially in the coastal  states . The foreign influence extended to later migratory waves;  Japanese immigrants  brought most of the food items that Brazilians associate with Asian cuisine today, [4]  and introduced large-scale aviaries well into the 20th century. [5] 
 The most visible regional cuisines belong to the states of  Minas Gerais  and  Bahia . Minas Gerais cuisine have European influence in delicacies and dairy products such as tropeiro beans,  pão de queijo  and the Minas cheese fresh, and Bahian cuisine due to the presence of African delicacies such as acarajé, abará and vatapá.
 Root vegetables  such as  manioc  (locally known as  mandioca ,  aipim  or  macaxeira , among other names),  yams , and  fruit  like  açaí ,  cupuaçu ,  mango ,  papaya ,  guava ,  orange ,  passion fruit ,  pineapple , and  hog plum  are among the local ingredients used in cooking.
 Some typical dishes are  feijoada , considered the country's national dish, [6]  and regional foods such as  beiju  [ pt ] , feijão tropeiro,  vatapá ,  moqueca capixaba ,  polenta  (from Italian cuisine) and  acarajé  (from African cuisine). [7]  There is also  caruru , which consists of  okra , onion, dried shrimp, and toasted nuts (peanuts or cashews), cooked with  palm oil  until a spread-like consistency is reached;  moqueca baiana , consisting of slow-cooked fish in  palm oil  and  coconut milk ,  tomatoes ,  bell peppers , onions, garlic and topped with  cilantro .
 The national beverage is  coffee , while  cachaça  is Brazil's native  liquor . Cachaça is distilled from fermented  sugar cane   must , and is the main ingredient in the national cocktail,  caipirinha .  [8] 
 Cheese buns  ( pão-de-queijo ), and  salgadinhos  such as  pastéis ,  coxinhas ,  risólis  and  kibbeh  (from Arabic cuisine) are common  finger food  items, while  cuscuz de tapioca  (milled  tapioca ) is a popular dessert.
 
 
 Cuisine by Brazilian region [ edit ] 
 Regional cuisines [ edit ] 
   Feijoada  is usually served with  rice ,  farofa , couve (a type of  cabbage ) and  orange . 
   Pastel . 
   Pão de queijo ,  coffee  and a small bottle of  cachaça . 
   Moqueca  from  Espírito Santo  State. 
 There is not an exact single "national Brazilian cuisine", but there is an assortment of various regional traditions and typical dishes. This diversity is linked to the origins of the people inhabiting each area.
 For instance, the cuisine of  Bahia  is heavily influenced by a mix of African, Indigenous, and Portuguese cuisines.  Chili  (including  chili sauces ) and palm oil are very common. In the northern states, however, due to the abundance of forest and freshwater rivers, fish, fruits and cassava (including flours made of cassava) are staple foods. In the deep south, as in  Rio Grande do Sul , the influence shifts more towards  gaúcho  traditions shared with its neighbors Argentina and Uruguay, with many meat-based products, due to this region's livestock-based economy; the  churrasco , a kind of barbecue, is a local tradition.
 
 Southeast Brazil's cuisine [ edit ] 
 In  Rio de Janeiro ,  São Paulo ,  Espírito Santo , and  Minas Gerais ,  feijoada  is popular, especially as a Wednesday or Saturday lunch. Also consumed frequently is  picadinho  (literally, diced meat) and  rice and beans . [9] [10]  In Rio de Janeiro, besides the  feijoada , a popular plate is any variation of grilled beef fillet, rice and beans,  farofa , fried garlic and fried potatoes ( batatas portuguesas ), commonly called  filé à  Osvaldo Aranha . Seafood is very popular in coastal areas, as is roasted chicken ( galeto ). The strong Portuguese heritage also endowed the city with a taste for  bolinhos de bacalhau  (fried cod fritters), being one of the most common street foods there.
 In São Paulo, a typical dish is  virado à paulista , made with rice,  virado de feijão  (similar to a  tutu ), sauteed  kale , fried plantains or bananas and pork chops. São Paulo is also the home of  pastel , a food consisting of thin  pastry  envelopes wrapped around assorted fillings, then deep-fried in vegetable oil. It is a common belief that they originated when  Chinese  and  Japanese  immigrants adapted the recipe of fried spring rolls to sell as snacks at weekly street markets. São Paulo is also known for  parmegianna .
 In Minas Gerais, the regional dishes include corn, pork, beans, chicken (including the very typical dish  frango com quiabo , or chicken with  okra ),  tutu de feijão  (puréed beans mixed with cassava flour), and local soft-ripened  traditional cheeses .
 In  Espírito Santo , there is significant Italian and German influence in local dishes, both savory and sweet. [11]  The state dish, though, is of  Amerindian  origin, [12]  called  moqueca capixaba , which is a tomato and fish stew traditionally prepared in a  panela de Goiabeiras  (pot made of clay from Goiabeiras district in  Vitória ). Amerindian and Italian cuisine are the two main pillars of Capixaba cuisine. Seafood dishes, in general, are very popular in Espírito Santo, but unlike other Amerindian dishes, the use of olive oil is almost mandatory.  Bobó de camarão , torta capixaba, and  polenta  are also very popular.
 
 North Brazil's cuisine [ edit ] 
 The cuisine of this region, which includes the states of  Acre ,  Amazonas ,  Amapá ,  Pará ,  Rondônia ,  Roraima , and  Tocantins , is heavily influenced by indigenous cuisine. In the state of Pará, there are several typical dishes, including:
 Pato no tucupi  (duck in tucupi) – one of the most famous dishes from Pará. It is associated to the  Círio de Nazaré , a local  Roman Catholic  celebration. The dish is made with  tucupi  (yellow broth extracted from cassava, after the fermentation process of the broth remained after the starch had been taken off, from the raw ground manioc root, pressed by a cloth, with some water; if added maniva, the manioc ground up external part, that is poisonous because of the  cyanic acid , and so must be cooked for several days). After cooking, the duck is cut into pieces and boiled in  tucupi , where is the sauce for some time. The  jambu  is boiled in water with salt, drained, and put on the duck. It is served with white rice and manioc flour and corn tortillas.
 
 Center-West Brazil's cuisine [ edit ] 
 In  Goiás  State, the pequi is used in many typical foods, especially the "arroz com pequi" (rice cooked with pequi), and in snacks, mostly as a filling for  pastel , in this state is very common the presence of chestnuts, and palm trees. Also, a mixture of chicken and rice known as  galinhada  is very popular. The states of Mato Grosso and Mato Grosso do Sul received influence from neighboring countries in their cuisine, as well as the  Pantanal  area and its various rivers and extensive wetlands that cross these two states with a high abundance of fish.
 
 Northeast Brazil's cuisine [ edit ] 
   Bobó de camarão . 
 The Northeastern Brazilian cuisine is heavily influenced by African cuisine from the coastal areas of  Pernambuco  to  Bahia , as well as the eating habits of indigenous populations that lived in the region.
 The  vatapá  is a Brazilian dish made from  bread ,  shrimp ,  coconut milk , finely ground  peanuts  and  palm oil  mashed into a creamy paste.
 The  bobó de camarão  is a dish made with cassava and shrimp (camarão).
 The  acarajé  is a dish made from peeled  black-eyed peas  formed into a ball and then deep-fried in  dendê  (palm oil). Often sold as street food, it is served split in half and then stuffed with  vatapá  and  caruru . [13]  Acarajé is typically available outside of the state of Bahia as well.
 In other areas, more to the west or away from the coast, the plates are most reminiscent of the indigenous cuisine, with many vegetables being cultivated in the area since before the arrival of the Portuguese. Examples include  baião de dois , made with rice and beans, dried meat, butter,  queijo coalho  and other ingredients. Jaggery is also heavily identified with the Northeast, as it is  carne-de-sol ,  paçoca de pilão , and  bolo de rolo .
 Tapioca  flatbreads or pancakes are also commonly served for breakfast in some states, with a filling of either coconut, cheese or condensed milk, butter, and certain meats. They can also be filled with dessert toppings as well.
 
 Southern Brazil's cuisine [ edit ] 
   Cuca. 
   Typical Brazilian  churrasco , with cuts of meat such as  picanha  and  alcatra ,  chicken   hearts ,  Tuscan   sausage ,  garlic bread  and  drumstick . 
 In Southern Brazil, due to the long tradition in  livestock  production and the heavy German immigration, red meat is the basis of the local cuisine. [14] 
 Besides many of the pasta, sausage and dessert dishes common to continental Europe,  churrasco  is the term for a barbecue (similar to the Argentine or Uruguayan  asado ) which originated in southern Brazil. It contains a variety of meats which may be cooked on a purpose-built  churrasqueira , a barbecue grill, often with supports for spits or skewers. Portable  churrasqueiras  are similar to those used to prepare the Argentine and Uruguayan asado, with a grill support, but many Brazilian  churrasqueiras  do not have grills, only the skewers above the embers. The meat may alternatively be cooked on large metal or wood skewers resting on a support or stuck into the ground and roasted with the embers of charcoal (wood may also be used, especially in the State of Rio Grande do Sul).
 Since gaúchos were nomadic and lived off the land, they had no way of preserving food; the gauchos would gather together after butchering a cow, and skewer and cook the large portions of meat immediately over a wood-burning fire (not exactly as gauchos also produced  charque ). The slow-cooked meat basted in its own juices and resulted in tender, flavorful steaks. [15]  This style has inspired many contemporary  churrascaria  which emulate the cooking style where waiters bring large cuts of roasted meat to diners' tables and carve portions to order. [16] 
 The  chimarrão  is the regional beverage, often associated with the  gaúcho  image.
 The most typical dishes of  Rio Grande do Sul  cuisine are  churrasco ,  chimarrão ,  carreteiro rice  [ pt ] , fried  polenta ,  galeto  [ pt ] ,  cuca , and  sagu , among others. [17] [18]  In the region there is a large consumption of  wine ,  grape juice  and white grape juice due to the south being the largest grape producer in the country, and artisanal cheeses and  salamis . [19] [20]  In the region,  fig ,  grape  and  peach  jellies and jams are also very common. One of the most famous is  chimia  [ pt ] . The consumption of vegetables preserved in water, vinegar, sugar, salt and spices, such as  beets  and  cucumbers , is also typical of the Southern Region. [21] 
 
 Popular dishes [ edit ] 
 See also:  List of Brazilian dishes 
   Coxinha  is a popular Brazilian snack. 
   Canastra  cheese. 
   Bife à cavalo, a steak topped with an egg, served with fries. 
   Frango a passarinho , a chicken dish, as served in the state of  Minas Gerais . 
   Brazilian pizzas can have just about any flavor. In the photo, a pizza half mozzarella, tomato, olives and spices (salty) and half chocolate, coconut and cherries (sweet). 
   Brazilian hot-dog with  tomato ,  corn , batata-palha ( straw - fries ) and  onion . 
 Brazilian cuisine is recognized around the world for its variety and quality. The city of  São Paulo  was chosen as the 7th main gastronomic destination in the world, for its recognized  restaurants  and  bars . The Brazilian city is only after of  Rome ,  London ,  Paris ,  Dubai ,  Barcelona  and  Madrid . It is important to note that the city of São Paulo alone has more than 9,000 restaurants and bars.
 
 Rice and beans  is an extremely popular dish, considered basic at table; a tradition Brazil shares with several Caribbean nations. Brazilian rice and beans usually are cooked utilizing either  lard  or the nowadays more common edible  vegetable fats and oils , in a variation of the Mediterranean  sofrito  locally called  refogado  which usually includes garlic in both recipes. 
 In variation to rice and beans, Brazilians usually eat  pasta  (including  spaghetti ,  lasagne , lamen , and  bīfun ),  pasta salad , various dishes using either potato or manioc, and  polenta  as substitutions for rice, as well as salads, dumplings or soups of green  peas ,  chickpeas ,  black-eyed peas ,  broad beans ,  butter beans ,  soybeans ,  lentils ,  moyashi  (which came to Brazil due to the  Chinese  and  Japanese  tradition of eating its sprouts),  azuki , and other legumes in substitution for the common beans cultivated in South America since Pre-Columbian times. It is more common to eat substitutions for daily rice and beans in festivities such as Christmas and New Year's Eve (the tradition is lentils), as follow-up of  churrasco  (mainly  potato salad / carrot salad , called  maionese , due to the widespread use of both industrial and home-made  mayonnaise , which can include egg whites, raw onion, green peas, sweetcorn or even  chayote  squashes, and pronounced almost exactly as in English and French) and in other special occasions. 
 Either way the basis of Brazilian daily cuisine is the  starch  (most often a  cereal ), legume, protein and vegetable combination. There is also a differentiation between vegetables of the  verduras  group, or greens, and the  legumes  group (no relation to the botanic concept), or non-green vegetables. 
 Salgadinhos  are small savoury snacks (literally  salties ). Similar to  Spanish   tapas , these are mostly sold in corner shops and a staple at working class and lower middle-class familiar celebrations. There are many types of pastries:
 Pão de queijo  (literally "cheese bread"), a typical Brazilian snack, is a small, soft roll made of  manioc  flour, eggs, milk, and  minas cheese . It can be bought ready-made at a corner store or frozen and ready to bake in a supermarket and is  gluten -free. 
 Coxinha  is a chicken  croquette  shaped like a chicken thigh. 
 Kibe/Quibe : extremely popular, it corresponds to the Lebanese dish  kibbeh  and was brought to mainstream Brazilian culture by  Syrian  and  Lebanese  immigrants. It can be served baked, fried, or raw. 
 Esfiha : another Middle Eastern dish, despite being a more recent addition to Brazilian cuisine they are nowadays easily found everywhere, specially in Northeastern, Southern and Southeastern regions. They are pies/cakes with fillings like beef,  mutton , cheese curd, or seasoned vegetables. 
 Pastéis  (sing.  pastel ) are pastries with a wide variety of fillings. Similar to Spanish fried Empanadas but of Asian origin (and brought to Brazil by the  Chinese diaspora  and  Japanese diaspora ). Different shapes are used to tell apart the different flavours, the two most common shapes being half-moon (cheese) and square (meat). Size, flavour, and shape may vary greatly. 
 Empadas  are snacks that resemble pot pies in a small scale. Filled with a mix of palm hearts, peas, flour and chicken or shrimp. 
 Misto-quente  is grilled ham and cheese sandwich. 
 Cuscuz branco  is a dessert consisting of milled  tapioca  cooked with  coconut milk  and sugar and is the couscous equivalent of rice pudding. 
 Açaí ,  cupuaçu ,  carambola , and many other tropical fruits are shipped from the  Amazon Rainforest  and consumed in smoothies or as fresh fruit. Other aspects of  Amazonian cuisine  are also gaining a following. 
 Cachorro-quente  is the Brazilian version of  hot dogs , usually garnished with tomato sauce, corn, peas and potato chips. 
 Cheese : the dairy-producing state of  Minas Gerais  is known for such cheeses as  Queijo Minas , a soft, mild-flavored fresh white cheese usually sold packaged in water;  requeijão , a mildly salty, silky-textured, spreadable cheese sold in glass jars and eaten on bread; and  Catupiry , a soft processed cheese sold in a distinctive round wooden box. 
 Pinhão  is the  pine nut  of the  Araucaria angustifolia , a common tree in the highlands of southern Brazil. The nuts are boiled and eaten as a snack in the winter months. It is typically eaten during the  festas juninas . 
 Risoto  ( risotto ) is an Italian originated rice dish cooked with chicken, shrimp, and seafood in general or other protein staples sometimes served with vegetables, another very popular dish in Southern Brazil due to massive waves of Italian immigration. 
 Mortadella sandwich 
 Sugarcane juice , mixed with fruit juices such as pineapple or lemon. 
 Angu  is a popular side dish (or a substitution for the rice fulfilling the "starch element" of use common in  Southern  and  Southeastern Brazil ). It is similar to the Italian polenta. 
 Arroz com pequi  is a traditional dish from the Brazilian  Cerrado , and the symbol of  Center-Western Brazil 's cuisine. It is basically made with rice seasoned on  pequi , also known as a souari nut, and often chicken. 
 Barreado [22] [23]  is a typical dish of Parana State, Brazil. It is a slow-cooked meat stew prepared in a clay pot whose lid is sealed with a sort of clay made from wheat or cassava flour, hence the name (which means, literally, "muddied"). Traditionally, Barreado was made of buffalo meat, but nowadays it is usually made of beef, bacon, tomatoes, onion, cumin and other spices, placed in successive layers in a large clay urn, covered and then "barreada" (sealed) with a paste of ash and farinha (manioc flour), and then slowly cooked in a wood-fired oven for 12 to 18 hours. Nowadays pressure cookers and gas or electric ovens are more commonly used. [24] 
 Also noteworthy are:
 
 Special ethnic foods and restaurants that are frequently found in Brazil include  Arab cuisine  ( Lebanese  and  Syrian ), local variations of  Chinese cuisine  (nevertheless closer to the traditional than  American Chinese cuisine ),  Italian cuisine , and  Japanese cuisine  ( sushi  bars are a constant in major metropolises, and people from  Rio de Janeiro  are more used to  temaki  than people from  São Paulo , home of more than 70% of the Japanese diaspora in the country). 
 Pizza  is also extremely popular. It is usually made in a wood-fire oven with a thin, flexible crust, little or very little sauce, and a number of interesting toppings. In addition to the "traditional" Italian pizza toppings, items like  guava cheese  and  Minas cheese ,  banana  and  cinnamon , poultry (either milled  chicken  meat or smoked  turkey breast ) and  catupiry , and  chocolate  are available. Traditionally olive oil is poured over the pizza, but in some regions people enjoy ketchup, mustard and even mayonnaise on pizza. 
 Brazil nut cake  is a cake in Brazilian cuisine that is common and popular in the  Amazon  region of Brazil, Bolivia and Peru. [25] 
 Broa , corn bread with  fennel . 
 Pirão , a  porridge -like dish of manioc in fish stock. [26] 
 Drinks [ edit ] 
   Caipirinha , the national drink. 
   Guaraná . 
   Suco de caju . 
 Brazil is a country-continent, its territorial extension causes different cultures and traditions to sprout at the same time, but at opposite points. And when it comes to  drinking , history repeats itself. Some Brazilian  drinks , alcoholic or not, are known only in their states of origin.
 Cachaça  is Brazil's native  liquor , distilled from  sugar cane  and it is the main ingredient in the national drink, the  Caipirinha . Other drinks include  mate tea ,  chimarrão  and  tereré  (both made up of  yerba maté ),  coffee , fruit juice,  beer  (mainly  Pilsen  variety), rum, guaraná and batidas.  Guaraná  is a caffeinated soft drink made from guaraná seeds and  batida  is a type of fruit punch. [1] 
 
 Água de Coco  –  coconut water . 
 Caldo de cana 
 Aluá  – prepared with maize, rice and sugar. [27]  It has also been referred to as corn wine. [28] 
 Bombeirinho  – prepared with cachaça and  gooseberry   syrup , it is similar to a  Kir Royal  cocktail. [29] 
 Cachaça  – a  distilled spirit  made from  sugarcane  juice. It is the most popular alcoholic beverage in Brazil. [8]  It is also informally referred to as  cana ,  caninha  and  pinga . [8] 
 Caipirinha  – a  cocktail  prepared using cachaça, lime juice and sugar. [8] 
 Caju Amigo 
 Cajuína 
 Suco de caju  [ pt ] , a  juice  made with  cashew apple 
 Licor de jabuticaba  [ pt ] , a  liqueur  made with  jabuticaba 
 Capeta  – a cocktail prepared with vodka, guaraná powder and sweet skim milk. [30] 
 Cauim 
 Chá mate gelado  –  roasted erva mate ( Ilex paraguariensis ) iced tea. Famous in homes and  Rio de Janeiro , sold at its beaches. 
 Chimarrão  and Tererê 
 Guaraná 
 Limonada suíça  – prepared with lime pieces with peel, ice cubes, sugar, and water. The version with condensed milk is also popular. [31] 
 Quentão 
 Rabo-de-galo 
 Tiquira  – a cachaça beverage prepared with  manioc . [32] 
 Vinho Quente 
 Calicivici  – a muddled berry drink with wine. 
 Typical and popular desserts [ edit ] 
 See also:  List of Brazilian sweets and desserts 
   Bolo de rolo . 
   Brigadeiro . 
   Paçoca . 
   Brazilian  cocada . 
   Quindim . 
   Passion fruit mousse . 
 Brazil has a tradition of manufacturing jams and jellies from fresh tropical fruits, as Brazil is recognized worldwide as a country with great characteristics in food production, being one of the largest food exporters in the world. Brazilians inherited the taste and cultivation of  sugar  from the  Portuguese  who  immigrated to Brazil . In the kitchens of the sugar farms, the wives of the  farmers  taught the subordinates how to properly mix the ingredients. This led to a growth in its commercialization in the Brazilian market, Portuguese recipes spread throughout the Brazilian colony and became part of the colonial food menu.
 The Portuguese tradition of producing  sweets  with  eggs  and sugar joined the immense variety of Brazilian  tropical fruits , which provided an immense menu of delicacies. Brazil has a variety of candies such as  brigadeiros  (chocolate fudge balls),  cocada  (a coconut sweet),  beijinhos  (coconut truffles and clove) and romeu e julieta (cheese with a guava jam known as  goiabada ).
 Peanuts are used to make  paçoca ,  rapadura  and  pé-de-moleque . Local common fruits like  açaí ,  cupuaçu ,  mango ,  papaya ,  cocoa ,  cashew ,  guava ,  orange ,  passionfruit ,  pineapple , and  hog plum  are turned in  juices  and used to make  chocolates ,  ice pops  and  ice cream . [33] 
 
 Typical cakes ( bolos ) [ edit ] 
 Nega maluca  (chocolate cake with chocolate cover and chocolate  sprinkles ) 
 Pão de mel  ( honey   cake , somewhat resembling  gingerbread , usually covered with melted chocolate) 
 Bolo de rolo  ( roll   cake , a thin mass wrapped with melted  guava ) 
 Bolo de cenoura  (carrot cake with chocolate cover made with butter and cocoa) 
 Bolo prestígio  (cake covered with a version of brigadeiro, which replaces cocoa powder for grated coconut) 
 Bolo de fubá  (corn flour cake) 
 Bolo de milho  (Brazilian-style corn cake) 
 Bolo de maracujá  ( passion fruit  cake) 
 Bolo de mandioca  ( cassava  cake) 
 Bolo de queijo  (literally "cheese cake") 
 Bolo de laranja  (orange cake) 
 Bolo de banana  (banana cake with  cinnamon  drizzle) 
 [[ Cuca ]]  [ pt ] , a board cake made with eggs, wheat flour, butter and covered with sugar, very similar to  Streuselkuchen , a traditional German cuisine cake. It is typical of the southern region of Brazil. 
 Other popular and traditional desserts [ edit ] 
 Fig ,  papaya ,  mango ,  orange ,  citron ,  pear ,  peach ,  pumpkin ,  sweet potato  (among others) sweets and  preserves , often eaten with solid fresh cheese or  doce de leite . 
 Quindim  (egg custard with coconut) [1] 
 Brigadeiro  (a Brazilian chocolate candy) 
 Beijinho  (coconut "truffles" with  clove ) 
 Cajuzinho  (peanut and cashew "truffles") 
 Cocada  (coconut sweet) 
 Olho-de-sogra 
 Pudim de pão  (literally "bread pudding", a pie made with bread "from yesterday" immersed in milk instead of flour (plus the other typical pie ingredients like eggs, sugar etc.) with dried orange slices and  clove ) 
 Manjar branco  (coconut pudding with caramel cover and dried plums) 
 Doce de leite 
 Arroz-doce  ( rice pudding ) 
 Curau 
 Canjica 
 Romeu e Julieta :  goiabada  ( guava  sweet) with white cheese (most often Minas cheese or  requeijão ) 
 Torta de limão  (literally ’lime pie’, a  shortcrust pastry  with creamy lime-flavored filling) 
 Pé-de-moleque  (made with  peanuts  and sugar caramel) 
 Paçoca  (similar to Spanish  polvorones , but made with peanuts instead of almonds and without addition of fats) 
 Pudim de leite  ( condensed milk -based  crème caramel , of French origin) 
 Brigadeirão  (a  pudim de leite  with chocolate or a chocolate cake) 
 Rapadura 
 Doce de banana  or  Bananada  (different types of banana sweets, solid or creamy) 
 Maria-mole 
 Pamonha  (a traditional Brazilian food made from fresh corn and milk wrapped in corn husks and boiled). It can be savoury or sweet. 
 Papo-de-anjo 
 " Açaí na tigela " (usually consists of an  açaí  (Brazilian fruit) mixture with bananas and cereal or strawberries and cereal (usually granola or muslix)) 
 Avocado  cream (avocado, lime and confectionery sugar; blended and chilled) [1] 
 Sagu 
 Mousse de maracujá 
 Queijadinha 
 Creme de papaya 
 Biscoito de polvilho 
 Daily meals [ edit ] 
   A Brazilian breakfast buffet in  Gramado . 
   Brazilian regional food in  Recife . 
   Costelada  in  Porto Alegre . 
 Breakfast ,¹ the  café-da-manhã  (literally, "morning coffee"): Every region has its own typical breakfast. It usually consists of a light meal, and it is not uncommon to have only a fruit or slice of bread and a cup of coffee. Traditional items include tropical fruits, typical cakes, crackers, bread, butter,  cold cuts , cheese,  requeijão , honey, jam,  doce de leite ,  coffee  (usually sweetened and with milk), juice,  chocolate milk , or  tea . 
 Elevenses  or  brunch ,² the  lanche-da-manhã  (literally, "morning snack"): Usually had between 9 and 11 am, consists of similar items as people have for breakfast. 
 Midday  dinner  or  lunch ,¹ the  almoço : This is usually the biggest meal and the most common times range from 11 am to 2 pm. Traditionally, people will go back to their houses to have lunch with their families, although nowadays that is not possible for most people, in which case it is common to have lunch in groups at  restaurants  or cafeterias. Rice is a staple of the Brazilian diet, albeit it is not uncommon to eat pasta instead. It is usually eaten together with beans and accompanied by salad, protein (most commonly red meat or chicken) and a side dish, such as polenta, potatoes, corn, etc... 
 Tea ,² the  lanche-da-tarde  or  café-da-tarde  (literally "afternoon snack" or "afternoon coffee"): It is a meal had between lunch and dinner, and basically everything people eat in the breakfast, they also eat in the afternoon snack. Nevertheless, fruits are less common. 
 Night  dinner  or  supper ,¹ the  jantar : For most Brazilians,  jantar  is a light affair, while others dine at night. Sandwiches, soups, salads, pasta, hamburgers or hot-dogs, pizza or repeating midday dinner foods are the most common dishes. 
 Late supper,² the  ceia : Brazilians eat soups, salads, pasta and what would be eaten at the elevenses if their  jantar  was a light one early at the evening and it is late at night or dawn. It is associated with  Christmas  and  New Year's Eve . 
 ¹  Main meals, that are served nearly everywhere, and are eaten in nearly all households above poverty line. 
²  Secondary meals. People usually have a meal at the tea time, while elevenses and late suppers depend in peculiarities on one's daily routine or certain diets. 
 
 Restaurant styles [ edit ] 
 A simple and usually inexpensive option, which is also advisable for  vegetarians , is comida a quilo or comida por quilo restaurants (literally "food by kilo value"), a  buffet  where food is paid for by weight. Another common style is the all-you-can-eat restaurant where customers pay a  prix fixe . In both types (known collectively as "self-services"), customers usually assemble the dishes of their choice from a large buffet.
 Rodízio  is a common style of service, in which a  prix fixe  is paid, and servers circulate with food. This is common in  churrascarias , pizzerias and sushi (Japanese cuisine) restaurants, resulting in an all-you-can-eat meat barbecue and pizzas of varied flavours, usually one slice being served at the time.
 The regular restaurant where there is a specific price for each meal is called "restaurante à la carte."
 
 Vegetarian [ edit ] 
 Although many traditional dishes are prepared with meat or fish, it is not difficult to live on  vegetarian food  as well, at least in the mid-sized and larger cities of Brazil. There is a rich supply of all kinds of fruits and vegetables, and on city streets one can find cheese buns ( pão de queijo ); in some cities even the version made of  soy .
 In the 2000s,  São Paulo ,  Rio de Janeiro  and  Brasilia  have gained several vegetarian and  vegan  restaurants. [34]  However outside big metropolises, vegetarianism is not very common in the country. Not every restaurant will provide vegetarian dishes and some seemingly vegetarian meals may turn out to include unwanted ingredients, for instance, using  lard  for cooking  beans . Commonly "meat" is understood to mean "red meat", so some people might assume a vegetarian eats fish and chicken.  Comida por quilo  and all-you-can eat restaurants prepare a wide range of fresh dishes. Diners can more easily find food in such restaurants that satisfies dietary restrictions.
 
 See also [ edit ] 
 
 Brazil portal Food portal 
 Culinary art 
 Brazilian tea culture 
 References [ edit ] 
 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   Brittin, Helen (2011).  The Food and Culture Around the World Handbook . Boston: Prentice Hall. pp. 20–21. 
 
 ^   "Way of Life" .  Encarta . MSN. Archived from  the original  on 2009-10-29 . Retrieved  2008-06-08 . 
 
 ^   Burns, E. Bradford (1993).  A History of Brazil . New York: Columbia University Press. p.  38 .  ISBN   0231079559 . 
 
 ^   "Centenário da imigração japonesa - NOTÍCIAS - Imigrantes japoneses ajudaram a 'revolucionar' agricultura brasileira" .  g1.globo.com . 
 
 ^   "Centenário da imigração japonesa - NOTÍCIAS - Imigrantes transformaram cidade paulista em grande produtora de ovos" .  g1.globo.com . 
 
 ^   Roger, " Feijoada: The Brazilian national dish   Archived  2009-11-29 at the  Wayback Machine " braziltravelguide.com. 
 
 ^   Cascudo, Luis da Câmara. História da Alimentação no Brasil. São Paulo/Belo Horizonte: Editora USP/Itatiaia, 1983. 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   Dictionaries, Oxford (2012).  Oxford Essential Portuguese Dictionary  (in Spanish). OUP Oxford. p. 30.  ISBN   978-0-19-964097-3 . Retrieved  February 3,  2015 . 
 
 ^   "A feijoada não é invenção brasileira"  (in Portuguese). Superinteressante . Retrieved  27 June  2017 . 
 
 ^   "O Carapuceiro (jornal)"  (in Portuguese). Fundaj . Retrieved  27 June  2017 . 
 
 ^   "Governo ES - Culinária Capixaba" .  www.es.gov.br . Retrieved  2022-05-06 . 
 
 ^   Foodandroad (2021-06-24).  "How To Make Moqueca Capixaba - Brazilian Fish Stew Recipe" . Retrieved  2022-05-06 . 
 
 ^   Blazes, Marian.  "Brazilian Black-Eyed Pea and Shrimp Fritters – Acarajé" . About.com . Retrieved  17 May  2012 . 
 
 ^   Somwaru, A.; Valdes, C. (2004).  Brazil's Beef Production and Its Efficiency : A Comparative Study of Scale Economies – 1–19 . 
 
 ^   Churrasco 
 
 ^   Sumayao, Marco.  "What Is a Churrascaria?" . WiseGeek . Retrieved  2014-02-27 . 
 
 ^   10 pratos típicos da culinária gaúcha 
 
 ^   Noite Gaúcha: Comidas típicas do Rio Grande do Sul 
 
 ^   Como a agricultura familiar gaúcha está segurando uma geração no campo 
 
 ^   Vinícolas do RS celebram crescimento nas exportações de vinhos e espumantes 
 
 ^   Veja o passo a passo e aprenda a fazer chimia de figo 
 
 ^   pt:Barreado 
 
 ^   Barreado 
 
 ^   "Barreado: The Famous Typical Dish of Paraná State!" . November 24, 2009. 
 
 ^   Castella, K. (2012).  A World of Cake . Storey Publishing, LLC.  ISBN   978-1-60342-446-2 . 
 
 ^   "Pirão | Traditional Porridge From Brazil" .  TasteAtlas . Retrieved  2022-10-04 . 
 
 ^   Dos Ventos, M. (2008).  Na Gira Do Exu - Invoking the Spirits of Brazilian Quimbanda . Nzo Quimbanda Exu Ventania. p. 319.  ISBN   978-0-9556903-1-0 . Retrieved  February 3,  2015 . 
 
 ^   Blocker, J.S.; Fahey, D.M.; Tyrrell, I.R. (2003).  Alcohol and Temperance in Modern History: An International Encyclopedia . Alcohol and Temperance in Modern History: An International Encyclopedia. ABC-CLIO. p. 167.  ISBN   978-1-57607-833-4 . Retrieved  February 3,  2015 . 
 
 ^   Sommers, M. (2011).  Moon Brazil . Moon Handbooks Series (in Italian). Avalon Travel Publishing. p. 1077.  ISBN   978-1-59880-891-9 . Retrieved  February 3,  2015 . 
 
 ^   Robinson, A.G. (2014).  Recife and Northeast Brazil Footprint Focus Guide: Includes Olinda, Fortaleza, Penedo, Pipa, Souza, Fernando de Noronha . Footprint Focus Guides (in Esperanto). Footprint Handbooks. p. 47.  ISBN   978-1-909268-87-6 . Retrieved  February 3,  2015 . 
 
 ^   Braga, Tatiana (11 January 2013).  "Aprenda a receita do ES de milkshake de limonada suíça" .  O Globo  (in Brazilian Portuguese) . Retrieved  5 November  2016 . 
 
 ^   Guides, I. (2014).  Insight Guides: Brazil . Insight Guides (in Italian). APA. p. 634.  ISBN   978-1-78005-718-7 . Retrieved  February 3,  2015 . 
 
 ^   Freyre, Gilberto. Açúcar. Uma Sociologia do Doce, com Receitas de Bolos e Doces do Nordeste do Brasil. São Paulo, Companhia das Letras, 1997. 
 
 ^   "Vegetarian Restaurants in Brazil" . Retrieved  2011-05-30 . 
 
 
 External links [ edit ] 
  Media related to  Cuisine of Brazil  at Wikimedia Commons
 
 v t e Brazil   History 
 Timeline 
 Indigenous peoples 
 Colonial Brazil (1500–1815) 
 United Kingdom (1815–1822) 
 Empire (1822–1889) 
 First (Old) Republic (1889–1930) 
 Vargas Era (1930–1946) 
 Fourth Republic (1946–1964) 
 Military dictatorship (1964–1985) 
 Sixth (New) Republic (1985–present) 
 Geography 
 Amazon basin 
 Brazilian Antarctica 
 Climate 
 Coastline 
 Extreme points 
 Geology 
 Islands 
 Largest cities 
 Mountains 
 Pantanal 
 Protected areas 
 Regions 
 Rivers 
 Time Zone 
 Water resources 
 Wildlife 
 World Heritage Sites 
 Politics 
 Administrative divisions 
 Constitution 
 Elections 
 Foreign relations 
 Government 
 Human rights 
 Judiciary 
 Law 
 Law enforcement 
 Military 
 National Congress 
 Political parties 
 President of the Republic 
 Economy 
 Agriculture 
 Animal husbandry 
 Automotive industry 
 Central Bank 
 Economic history 
 Energy 
 Exports 
 Industry 
 Mining 
 Real  (currency) 
 Science and technology 
 Stock index 
 Taxation 
 Telecommunications 
 Tourism 
 Transport 
 Society 
 Corruption 
 Crime 
 Demographics 
 Education 
 Health 
 Immigration 
 Income inequality 
 Languages 
 People 
 Religion 
 Social issues 
 States by HDI 
 Unemployment 
 Water supply and sanitation 
 Welfare 
 Youth 
 Culture 
 Animation 
 Arts 
 Carnaval 
 Cinema 
 Comics 
 Cuisine 
 Literature 
 Malandragem 
 Music 
 Mythology 
 National symbols 
 Newspapers 
 Painting 
 Public holidays 
 Sculpture 
 Science fiction 
 Sports 
 Television 
 Outline Index 
 Category 
 Portal 
 v t e South American cuisine Sovereign states 
 Argentina 
 Bolivia 
 Brazil 
 Chile 
 Colombia 
 Ecuador 
 Guyana 
 Paraguay 
 Peru 
 Suriname 
 Uruguay 
 Venezuela 
 Dependencies  and other territories 
 Falkland Islands 
 French Guiana 
 South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands 
 
 v t e Cuisines Continental 
 African 
 North 
 West 
 list 
 Americas 
 Caribbean 
 North 
 South 
 list 
 Asian 
 Caucasian 
 Central 
 Indian subcontinent 
 Levantine 
 list 
 European 
 Balkan 
 Central 
 Eastern 
 list 
 Oceanic 
 Intercontinental
 Global 
 Latin American 
 Mediterranean 
 Middle Eastern 
 National  and regional 
 Afghan 
 Albanian 
 Algerian 
 American 
 Californian 
 Floribbean 
 Hawaiian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Lowcountry (South Carolina) 
 New England 
 New Mexico 
 Pacific Northwest 
 Pennsylvania Dutch 
 Puerto Rican 
 Southern US 
 Southwest US 
 Texas 
 Angolan 
 Argentine 
 Armenian 
 Australian 
 Austrian 
 Azerbaijani 
 Bahraini 
 Bangladeshi 
 Barbadian 
 Belarusian 
 Belgian 
 Belizean 
 Beninese 
 Bhutanese 
 Bolivian 
 Bosnian-Herzegovinian 
 Botswana 
 Brazilian 
 British 
 Channel Islands 
 English 
 Gibraltarian 
 Northern Irish 
 Saint Helena 
 Scottish 
 Welsh 
 Bruneian 
 Bulgarian 
 Burkinabé 
 Burmese 
 Burundian 
 Cambodian 
 Cameroonian 
 Canadian 
 Acadian 
 Québécois 
 Central African Republic 
 Chadian 
 Chilean 
 Chinese 
 Cantonese 
 Hong Kong 
 Macanese 
 Tibetan 
 Xinjiang 
 Colombian 
 Congolese 
 Corsican 
 Croatian 
 Cuban 
 Cypriot 
 Czech 
 Danish 
 Faroese 
 Greenlandic 
 Djiboutian 
 Dominican 
 Dominican Republic 
 Dutch 
 East Timorese 
 Ecuadorian 
 Egyptian 
 Emirati 
 Equatorial Guinean 
 Eritrean 
 Estonian 
 Ethiopian 
 Fijian 
 Filipino 
 Finnish 
 French 
 Occitan 
 French Guianan 
 Gabonese 
 Gambian 
 Georgian 
 German 
 Ghanaian 
 Greek 
 Cretan 
 Epirotic 
 Greek Macedonian 
 Heptanesean 
 Guatemalan 
 Guinea-Bissauan 
 Guinean 
 Haitian 
 Honduran 
 Hungarian 
 Icelandic 
 Indian 
 Arunachalese 
 Assamese 
 Bengali 
 Bihari 
 Goan 
 Gujarati 
 Himachal Pradesh 
 Kashmiri 
 Jharkhandi 
 Karnataka 
 Kerala 
 Maharashtrian 
 Manipuri 
 Meghalayan 
 Mizo 
 Naga 
 Odia 
 Punjabi 
 Rajasthani 
 Sikkimese 
 Sindhi 
 Tamil 
 Telangana 
 Telugu 
 Indonesian 
 Acehnese 
 Balinese 
 Banjar 
 Batak 
 Betawi 
 Indo 
 Javanese 
 Madurese 
 Makassar 
 Minahasan 
 Minangkabau 
 Palembangese 
 Sundanese 
 Iranian 
 Iraqi 
 Irish 
 Israeli 
 Italian 
 Abruzzese 
 Ligurian 
 Lombard 
 Lucanian 
 Neapolitan 
 Roman 
 Sardinian 
 Sicilian 
 Venetian 
 Ivorian 
 Jamaican 
 Japanese 
 Okinawan 
 Jordanian 
 Kazakh 
 Kenyan 
 Korean 
 North Korean 
 South Korean 
 Kosovan 
 Kuwaiti 
 Kyrgyz 
 Lao 
 Latvian 
 Lebanese 
 Lesotho 
 Liberian 
 Libyan 
 Liechtensteiner 
 Lithuanian 
 Luxembourg 
 Macedonian 
 Malagasy 
 Malawian 
 Malaysian 
 Sabahan 
 Sarawakian 
 Maldivian 
 Malian 
 Maltese 
 Mauritanian 
 Mauritian 
 Mexican 
 Moldovan 
 Monégasque 
 Mongolian 
 Montenegrin 
 Moroccan 
 Mozambican 
 Namibian 
 Nauruan 
 Nepalese 
 New Zealand 
 Nicaraguan 
 Niger 
 Nigerian 
 Niuean 
 Norwegian 
 Omani 
 Pakistani 
 Palestinian 
 Panamanian 
 Peruvian 
 Polish 
 Portuguese 
 Qatari 
 Romanian  (incl.  Transylvanian Saxon ) 
 Russian 
 Bashkir 
 Chechen 
 Circassian 
 Komi 
 Mordovian 
 Sakha 
 Tatar 
 Udmurt 
 Yamal 
 Rwandan 
 Saint Lucian 
 Salvadoran 
 Sammarinese 
 São Tomé and Príncipe 
 Saudi Arabian 
 Senegalese 
 Serbian 
 Seychellois 
 Sierra Leonean 
 Singaporean 
 Slovak 
 Slovenian 
 Somali 
 South African 
 Spanish 
 Andalusian 
 Asturian 
 Balearic 
 Basque 
 Canarian 
 Cantabrian 
 Catalan 
 Extremaduran 
 Galician 
 Manchegan 
 Valencian 
 Sri Lankan 
 Sudanese 
 Swazi 
 Swedish 
 Swiss 
 Syrian 
 Taiwanese 
 Tajik 
 Tanzanian 
 Zanzibari 
 Thai 
 Togolese 
 Tunisian 
 Turkish 
 Turkmen 
 Trinidadian and Tobagonian 
 Ugandan 
 Ukrainian 
 Uruguayan 
 Uzbek 
 Venezuelan 
 Vietnamese 
 Western Saharan 
 Yemeni 
 Zambian 
 Zimbabwean 
 Ethnic 
 Ainu 
 Arab 
 Indonesian 
 Aromanian 
 Assyrian 
 Balochi 
 Berber 
 Cajun 
 Chinese 
 American 
 Canadian 
 Chifa 
 Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Crimean Tatar 
 Greek American 
 Hazaragi 
 Indian 
 Anglo-Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Indigenous American 
 Inuit 
 Italian American 
 Kurdish 
 Livonian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Malay 
 Ossetian 
 Parsi 
 Pashtun 
 Peranakan 
 Romani 
 Sámi 
 Soul food 
 Sylheti 
 Transylvanian Saxon 
 Yup'ik 
 Religious 
 Buddhist 
 Christian 
 Goan Catholic 
 Mangalorean Catholic 
 Mennonite 
 Hindu 
 Islamic 
 Chinese 
 Ital 
 Jain 
 Jewish 
 American 
 Ashkenazi 
 Bukharan 
 Ethiopian 
 Mizrahi 
 Sephardic 
 Syrian 
 Ritual slaughter 
 Sikh 
 Historical 
 Ancient Egyptian 
 Ancient Greek 
 Ancient Israelite 
 Ancient Roman 
 Antebellum America 
 Aztec 
 Byzantine 
 Early modern European 
 Historical Chinese 
 Historical Indian subcontinent 
 Historical North Indian and Pakistani 
 History of agriculture 
 History of alcoholic drinks 
 History of bread 
 History of seafood 
 History of vegetarianism 
 Historical Argentine 
 Historical Japanese 
 Inca 
 Mayan 
 Muisca 
 Mughal 
 Medieval 
 Ottoman 
 Peasant 
 Soviet 
 Thirteen Colonies 
 Styles 
 Classique 
 Fast food 
 Fusion 
 New American 
 Eurasian 
 Haute 
 Molecular gastronomy 
 Note by Note 
 Nouvelle 
 Lists 
 List of cuisines 
 List of historical cuisines 
 Lists of prepared foods 
 Related 
 Cookbook 
 Cooking 
 Culinary arts 
 Drink 
 Food 
 history 
 Diet 
 Meal preparation 
 
   Food portal 
   Drink portal 
   Category 
   Commons 
   Cookbook 
   WikiProject 
   Outline 
 
 v t e Latin America and the Caribbean Caribbean 
 Antigua and Barbuda 
 Aruba 
 Bahamas 
 Barbados 
 Cuba 
 Curaçao 
 Dominica 
 Dominican Republic 
 Grenada 
 Haiti 
 Jamaica 
 Puerto Rico 
 Saint Kitts and Nevis 
 Saint Lucia 
 Saint Vincent and the Grenadines 
 Sint Maarten 
 Trinidad and Tobago 
 Central America 
 Costa Rica 
 El Salvador 
 Guatemala 
 Honduras 
 Nicaragua 
 Panama 
 Middle America 
 Mexico 
 South America 
 Argentina 
 Bolivia 
 Brazil 
 Chile 
 Colombia 
 Ecuador 
 Paraguay 
 Peru 
 Uruguay 
 Venezuela 
 Dependencies  not included.      Semi-autonomous territories are in italics. 
 Authority control   National libraries 
 France 
 BnF data 
 Israel 
 United States 
 Other 
 IdRef 
 
  
NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw2305
Cached time: 20230311173033
Cache expiry: 1814400
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc, no‐toc‐conversion]
CPU time usage: 0.746 seconds
Real time usage: 0.995 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 7351/1000000
Post‐expand include size: 177916/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 12222/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 36/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 123393/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.336/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 8158953/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/400
 
 
Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  657.812      1 -total
 28.08%  184.709      1 Template:Reflist
 17.13%  112.702      1 Template:Brazil_topics
 16.88%  111.019      1 Template:Country_topics
 16.05%  105.558     10 Template:Cite_book
 13.83%   90.948      3 Template:Navbox
 11.89%   78.182      2 Template:Sidebar
 11.59%   76.225      1 Template:Brazilian_cuisine
  6.78%   44.604      1 Template:Cuisine
  6.60%   43.425      1 Template:Short_description
 
  Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:idhash:147813-0!canonical and timestamp 20230311173032 and revision id 1139356741. Rendering was triggered because: page-view
  
 esi <esi:include src="/esitest-fa8a495983347898/content" />  
 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Brazilian_cuisine&oldid=1139356741 " 
 Categories :  Brazilian cuisine South American cuisine Latin American cuisine Hidden categories:  Webarchive template wayback links CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) CS1 Portuguese-language sources (pt) CS1 Italian-language sources (it) CS1 Esperanto-language sources (eo) CS1 Brazilian Portuguese-language sources (pt-br) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Commons category link is on Wikidata Region topic template using suffix Articles with BNF identifiers Articles with J9U identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers Articles with SUDOC identifiers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  This page was last edited on 14 February 2023, at 18:29  (UTC) . 
 Text is available under the  Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0 ;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the  Terms of Use  and  Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the  Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. 
 
 
 Privacy policy 
 About Wikipedia 
 Disclaimers 
 Contact Wikipedia 
 Mobile view 
 Developers 
 Statistics 
 Cookie statement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
