
 
 
 Jump to content 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle sidebar 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Create account Log in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Personal tools 
 
 
 
 
   Create account   Log in 
 
 
 
 
		Pages for logged out editors  learn more 
 
 
 Contributions Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Navigation 
 
 
 Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate 
 
 
 
 
 Contribute 
 
 
 Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file 
 
 
 
 
 Tools 
 
 
 What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item 
 
 
 
 
 Print/export 
 
 
 Download as PDF Printable version 
 
 
 
 
 In other projects 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons Wikivoyage 
 
 
 
 
 Languages 
 
 On this Wikipedia the language links are at the top of the page across from the article title.  Go to top . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CentralNotice  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Contents 
 move to sidebar 
 hide 
 
 
 
 
 (Top) 
 
 
 
 
 
 1 History 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 Etiquette and customs 
 
 
				Toggle Etiquette and customs subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 2.1 Dining 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.2 Religious practices 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.3 Beef taboo 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.4 Food theories 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 Cooking techniques 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4 Regional and variant cuisines 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5 Dishes and ingredients 
 
 
				Toggle Dishes and ingredients subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 5.1 Preserved foods 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5.2 Rice 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5.3 Noodles 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5.4 Salads 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5.5 Curries 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5.6 Soups 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5.7 Other grains and breads 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5.8 Snacks 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5.9 Fruits and fruit preserves 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6 Beverages 
 
 
				Toggle Beverages subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 6.1 Burmese tea 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6.2 Alcohol 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 7 Food establishments 
 
 
				Toggle Food establishments subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 7.1 Restaurants 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 7.2 Tea shops 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 7.3 Street food 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8 See also 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 9 Notes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 10 References 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 11 Further reading 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 12 External links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
						Toggle the table of contents
					 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle the table of contents 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Burmese cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 18 languages 
 
 
 
 বাংলা Čeština Español فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Jawa ქართული မြန်မာဘာသာ 日本語 Polski Русский ไทย Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 
 Edit links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Article Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 English 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 More 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
 
 
 Culinary traditions of Myanmar 
 
 
 Part of  a series  on the Culture of Myanmar 
 History 
 History of Myanmar 
 
 People 
 Languages 
 Burmese language 
 Mon language 
 
 Traditions 
 Twelve Auspicious Rites 
 Anade 
 Clothing 
 Acheik 
 Kinship 
 Names 
 Tattooing 
 Weddings 
 Zodiac 
 
 Mythology 
 Folklore 
 
 Cuisine 
 Cuisine 
 Burmese curry 
 Burmese fritters 
 Burmese salads 
 Burmese snacks 
 Burmese tea 
 Burmese tofu 
 Satuditha 
 
 Festivals 
 Burmese calendar 
 Public holidays 
 Traditional festivals 
 Pagoda festival 
 
 Religion 
 Burmese folk religion 
 Buddhism 
 Burmese pagoda 
 Kyaung 
 Buddhābhiṣeka 
 Okāsa 
 Phongyibyan 
 Christianity 
 Hinduism 
 
 Art 
 Architecture 
 Ceramics 
 Contemporary art 
 Kalaga 
 Glass mosaic 
 
 Literature 
 Literature 
 
 Music  and Performing arts 
 Mahāgīta 
 Dance 
 Yein 
 Anyeint 
 Yoke thé 
 
 Media 
 Television 
 Cinema 
 
 Sport 
 Naban 
 Thaing 
 Chinlone 
 Lethwei 
 Banshay 
 Bando 
 
 Monuments 
 World Heritage Sites 
 Shwedagon Pagoda 
 Mandalay Palace 
 
 Symbols 
 Flag 
 Coat of arms 
 National anthem 
 
 Organisations 
 National Museum (Naypyidaw) 
 National Museum (Yangon) 
 National Library of Myanmar 
 National Theatre of Yangon 
 
   Myanmar portal v t e 
 
 
 
 This article contains  Burmese script .  Without proper  rendering support , you may see  question marks, boxes, or other symbols  instead of  Burmese script . 
 
 Burmese cuisine  ( Burmese :  မြန်မာ့အစားအစာ ) encompasses the diverse regional culinary traditions of Myanmar, which have developed through longstanding agricultural practices, centuries of sociopolitical and economic change, and cross-cultural contact and trade with neighboring countries at the confluence of  South Asia ,  Southeast Asia , and  East Asia , including the modern-day nations of India, China, and Thailand. [1] 
 
   Laphet , served in a traditional lacquer tray called  laphet ok . 
 Burmese cuisine is typified by a wide-ranging array of dishes, including traditional  Burmese curries ,  Burmese salads , and soups that are traditionally eaten with  white rice . [2]  Burmese cuisine also features noodles in many forms, as fried or dry noodles, noodle soups, or as noodle salads, as well as  Indian breads .  Street food  culture has also nurtured the profuse variety of traditional  Burmese fritters  and traditional snacks called  mont .
 The contrasting flavor profile of Burmese cuisine is broadly captured in the phrase  chin ngan sat  ( ချဉ်ငန်စပ် ), which literally means "sour, salty, and spicy." [3]  A popular Burmese rhyme — "of all the fruit, the  mango 's the best; of all the meat, the  pork 's the best; and of all the leaves,  lahpet 's the best" — sums up the traditional favourites. [Note 1] 
 
 
 History [ edit ] 
   A traditional Burmese painting depicts the  Royal Ploughing Ceremony , during which the monarch ceremonially ploughs a rice field outside the royal palace, to mark the traditional start of the rice-growing season. 
 Rice is the principal staple in Burmese cuisine, reflecting several millennia of  rice cultivation , which first emerged in the country's  Chindwin ,  Ayeyarwady , and  Thanlwin river  valleys between 11,000 and 5000 BCE. [4]  By 3000 BCE, irrigated rice cultivation flourished, paralleled by the domestication of cattle and pigs by inhabitants. [4]  In addition to rice,  tea  originated in the borderlands separating Myanmar from China, precipitating a longstanding tradition of tea consumption and the development of pickled tea known as  laphet , which continues to play a pivotal role in Burmese ritual culture. [5] [6]  This longstanding history is reflected in the  Burmese language , which is among the few world languages whose word for "tea" is not etymologically traced back to the Chinese word for "tea" (see  etymology of tea ). [7] 
 Agrarian settlements were settled by ancestors of Myanmar's modern-day ethnolinguistic groups. From these settlements emerged a succession of Burmese, Mon, Shan, Rakhine-speaking kingdoms and tributary states that now make up contemporary Myanmar. Paddy rice cultivation remains synonymous with the predominantly Buddhist  Bamar ,  Mon ,  Shan , and  Rakhine peoples  who inhabit the country's fertile lowlands and plateaus. [8] 
 Burmese cuisine has been significantly enriched by contact and trade with neighboring kingdoms and countries well into modern times. The  Columbian exchange  in the 15th and 16th centuries introduced key ingredients into the Burmese culinary repertoire, including  tomatoes ,  chili peppers ,  peanuts , and  potatoes . [9]  A series of  Burmese–Siamese wars  between the 16th to 19th centuries resulted in the emergence of Thai-inspired delicacies, including  khanon dok ,  shwe yin aye ,  mont let hsaung , and  Yodaya mont di . [10] 
 
   Buddhist monks in Mandalay receive food alms from a  htamanè  hawker during their daily alms round (ဆွမ်းလောင်းလှည့်). 
 While record-keeping of pre-colonial culinary traditions is scant, food was and remains deeply intertwined with religious life, especially among Buddhist communities, exemplified in the giving of food alms ( dāna ), and communal feasts called  satuditha  and  ahlu pwe  (အလှူပွဲ). One of the few remaining pre-colonial cookbooks is the  Sadawhset Kyan  ( စားတော်ဆက်ကျမ်း ,  lit.   'Treatise on Royal Foods'), written on a  palm leaf manuscript  in 1866 during the  Konbaung dynasty . [11]  By the  Konbaung dynasty  (16th to 19th centuries), elaborate preparations of food played a central role in key court ceremonies (e.g., naming ceremonies, wedding ceremonies, etc.), including as ritual offerings to Hindu and  indigenous deities , and as celebratory meals for attendees. [12] 
 British rule in Burma  between the 19th and 20th centuries led to the establishment of  Burmese Indian  and  Sino-Burmese  communities that introduced novel cooking techniques, ingredients, food vocabulary, and fusion dishes that are now considered integral parts of Burmese cuisine. [13]  These range from  Indian breads  such as  naan  and  paratha  to Chinese  stir frying  techniques and ingredients like  tofu  and  soy sauce .  
 
 Etiquette and customs [ edit ] 
 Dining [ edit ] 
   A traditional Burmese meal includes a bowl of soup, rice, several meat curries, and  ngapi yay  (a dip or dipping sauce) with  tozaya  (vegetables for dipping). 
 Traditionally, the Burmese eat meals from plates on a low table or  daunglan , while sitting on a bamboo mat. [14]  Dishes are simultaneously served and shared. [14]  A traditional meal includes steamed white rice as the main dish accompanied by  Burmese curries , a light soup or consommé, and other side dishes, including fried vegetables,  Burmese fritters , and  ngapi yay gyo  (ငါးပိရည်ကျို), a plate of fresh and blanched vegetables served with pickled fish dip. The meal is then finished with a piece of  palm sugar  or  laphet  (fermented tea leaves). [15] 
 Out of respect, the eldest diners are always served first before the rest join in; even when the elders are absent, the first morsel of rice from the pot is scooped and put aside as an act of respect to one's parents, a custom known as  u cha  ( ဦးချ ,  lit.   'first serve'). [16] 
 The Burmese traditionally eat with their right hand, forming the rice into a small ball with only the fingertips and mixing this with various morsels before popping it into their mouths. [16]  Chopsticks and  Chinese-style spoons  are used for noodle dishes, although noodle salads are more likely to be eaten with just a spoon. Western-style utensils, especially forks and knives, have gained currency in recent years. 
 
 Religious practices [ edit ] 
 The country's diverse religious makeup influences its cuisine, as Buddhists and Hindus traditionally avoid  beef  and Muslims  pork . Beef is considered taboo by devout Buddhists and farmers because the cow is highly regarded as a  beast of burden . [17]   Vegetarianism  is commonly practiced by Buddhists during the three-month  Vassa  (ဝါတွင်း) between July and October, as well as during  Uposatha  days, reflected in the Burmese word for "vegetarian,"  thet that lut  (သက်သတ်လွတ်,  lit.   'free of killing'). During this time, devout Buddhists observe  eight or more precepts , including fasting rules that restrict food intake to two daily meals (i.e., breakfast and lunch) taken before noon.
 
 Beef taboo [ edit ] 
 The beef taboo is fairly widespread in Myanmar, particularly in the Buddhist community. In Myanmar, beef is typically obtained from cattle that are slaughtered at the end of their working lives (16 years of age) or from sick animals. [18]  Cattle is rarely raised for meat; 58% of cattle in the country is used for draught animal power. [18]  Few people eat beef, and there is a general dislike of beef (especially among the  Bamar  and  Burmese Chinese ), [19] [20]  although it is more commonly eaten in regional cuisines, particularly those of ethnic minorities like the  Kachin . [21]  Buddhists, when giving up meat during the Buddhist ( Vassa ) or  Uposatha  days, will forego beef first. [22]  Butchers tend to be Muslim because of the Buddhist doctrine of  ahimsa  (no harm). [23] 
 During the country's last dynasty, the  Konbaung dynasty , habitual consumption of beef was punishable by public  flogging . [24]  In 1885,  Ledi Sayadaw , a prominent  Buddhist monk  wrote the  Nwa-myitta-sa  ( နွားမေတ္တာစာ ), a poetic prose letter which argued that Burmese Buddhists should not kill cattle and eat beef, because Burmese farmers depended on them as beasts of burden to maintain their livelihoods, that the marketing of beef for human consumption threatened the extinction of buffalo and cattle, and that the practice was ecologically unsound. [25]  He subsequently led successful beef boycotts during the colonial era, and influenced a generation of Burmese nationalists in adopting this stance. [25] 
 On 29 August 1961, the  Burmese Parliament  passed the State Religion Promotion Act of 1961, which explicitly banned the slaughtering of cattle nationwide (beef became known as  todo tha  ( တိုးတိုးသား );  lit.   'hush hush meat'). [26]  Religious groups, such as Muslims, were required to apply for exemption licences to slaughter cattle on religious holidays. This ban was repealed a year later, after  Ne Win  led a  coup d'état  and declared martial law in the country.
 
 Food theories [ edit ] 
 In traditional Burmese medicine, foods are divided into two classes: heating ( အပူစာ ,  apu za ) or cooling ( အအေးစာ ,  a-aye za ), based on their effects on one's body system, similar to the  Chinese classification of food . [16]  Examples of heating foods include chicken, bitter melon, durian, mango, chocolate, and ice cream. Examples of cooling foods include pork, eggplant, dairy products, cucumbers, and radish.
 The Burmese also hold several taboos and superstitions regarding consumption during various occasions in one's life, especially  pregnancy . For instance, pregnant women are not supposed to eat chili, due to the belief that it causes children to have sparse scalp hairs. [16] 
 
 Cooking techniques [ edit ] 
 This section  needs expansion . You can help by  adding to it .   ( January 2021 ) 
   Beans and pulses are commonly used in Burmese cuisine. Burmese dishes are not cooked with precise recipes. The use and portion of ingredients used may vary, but the precision of timing is of utmost importance. [16] [11]  Burmese dishes may be stewed, boiled, fried, roasted, steamed, baked or grilled, or any combination of the said techniques. [11]   Burmese curries  use only a handful of spices (in comparison to Indian ones) and use more fresh garlic and ginger. [11] 
 Regional and variant cuisines [ edit ] 
   Htamin jin , 'fermented' rice kneaded with fish and/or potato with twice-fried  Shan tofu , is a popular local dish at  Inle Lake . 
 Broadly speaking, Burmese cuisine is divided between the culinary traditions of  Upper Myanmar , which is inland and landlocked; and  Lower Myanmar ; which is surrounded by numerous rivers, river deltas, and the  Andaman Sea . [27]  Variations between regional cuisines are largely driven by the availability of fresh ingredients. Myanmar's long coastline has provided an abundant source of fresh seafood, which is particularly associated with  Rakhine  cuisine. [28]  Southern Myanmar, particularly the area around  Mawlamyaing , is known for its cuisine, as the Burmese proverb goes: "Mandalay for eloquence, Yangon for boasting, Mawlamyaing for food." [29] [Note 2] 
 Cuisine in Lower Myanmar, including  Yangon  and Mawlamyaing, makes extensive use of fish and seafood-based products like  fish sauce  and  ngapi  (fermented seafood). [27]  The cuisine in Upper Myanmar, including the Bamar heartland ( Mandalay ,  Magway , and  Sagaing Regions ),  Shan State , and  Kachin States , tends to use more meat, poultry, pulses and beans. [27]  The level of spices and use of fresh herbs varies depending on the region; Kachin and Shan curries will often use more fresh herbs. [2] 
 Fusion  Chettiar  ( ချစ်တီးကုလား ) cuisine, originating from Southern Indian cuisine, is also popular in cities.
 
 Dishes and ingredients [ edit ] 
 Main articles:  List of Burmese dishes  and  List of Ingredients in Burmese cuisine 
 Because a standardised system of  romanisation  for spoken  Burmese  does not exist, pronunciations of the following dishes in modern standard Burmese approximated using  IPA  are provided (see  IPA/Burmese  for details). 
 
 Preserved foods [ edit ] 
 Main articles:  Ngapi  and  Lahpet 
   A plate of  ngapi yay gyo  is surrounded by an assortment of traditional Burmese side dishes. Myanmar  is one of very few countries where tea is not only drunk but eaten as  lahpet , pickled tea served with various accompaniments. [30] [31]  The practice of eating tea dates in modern-day Myanmar back to prehistoric antiquity, reflecting the legacy of indigenous tribes who pickled and fermented tea leaves inside bamboo tubes, bamboo baskets, plantain leaves and pots. [7]  Tea leaves are traditionally cultivated by the  Palaung people . [7]  Pickled tea leaves continue to play an important role in  Burmese culture  today. [7] 
 Ngapi  ( ငါးပိ ), a fermented paste made from salted fish or shrimp, is considered the cornerstone of any Burmese traditional meal. It is used to season many soups, salads, curries and dishes, and condiments, imparting a rich  umami  flavor. [2]  The ngapi of  Rakhine State  contains no or little salt, and uses marine fish. Meanwhile, ngapi made with freshwater fish is common in Ayeyarwady and Tanintharyi regions.  Ngapi yay  ( ငါးပိရည် ) is an essential part of Karen and Bamar cuisine, in which a sauce dip of  ngapi  cooked in various vegetables and spices is served with blanched and fresh vegetables, similar to Thai  nam phrik , Indonesian  lalab , and Malay  ulam .   Dried fermented bean cakes called  pè bok  are grilled or fried in Shan cooking. 
 Shan cuisine traditionally uses fermented beans called  pè ngapi  ( ပဲငါးပိ ;  lit.   'bean  ngapi ' ), in lieu of ngapi, to impart umami. [2]  Dried bean ngapi chips ( ပဲပုပ် ;  lit.   'spoiled beans') are used as condiments for various Shan dishes. [32] 
 Pon ye gyi  ( ပုံးရည်ကြီး ), a thick salty black paste made from fermented beans, is popular in the Bamar heartland. It is used in cooking, especially with pork, and as a salad with peanut oil, chopped onions and red chili.  Bagan  is an important  pon ye gyi  producer. [33] 
 Burmese cuisine also features a wide variety of pickled vegetables and fruits that are preserved in oil and spices, or in brine and rice wine. [3]  The former, called  thanat  (သနပ်), are similar to  South Asian pickles , including  mango pickle . The latter are called  chinbat  (ချဉ်ဖတ်), and include pickles like  mohnyin gyin .
 
 Rice [ edit ] 
   Buddhist monks cooking rice at the  Mahagandhayon Monastery  in Amarapura. 
 The most common staple in Myanmar is steamed rice, called  htamin  ( ထမင်း ). Fragrant, aromatic varieties of white rice, including  paw hsan hmwe  ( ပေါ်ဆန်းမွှေး ), are popular. Lower-amylose varieties of  glutinous rice , which are called  kauk hnyin  ( ကောက်ညှင်း ), also feature in Burmese cuisine, including a purple variety called  ngacheik  (ငချိပ်). Consumers in the northern highlands (e.g.,  Shan State ) prefer stickier, lower- amylose  varieties like  kauk hnyin  and  kauk sei , while consumers in lower delta regions preferring higher-amylose varieties like  kauk chaw  and  kauk kyan . [34]  Lower-amylose varieties of rice are commonly used in traditional Burmese snacks called  mont . [34]  While rice is traditionally eaten plain, flavored versions like  buttered rice  and  coconut rice  are commonplace festive staples. [35] 
 
   Hsi htamin , glutinous rice seasoned with oil and turmeric, is a popular breakfast food. 
 Htamin gyaw  ( ထမင်းကြော်   [tʰəmɪ́ɴ dʒɔ̀] ) – fried rice with boiled peas, sometimes with meat, sausage, and eggs. [36] 
 San byok  ( ဆန်ပြုတ်   [sʰàɴbjoʊʔ] ) – rice congee with fish, chicken or duck often fed to invalids. 
 Danbauk  ( ဒံပေါက်   [dàɴbaʊʔ] , from Persian  dum pukht ) – Burmese-style  biryani  with either chicken or mutton served with mango pickle, a fresh salad of sliced onions, julienned cabbage, sliced cucumbers, fermented limes and lemons, fried dried chilies, and soup [37] [38] 
 Htamin jin  ( ထမင်းချဉ် ‌  [tʰəmíɴ dʒɪ̀ɴ] ) – a rice, tomato and potato or fish salad kneaded into round balls dressed and garnished with crisp fried onion in oil, tamarind sauce, coriander and spring onions often with garlic,  Chinese chive roots , fried whole dried chili, grilled dried fermented bean cakes ( pé bok ) and fried dried tofu ( tohu gyauk kyaw ) on the side [39] 
 Thingyan rice  ( သင်္ကြန်ထမင်း   [ðədʒàɴ tʰəmɪ́ɴ] ) – fully boiled rice in candle-smelt water served with pickled marian plums [40] 
 Noodles [ edit ] 
   Rice noodles sun-drying in  Hsipaw . 
 Burmese cuisine uses a wide variety of noodles, which are prepared in soups, salads, or other dry noodle dishes and typically eaten outside of lunch, or as a snack. [2]  Fresh, thin rice noodles called  mont bat  ( မုန့်ဖတ် ) or  mont di  ( မုန့်တီ ), are similar to Thai  khanom chin , and feature in Myanmar's national dish,  mohinga . Burmese cuisine also has a category of  rice noodles  of varying sizes and shapes called  nan , including  nangyi  ( နန်းကြီး ), thick udon-like noodles;  nanlat  ( နန်းလတ် ), medium-sized rice noodles;  nanthe  ( နန်းသေး ), thinner rice noodles; and  nanbya  ( နန်းပြား ), flat rice noodles. [41]   Cellophane noodles , called  kyazan  ( ကြာဆံ ,  lit.   'lotus thread') and wheat-based noodles called  khauk swe  ( ခေါက်ဆွဲ ), [41]  are often used in salads, soups, and stir-fries. [2] 
 
   Shan khao swè  and  tohpu jaw , with  monnyin gyin  on the side 
 Dry or fried noodle dishes include:
 
 Kat kyi kaik  ( ကတ်ကြေးကိုက်   [kaʔtɕígaɪʔ] ,  lit.   'bitten with scissors') – a southern coastal dish (from the  Dawei  area) of flat rice noodles with a variety of seafood, land meats, raw bean sprouts, beans and fried eggs, comparable to  pad thai [42] 
 Meeshay  ( မြီးရှေ   [mjíʃè] ) – rice noodles with pork or chicken, bean sprouts, rice flour gel, rice flour fritters, dressed with  soy sauce , salted  soybean , rice vinegar, fried peanut oil, chilli oil, and garnished with crisp fried onions, crushed garlic, coriander, and pickled white  radish / mustard greens 
 Mont di  – an extremely popular and economical fast food dish where rice vermicelli are either eaten with some condiments and soup prepared from ngapi, or as a salad with powdered fish and some condiments. 
 Panthay khao swè  ( ပန်းသေးခေါက်ဆွဲ   [páɴðé kʰaʊʔ sʰwɛ́] ) –  halal  egg noodles with a spiced chicken curry. The dish is associated with  Panthay community , a group of Burmese  Chinese Muslims . [43] 
 Sigyet khauk swè  ( ဆီချက်ခေါက်ဆွဲ   [sʰìdʑɛʔ kʰaʊʔ sʰwɛ́] ) – wheat noodles with duck or pork, fried garlic oil,  soy sauce  and chopped spring onions. The dish originated from with the Sino-Burmese community [44] 
   Mandalay  meeshay , served with a thin  hingyo  broth. 
 Noodle soups  include:
 
 Mohinga  ( မုန့်ဟင်းခါး   [mo̰ʊɴhíɰ̃ɡá] ) – the unofficial national dish, made with fresh thin rice noodles in a fish broth with onions, garlic, ginger,  lemon grass  and tender banana stem cores, served with boiled eggs, fried  fishcake  and  Burmese fritters [45] 
 Ohn-no khauk swè  ( အုန်းနို့ခေါက်ဆွဲ   [ʔóʊɴno̰ kʰaʊʔsʰwɛ́] ) – curried chicken and wheat noodles in a coconut milk broth. It is comparable to  Malaysian   laksa  and  Northern Thai   khao soi [46] 
 Kyay oh  ( ကြေးအိုး   [tʃé ʔó] ) – rice noodles in a broth of pork offal and egg, traditionally served in copper pot [47] 
 Kawyei khao swè  ( ကော်ရည်ခေါက်ဆွဲ   [kɔ̀ jè kʰaʊʔ sʰwɛ́] ) – noodles and duck (or pork) curried with  five-spice powder  in broth with eggs, comparable to Singaporean/Malaysian  lor mee [48] 
 Mi swan  ( မြူစွမ်   [mjù swàɴ] ) – thin wheat noodles, known as  misua  in Singapore and Malaysia. It is a popular option for invalids, usually with chicken broth. 
 Shan khauk swé  ( ရှမ်းခေါက်ဆွဲ   [ʃáɴ kʰaʊʔsʰwɛ́] ) – rice noodles with chicken or minced pork, onions, garlic, tomatoes, chili, crushed roasted peanuts, young  snowpea  vine, served with tofu fritters, and pickled mustard greens [49] 
 Salads [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Burmese salads 
   Samosa salad in Mandalay 
Burmese salads ( အသုပ် ; transliterated  athoke  or  athouk ) are a diverse category of indigenous  salads  in Burmese cuisine. Burmese salads are made of cooked and raw ingredients that are mixed by hand to combine and balance a wide-ranging array of flavors and textures. [50]  Burmese salads are eaten as standalone snacks, as  side dishes  paired with  Burmese curries , and as entrees. [51]   Thayet chin thoke  – fermented green mango salad with onions, green chilli, roasted peanuts, sesame and peanut oil 
 Lahpet  thoke  ( လက်ဖက်သုပ်   [ləpʰɛʔ ðoʊʔ] ) – a salad of pickled tea leaves with fried peas, peanuts and garlic, toasted sesame, fresh garlic, tomato, green chili, crushed dried shrimps, preserved ginger and dressed with peanut oil, fish sauce and lime [3] 
 Gyin thoke  ( ချင်းသုပ် ‌  [dʒɪ́ɰ̃ ðoʊʔ] ) – a salad of pickled ginger with sesame seeds [3] 
 Khauk swè thoke  ( ခေါက်ဆွဲသုပ်   [kʰaʊʔsʰwɛ́ ðoʊʔ] ) – wheat noodle salad with dried shrimps, shredded cabbage and carrots, dressed with fried peanut oil,  fish sauce  and lime 
 Let thoke son  ( လက်သုပ်စုံ   [lɛʔ θoʊʔzòʊɴ] ) – similar to  htamin thoke  with shredded green  papaya , shredded carrot,  ogonori  sea moss and often wheat noodles 
 Nan gyi thoke  ( နန်းကြီးသုပ်   [náɰ̃dʒí ðoʊʔ] ) or Mandalay  mont di , thick rice noodle salad with chickpea flour, chicken, fish cake, onions, coriander, spring onions, crushed dried chilli, dressed with fried crispy onion oil, fish sauce and lime [52] 
 Samusa thoke  ( စမူဆာသုပ်   [səmùsʰà ðoʊʔ] ) – samosa salad with onions, cabbage, fresh mint, potato curry, masala, chili powder, salt and lime [53] 
 Kya zan thoke  – glass vermicelli salad with boiled prawn julienne and mashed curried duck eggs and potatoes. 
 Curries [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Burmese curry 
   A traditional  Danu -style meal featuring a curry broth, rice disks, and a requisite plate of blanched vegetables and dip. 
 Burmese curry refers to a diverse array of dishes in Burmese cuisine that consist of protein or vegetables simmered or stewed in an base of aromatics. [2]  Burmese curries generally differ from other Southeast Asian  curries  (e.g.,  Thai curry ) in that Burmese curries make use of dried  spices , in addition to fresh herbs and aromatics, and are often milder. [54]  The most common variety of curry is called  sibyan  ( ဆီပြန် ;  lit.   'oil returns'), which is typified by a layer of oil that separates from the gravy and meat after cooked. [55]  Pork, chicken, goat, shrimp, and fish are commonly prepared in Burmese curries.
 
 Pork  sibyan  ( ဝက်သားဆီပြန် ) – classic Burmese curry with fatty cuts of pork [56] 
 Chicken  sibyan  ( ကြက်သားဆီပြန် ) – the classic Burmese curry, served with a thick gravy of aromatics [36] [57] 
 Bachelor's chicken curry ( ကြက်ကာလသားချက် ) – a red and watery chicken curry cooked with  calabash [58] [36] 
 Goat  hnat  ( ဆိတ်သားနှပ် ) – a braised goat curry spiced with  masala , cinnamon sticks, bay leaf, and cloves [59] 
 Nga thalaut paung  ( ငါးသလောက်ပေါင်း   [ŋəθəlaʊʔbáʊɴ] ) – a curry of  hilsa  fish and tomatoes, which is slowly simmered to melt the fish bones [60] 
 Egg curry ( ဘဲဥချဥ်ရည်ဟင်း ) – a sour curry made with hardboiled duck or chicken eggs, cooked in tamarind paste and mashed  tomatoes [3] 
 Soups [ edit ] 
   Dandalun chinyay,  a sour soup with chopped drumsticks 
 In Burmese cuisine, soups typically accompany meals featuring both rice and noodles, and are paired accordingly to balance contrasting flavors. Lightly flavored soups, called  hin gyo  ( ဟင်းချို ) are served with saltier dishes, while sour soups, called  chinyay hin  ( ချဉ်ရည်ဟင်း ), are paired with rich, fatty  Burmese curries . [3] 
 Thizon chinyay  ( သီးစုံချဉ်ရည်   [θízòʊɴ tʃìɴjè] ,  lit.   'sour soup of assorted vegetables'), cooked with  drumstick ,  lady's finger ,  eggplant ,  green beans ,  potato ,  onions ,  ginger , dried chilli, boiled eggs, dried salted fish,  fish paste  and  tamarind , is an elevated version of  chinyay hin , and served during festive occasions. [3] 
 
 Other grains and breads [ edit ] 
   Palata  is commonly dusted with sugar as a dessert or teatime snack. 
 Indian breads  are commonly eaten for breakfast or teatime in Myanmar.  Palata  ( ပလာတာ ), also known as  htattaya  (ထပ်တစ်ရာ), a flaky fried flatbread related to Indian  paratha , is often eaten with curried meats or as dessert with sprinkled sugar, [61]  while  nanbya  ( နံပြား ), a baked flatbread, is eaten with any Indian dishes. [36]  Other favorites include  aloo  poori  ( အာလူးပူရီ ),  chapati  (ချပါတီ), and  appam  (အာပုံ). [62] [63] 
 
   Burmese-style omelette fried with  acacia leaves 
 Other dishes include:
 
 Burmese tofu  ( ရှမ်းတို့ဟူး   [ʃáɴ tòhú] ) – a  tofu  of Shan origin made from  chickpea flour , eaten as fritters, in a salad, or in porridge forms 
 A sein kyaw  ( အစိမ်းကြော်   [ʔəséɪɴdʒɔ̀] ) – cabbage, cauliflower, carrot, green beans, baby corn, corn flour or tapioca starch, tomatoes, squid sauce [64] 
 Ngapi daung  ( ငါးပိထောင်း ) – a spicy Rakhine-style condiment made from pounded ngapi and green chili 
 Nga baung htoke  ( ငါးပေါင်းထုပ်   [ŋəbáʊɴ doʊʔ] ) – a Mon-style steamed parcel of mixed vegetables and prawns, wrapped in  morinda  and banana leaves [65] 
 Wet tha chin  ( ဝက်သားချဉ်   [wɛʔ θə dʑɪ̀ɴ] ) – Shan-style preserved minced pork in rice [66] 
 Snacks [ edit ] 
 Main articles:  Mont (food)  and  Burmese fritters 
   A street hawker in  Ponnagyun  selling an assotment of fritters and  mont  to passersby. 
 Burmese cuisine has a wide variety of traditional snacks called  mont , ranging from sweet desserts to savory food items that are steamed, baked, fried, deep-fried, or boiled. Traditional  Burmese fritters , consisting of vegetables or seafood that have been battered and deep-fried, are also eaten as snacks or as toppings. [67] 
 Savory snacks include:
 
 Hpet htok  ( lit.   'leaf wrap',  ဖက်ထုပ်   [pʰɛʔtʰoʊʔ] ) – meat, pastry paper, ginger, garlic, pepper powder, and salt. Usually served with soup or noodles. 
 Samusa  ( စမူဆာ   [səmùzà] ) – Burmese-style  samosa  with mutton and onions served with fresh mint, green chilli, onions and lime 
 Burmese pork offal skewers  ( ဝက်သား တုတ်ထိုး   [wɛʔθá doʊʔtʰó] ) – pork offal cooked in light soy sauce, and eaten with raw ginger and chili sauce. 
 Htamane  ( ထမနဲ   [tʰəmənɛ́] ) – dessert made from glutinous rice, shredded coconuts and peanuts 
 Sweet snacks include:
 
 Mont let hsaung  ( မုန့်လက်ဆောင်း   [mo̰ʊɴlɛʔsʰáʊɴ] ) – tapioca or rice noodles, glutinous rice, grated coconut and toasted sesame with  jaggery  syrup in coconut milk [68] 
 Sanwin makin  ( ဆနွင်းမကင်း   [sʰà.nwɪ́ɴ məgɪ́ɴ] ) –  semolina  cake with raisins, walnuts and  poppy seeds [3] 
 Shwe yin aye  ( ရွှေရင်အေး   [ʃwè jɪ̀ɴ ʔé] ) – agar jelly,  tapioca  and  sago  in coconut milk 
 Pathein halawa  ( ပုသိမ်ဟလဝါ   [pəθèɪɴ ha̰ləwà] ) – a sticky sweetmeat made of glutinous rice, butter, coconut milk, [69]  inspired by Indian  halwa 
 Hpaluda  ( ဖာလူဒါ   [pʰàlùdà] ) – rose water, milk, coconut jelly, coconut shavings, sometimes served with egg custard and ice cream, similar to Indian  falooda [3] 
 Ngapyaw baung  ( ငှက်ပျောပေါင်း ) – A Mon-style dessert of bananas stewed in milk and coconut, and garnished with black sesame [70] 
 Saw hlaing mont  ( စောလှိုင်မုန့် ) – a Rakhine-style baked sweet, made from millet, raisins, coconut and butter 
 Fruits and fruit preserves [ edit ] 
   A street-side fruit stall in Yangon. 
 Myanmar has a wide range of fruits, mostly of tropical origin. Fruit is commonly eaten as a snack or dessert. [2]  While most fruits are eaten fresh, a few, including  jengkol , are boiled, roasted or otherwise cooked. Popular fruits include  banana ,  mango ,  watermelon ,  papaya ,  jujube , avocado,  pomelo , and  guava . [71]  Others include  marian plum ,  mangosteen ,  sugar-apple ,  rambutan ,  durian ,  jackfruit ,  lychee , and  pomegranate . Burmese fruit preserves, called  yo  ( ယို ), are also commonly eaten as standalone snacks. Common ones include fruit preserves made from  fig , jujube, marian plum, citrus, mango, pineapple, and  durian .
 300 cultivars of mango are grown in Myanmar, the most popular being  seintalon  ( စိန်တစ်လုံး ,  lit.   'one diamond'). [72]  13 species of banana are locally cultivated in Myanmar, including the following cultivars: [73] 
 
 red  - locally called  shweni  ( ရွှေနီ ,  lit.   'golden red') 
 Dwarf Cavendish  - locally called  htawbat  ( သီးမွှေး ,  lit.   'fragrant fruit') 
 Mysore - locally called  Rakhine  ( ရခိုင် ) 
 Latundan  - locally called  htawbat  ( ထောပတ် ,  lit.   'butter') 
 Beverages [ edit ] 
   Clay pots containing drinking water are commonly seen throughout Myanmar, left for travellers and passersby to rehydrate. 
 Tea is the national drink of Myanmar, reflecting the influence of Buddhism and its views on  temperance . [74]  Tea is central to Burmese dining culture; complimentary green tea is customarily served to diners at restaurants and teashops alike. [75]  Various liquid concoctions made from fruits and  coconut milk , including  sugarcane juice , and  mont let hsaung  ( မုန့်လက်ဆောင်း ) are also popular. [76]  Indigenous fermented drinks like  palm wine  are also found across the country. During a traditional Burmese meal, drinks are not often served; instead, the usual liquid refreshment is a light broth or  consommé  served from a  communal bowl .
 
 Burmese tea [ edit ] 
   Snacks served at a Burmese tea house alongside  Burmese milk tea . 
 Main articles:  Laphet  and  Burmese milk tea 
 Plain  green tea ,  yay nway gyan  ( ရေနွေးကြမ်း ,  lit.   'crude tea water'), is a popular form of tea drunk in Myanmar. [30]  Tea leaves are traditionally cultivated in  Shan State  and  Kachin State . [30]   Milk tea , called  laphet yay cho  (လက်ဖက်ရည်ချို), made with strongly brewed black tea leaves, and sweetened with a customized ratio of  condensed milk  and  evaporated milk , is also popular. [77] [7] 
 
 Alcohol [ edit ] 
 See also:  Beer in Myanmar 
   Shwe yin aye  is a popular and refreshing dessert 
 Palm wine , called  htan yay  ( ထန်းရည် ), made from the fermented sap of the  toddy palm , is traditionally consumed in rural parts of  Upper Myanmar [78]  Ethnic communities, including the  Kachin  and  Shan , also brew local  moonshines . [79]  Several ethnic minorities traditionally brew alcoholic beverages using rice or glutinous rice called  khaung  [ my ]  ( ခေါင်ရည် ). [80]  The  khaung  of the  Chin peoples  is brewed using millet seeds. [80]  Locally brewed beers include Irrawaddy, Mandalay, Myanmar, and Tiger. [74] 
 
 Food establishments [ edit ] 
 Restaurants [ edit ] 
 This section  needs expansion . You can help by  adding to it .   ( January 2021 ) Dine-in restaurants that serve steamed rice with traditional Burmese curries and dishes are called  htamin saing  ( ထမင်းဆိုင် ;  lit.   'rice shop').
 Tea shops [ edit ] 
   An outdoor café in Yangon During British rule in Burma,  Burmese Indians  introduced  tea shops  to the country, first known as  kaka hsaing , which later evolved into teashops called  laphet yay hsaing  ( လက်ဖက်ရည်ဆိုင် ) or  kaphi  (ကဖီး), the latter word from French  café.  Burmese tea shop culture emerged from a combination of British, Indian, and Chinese influences throughout the colonial period. [81]  Teashops are prevalent across the country, forming an important part of communal life. [31] [82]  Typically open throughout the day, some Burmese tea shops cater to locals, long distance drivers and travellers alike. The Burmese typically gather in tea shops to drink milk tea served with an extensive array of snacks and meals. [81] 
 Street food [ edit ] 
   A street hawker selling  Burmese pork offal skewers . Street food stalls and hawkers are a feature of the Burmese urban landscape, especially in major cities like  Yangon . [83]   Burmese salads ,  snacks , and  fritters  are especially popular street foods. [84]  In recent years, some major cities have clamped down on street food vendors. In 2016, Yangon banned the city's 6,000 street vendors from selling food on major thoroughfares, and relocated them to formal night markets set up by the city. [85] 
 Night markets , called  nya zay  ( ညဈေး ), are a feature of many Burmese towns and cities. Colonial observers as early as 1878 noted Burmese street hawkers selling delicacies such as fruits, cakes, and laphet during "night bazaars." [86]  The streets surrounding major daytime markets, such as  Zegyo Market  in Mandalay, typically double as makeshift night markets during the evenings. [87] 
 
 See also [ edit ] 
 
 
 
 This article contains  Burmese script .  Without proper  rendering support , you may see  question marks, boxes, or other symbols  instead of  Burmese script . 
 
 Myanmar 
 Culture of Myanmar 
 Rice production in Myanmar 
   Food portal 
   Myanmar portal 
 Notes [ edit ] 
 
 ^   The traditional rhyme is " A thee ma, thayet; a thar ma, wet; a ywet ma, lahpet " ( အသီးမှာသရက်၊ အသားမှာဝက်၊ အရွက်မှာလက်ဖက်။ ). 
 
 ^   The traditional Burmese proverb reads  မန္တလေးစကား ရန်ကုန်အကြွား မော်လမြိုင်အစား . 
 
 
 References [ edit ] 
 
 
 ^   Tan, Desmond, 1966– (2017).  Burma Superstar : addictive recipes from the crossroads of Southeast Asia . Leahy, Kate,, Lee, John, 1971– (First ed.). Berkeley.  ISBN   9781607749509 .  OCLC   954719901 . {{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   e   f   g   h   Duguid, Naomi (27 November 2012).  Burma: Rivers of Flavor . Random House of Canada.  ISBN   978-0-307-36217-9 . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   e   f   g   h   i   Aye, MiMi (13 June 2019).  Mandalay: Recipes and Tales from a Burmese Kitchen . Bloomsbury Publishing.  ISBN   978-1-4729-5948-5 . 
 
 ^  a   b   Topich, William J.; Leitich, Keith A. (2013).  The History of Myanmar . ABC-CLIO.  ISBN   978-0-313-35724-4 . 
 
 ^   Heiss, Mary Lou; Heiss, Robert J. (23 March 2011).  The Story of Tea: A Cultural History and Drinking Guide . Potter/Ten Speed/Harmony/Rodale.  ISBN   978-1-60774-172-5 . 
 
 ^   Driem, George L. van (14 January 2019).  The Tale of Tea: A Comprehensive History of Tea from Prehistoric Times to the Present Day . BRILL.  ISBN   978-90-04-39360-8 . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   e   Driem, George L. van (14 January 2019).  The Tale of Tea: A Comprehensive History of Tea from Prehistoric Times to the Present Day . BRILL.  ISBN   978-90-04-39360-8 . 
 
 ^   Seekins, Donald M. (27 March 2017).  Historical Dictionary of Burma (Myanmar) . Rowman & Littlefield.  ISBN   978-1-5381-0183-4 . 
 
 ^   Cumo, Christopher (25 February 2015).  The Ongoing Columbian Exchange: Stories of Biological and Economic Transfer in World History: Stories of Biological and Economic Transfer in World History . ABC-CLIO.  ISBN   978-1-61069-796-5 . 
 
 ^   "မန္တလေးက ခနုံထုပ်" .  The Voice  (in Burmese) . Retrieved  15 November  2019 . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   Khin Maung Saw.  "Burmese Cuisine: Its Unique Style and Changes after British Annexation" . Retrieved  4 October  2012 . 
 
 ^   Yi YI (1982).  "Life at the Burmese Court under the Konbaung Kings" .  Burma Historical Research Department Silver Jubilee Publication . 
 
 ^   Meyer, Arthur L.; Jon M. Vann (2003).  The Appetizer Atlas: A World of Small Bites . John Wiley and Sons. p.  276 .  ISBN   978-0-471-41102-4 . 
 
 ^  a   b   "Myanmar Traditional Foods" .  Myanmar.com . Archived from  the original  on 13 October 2012 . Retrieved  4 October  2012 . 
 
 ^   Nway Nway Ei (2020).  "A Comparative Study of the French and Myanmar Table Manners"   (PDF) .  Mandalay University of Foreign Languages Research Journal .  11 . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   e   Saw Myat Yin (2011).  Culture Shock! Myanmar: A Survival Guide to Customs and Etiquette . Marshall Cavendish Corporation.  ISBN   9780761458722 . 
 
 ^   Saw Myat Yin (2007).  Culture Shock!: Myanmar . Singapore: Marshall Cavendish Inc. p. 133.  ISBN   978-0-7614-5410-6 . 
 
 ^  a   b   Devendra, C.; Devendra, C.; Thomas, D.; Jabbar, M.A.; Kudo, H.; Thomas, D.; Jabbar, M.A.; Kudo, H.  Improvement of livestock production in crop-animal systems in rainfed agro-ecological zones of South-East Asia . ILRI. p. 33. 
 
 ^   Gesteland, Richard R.; Georg F. Seyk (2002).  Marketing across cultures in Asia . Copenhagen Business School Press DK. p. 156.  ISBN   978-87-630-0094-9 . 
 
 ^   U Khin Win (1991).  A century of rice improvement in Burma . International Rice Research Institute. pp. 27, 44.  ISBN   978-971-22-0024-3 . 
 
 ^   Meyer, Arthur L.; Jon M. Vann (2003).  The Appetizer Atlas: A World of Small Bites . John Wiley and Sons. p.  276 .  ISBN   978-0-471-41102-4 . 
 
 ^   Simoons, Frederick J. (1994).  Eat not this flesh: food avoidances from prehistory to the present . Univ of Wisconsin Press. p. 120.  ISBN   978-0-299-14254-4 . 
 
 ^   Spiro, Melford (1982).  Buddhism and society: a great tradition and its Burmese vicissitudes . University of California Press. p. 46.  ISBN   0-520-04672-2 . 
 
 ^   Hardiman, John Percy (1900).  Gazetteer of Upper Burma and the Shan States . Vol. 2. Government of Burma. pp. 93–94. 
 
 ^  a   b   Charney, Michael (2007). "Demographic Growth, Agricultural Expansion and Livestock in the Lower Chindwin in the Eighteenth and Nineteenth Centuries".  In Greg Bankoff, P. Boomgaard (ed.).  A history of natural resources in Asia: the wealth of nature . MacMillan. pp.  236 –40.  ISBN   978-1-4039-7736-6 . 
 
 ^   King, Winston L. (2001).  In the hope of Nibbana: the ethics of Theravada Buddhism . Vol. 2. Pariyatti. p. 295.  ISBN   978-1-928706-08-3 . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   Richmond, Simon; Eimer, David; Karlin, Adam; Louis, Regis St; Ray, Nick (2017).  Myanmar (Burma) . Lonely Planet.  ISBN   978-1-78657-546-3 . 
 
 ^   Thaw Kaung  (8 May 2014).  "Myanmar Food: Traditional and Change" .  TODAY .  Archived  from the original on 7 May 2018 . Retrieved  13 January  2021 . 
 
 ^   Janssen, Peter (25 September 2012).  "Good food in Rangoon, seriously" .  Yahoo! 7 . Archived from  the original  on 27 September 2012 . Retrieved  4 October  2012 . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   Ma Thanegi.  "A World filled with Tea" .  Myanmar Times  vol.6 no.113. Archived from  the original  on 27 September 2007 . Retrieved  1 April  2007 . 
 
 ^  a   b   "The Travelling Gourmet" .  Myanmar Times  no.37. Archived from  the original  on 27 September 2007 . Retrieved  1 April  2007 . 
 
 ^   "ရှမ်းပဲပုပ် ရောင်းလိုအားထက်ဝယ်လိုအားများ – သတင်းများ" .  Myanmar National Trade Portal  (in Burmese) . Retrieved  14 January  2021 . 
 
 ^   "ပုံးရည်ကြီးလုပ်ငန်းများ ဈေးကွက်ချဲ့ထွင်ရန် နည်းပညာနှင့်ငွေကြေး အကူအညီပေးမည်" .  7Day News – ၇ ရက်နေ့စဉ် သတင်း  (in Burmese). 3 April 2017.  Archived  from the original on 16 January 2021 . Retrieved  14 January  2021 . 
 
 ^  a   b   Tun, Ye Tint; IRIE, Kenji; SEIN, THAN; SHIRATA, Kazuto; TOYOHARA, Hidekazu; KIKUCHI, Fumio; FUJIMAKI, Hiroshi (2006),  Diverse Utilization of Myanmar Rice with Varied Amylose Contents , Japanese Society for Tropical Agriculture,  doi : 10.11248/jsta1957.50.42 
 
 ^   Robert, Claudia Saw Lwin; Pe, Win; Hutton, Wendy (4 February 2014).  The Food of Myanmar: Authentic Recipes from the Land of the Golden Pagodas . Tuttle Publishing.  ISBN   978-1-4629-1368-8 . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   Marks, Copeland; Thein, Aung (8 September 1994).  The Burmese Kitchen: Recipes from the Golden Land . Rowman & Littlefield.  ISBN   9781590772607 . 
 
 ^   "ဒံပေါက် (Biryani)" .  Food Magazine Myanmar  (in Burmese). 12 September 2019 . Retrieved  25 April  2020 . 
 
 ^   "Top 10: Biryani Restaurants in Yangon" .  The Myanmar Times . 3 January 2020 . Retrieved  25 April  2020 . 
 
 ^   Sofia.  "ထမင်းချဉ် (Shan Traditional Rice Cake)" .  Food Magazine Myanmar . Archived from  the original  on 18 December 2017. 
 
 ^   "သင်္ကြန်ထမင်းစားပြီး ရင်အေးကြစေဖို့" .  မဇ္ဈိမ မာလ်တီမီဒီယာ  (in Burmese). 8 April 2017 . Retrieved  2 April  2018 . {{ cite news }} :  CS1 maint: url-status ( link ) 
 
 ^  a   b   Myanmar-English Dictionary . Myanmar Language Commission. 1993.  ISBN   1-881265-47-1 . 
 
 ^   "တစ်နေ့တခြား လူကြိုက်များလာတဲ့ မြိတ်ဒေသအစားစာ ကတ်ကြေးကိုက်" .  Mizzima Myanmar News and Insight . Retrieved  8 April  2019 . 
 
 ^   "ပန်းသေးခေါက်ဆွဲ (Pan Thay Fried Noodle)" .  WE Media  (in Burmese).  Archived  from the original on 23 December 2019 . Retrieved  8 January  2021 . 
 
 ^   "ကွေတာလန်းနဲ့ ဆီဥကြော်၊ မြန်မာပြည်က တရုတ်အစားအသောက်များ" .  BBC News မြန်မာ  (in Burmese) . Retrieved  14 January  2021 . {{ cite news }} :  CS1 maint: url-status ( link ) 
 
 ^   "မုန့်ဟင်းခါး အကြောင်း သိကောင်းစရာ" .  MyFood Myanmar  (in Burmese). 5 April 2016.  Archived  from the original on 9 January 2018 . Retrieved  9 January  2021 . 
 
 ^   "အရသာပြည့်စုံတဲ့ အုန်းနို့ခေါက်ဆွဲတစ်ပွဲ ဘယ်လို ချက်မလဲ" .  How to Cook  (in Burmese).  Archived  from the original on 15 January 2021 . Retrieved  14 January  2021 . 
 
 ^   Gross, Matt (20 September 2012).  "Burma Blossoms" .  AFAR .  Archived  from the original on 15 January 2013 . Retrieved  14 January  2021 . 
 
 ^   "ဘဲသား ကော်ရည်ခေါက်ဆွဲ" .  Wutyee Food House  (in Burmese).  Archived  from the original on 5 July 2012 . Retrieved  14 January  2021 . 
 
 ^   Thiha Htun.  "ရှမ်းခေါက်ဆွဲကို ကိုယ်တိုင်လုပ်စားကြမယ်" .  Duwun  (in Burmese).  Archived  from the original on 14 January 2021 . Retrieved  14 January  2021 . 
 
 ^   Duguid, Naomi (27 November 2012).  Burma: Rivers of Flavor . Random House of Canada.  ISBN   978-0-307-36217-9 . 
 
 ^   Aye, MiMi (13 June 2019).  Mandalay: Recipes and Tales from a Burmese Kitchen . Bloomsbury Publishing.  ISBN   978-1-4729-5948-5 . 
 
 ^   "နန်းကြီးသုပ် ပြုလုပ်နည်း" .  MyFood Myanmar  (in Burmese).  Archived  from the original on 21 August 2018 . Retrieved  14 January  2021 . 
 
 ^   "စမူဆာသုပ်‌" .  WE  (in Burmese).  Archived  from the original on 11 January 2021 . Retrieved  9 January  2021 . 
 
 ^   "Burmese curry restaurants" .  Austin Bush . Retrieved  8 January  2021 . 
 
 ^   Richmond, Simon; Eimer, David; Karlin, Adam; Louis, Regis St; Ray, Nick (2017).  Myanmar (Burma) . Lonely Planet.  ISBN   978-1-78657-546-3 . 
 
 ^   "ဝက်သားသုံးထပ်သား ဆီပြန်ဟင်း" .  MyFood Myanmar  (in Burmese). 11 December 2015.  Archived  from the original on 10 January 2021 . Retrieved  8 January  2021 . 
 
 ^   Aye, MiMi (13 June 2019).  Mandalay: Recipes and Tales from a Burmese Kitchen . Bloomsbury Publishing.  ISBN   978-1-4729-5948-5 . 
 
 ^   "Bachelor's Chicken Curry" .  Burmalicious . Archived from  the original  on 8 December 2015 . Retrieved  8 January  2021 . 
 
 ^   "မဆလာနံ့သင်းသင်း ဆိတ်သားဟင်းတစ်ခွက်" .  How to Cook  (in Burmese).  Archived  from the original on 9 January 2021 . Retrieved  8 January  2021 . 
 
 ^   "လျှာရင်းမြက်စေမယ့် နူးနူးအိအိ ငါးသလောက်ပေါင်း" .  How to Cook  (in Burmese).  Archived  from the original on 9 January 2021 . Retrieved  8 January  2021 . 
 
 ^   "ကြက်သား ပလာတာ" .  Wutyee Food House  (in Burmese).  Archived  from the original on 7 September 2013 . Retrieved  14 January  2021 . 
 
 ^   "လှည်းတန်းတစ်ဝိုက်မုန့်စားကြမယ်" .  Yangon Life  (in Burmese) . Retrieved  14 January  2021 . 
 
 ^   Travel, D. K. (20 September 2016).  DK Eyewitness Myanmar (Burma) Travel Guide . Penguin.  ISBN   978-1-4654-5982-4 . 
 
 ^   "အစိမ်းကြော် ပူပူလေး ကြော်စားကြရအောင်" .  WE  (in Burmese).  Archived  from the original on 10 July 2018 . Retrieved  14 January  2021 . 
 
 ^   "သထုံငါးပေါင်းထုပ်နှင့် ထမင်းဝါ" .  MDN – Myanmar DigitalNews  (in Burmese) . Retrieved  14 January  2021 . 
 
 ^   "("၀" အစီအစဉ်) "အစားအစာ" ရှမ်းဝက်သားချဉ်ပြုလုပ်နည်းနဲ့ကြက်သားချဉ်စော်ခါးသီးဟင်းရည်" .  Myanma Radio and Television  (in Burmese) . Retrieved  14 January  2021 . 
 
 ^   Kime, Tom (18 February 2008).  Asian Bites: A Feast of Flavors from Turkey to India to Japan . Penguin.  ISBN   978-0-7566-4326-3 . 
 
 ^   "မုန့်လက်ဆောင်း" .  Yangon Life . Archived from  the original  on 26 March 2019 . Retrieved  26 March  2019 . 
 
 ^   "မြန်မာ့ ရိုးရာ စားစရာ ပုသိမ် ဟလဝါ" .  မြဝတီ  (in Burmese) . Retrieved  15 November  2019 . 
 
 ^   "အုန်းနို့ငှက်ပျောပေါင်း" .  Yangon Life  (in Burmese). Archived from  the original  on 15 January 2021 . Retrieved  14 January  2021 . 
 
 ^   "DATA ANALYSIS OVERVIEW OF THE FRUIT SECTOR IN MYANMAR" .  Food and Fertilizer Technology Center . Retrieved  14 January  2021 . 
 
 ^   Kyaing, May Sandar; Thandar, San; Myint, Moe Moe; Wai, Khaing Phyo; Htwe, Honey Thet Paing; Nyein, Chan Myae; Han, Jeung-Sul; Naing, Aung Htay (March 2023).  "Characterization of Fruit Quality Traits and Biochemical Properties in Different Myanmar Mango Cultivars during Ripening Stages" .  International Journal of Plant Biology .  14  (1): 14–27.  doi : 10.3390/ijpb14010002 .  ISSN   2037-0164 . 
 
 ^   "Current situation of banana R&D in Myanmar".  Advancing banana and plantain R&D in Asia and the Pacific .  13 : 97–99. November 2004. 
 
 ^  a   b   Schweitzer, Sharon (7 April 2015).  Access to Asia: Your Multicultural Guide to Building Trust, Inspiring Respect, and Creating Long-Lasting Business Relationships . John Wiley & Sons.  ISBN   978-1-118-91902-6 . 
 
 ^   "Drinking and Eating Burmese Tea" .  Matcha-Tea.com . 4 February 2016 . Retrieved  13 March  2019 . 
 
 ^   "မုန့်လက်ဆောင်း" .  Yangon Life  (in Burmese). 15 April 2016. 
 
 ^   "Coffee and tea connect daily life of the locals" .  The Myanmar Times . 30 January 2018 . Retrieved  16 January  2021 . 
 
 ^   "I toddy you so" .  The Myanmar Times . 25 May 2018 . Retrieved  16 January  2021 . 
 
 ^   "Shan moonshine maker captures the Kachin spirit" .  Myanmar Mix . Retrieved  16 January  2021 . 
 
 ^  a   b   "Chin State" .  MYANMORE . Retrieved  16 January  2021 . 
 
 ^  a   b   "Myanmar's Evolving Tea Culture" .  Myanmar Insider . 21 June 2018.  Archived  from the original on 25 June 2018 . Retrieved  16 January  2021 . 
 
 ^   "The Rich Culture and Tradition of Tea in Myanmar" .  MVA . 5 October 2015.  Archived  from the original on 22 January 2021 . Retrieved  16 January  2021 . 
 
 ^   Kraig, Bruce; Ph.D, Colleen Taylor Sen (9 September 2013).  Street Food around the World: An Encyclopedia of Food and Culture: An Encyclopedia of Food and Culture . ABC-CLIO.  ISBN   978-1-59884-955-4 . 
 
 ^   "Top 10: Street Foods" .  The Myanmar Times . 14 June 2019 . Retrieved  16 January  2021 . 
 
 ^   "Street vendors to be banned on Yangon's busiest roads" .  The Myanmar Times . 17 November 2016 . Retrieved  16 January  2021 . 
 
 ^   Smith-Forbes, Charles James Forbes (1878).  British Burma and Its People: Being Sketches of Native Manners, Customs, and Religion . J. Murray. 
 
 ^   Eyewitness, D. K. (20 September 2016).  DK Eyewitness Myanmar (Burma) . Penguin.  ISBN   978-0-7440-2350-3 . 
 
 
 Further reading [ edit ] 
 Myanmar Business Today; Print Edition, 27 February 2014.  A Roadmap to Building Myanmar into the Food Basket of Asia , by David DuByne & Hishamuddin Koh 
 External links [ edit ] 
 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons has media related to  Cuisine of Myanmar . 
 
 Photo guide to eating in Myanmar 
 Guide to eating vegetarian in Myanmar 
 Mi Mi Khaing ,  Cook and Entertain the Burmese Way . Rangoon, 1975 
 v t e Burmese cuisine Salads 
 Burmese salads 
 Cassia flower bud salad 
 Fermented tea leaf salad 
 Khauk swè thoke 
 Nan gyi thohk 
 Mont di 
 Papaya salad 
 Rice dishes 
 Burmese fried rice 
 Buttered rice 
 Coconut rice 
 Congee 
 Danpauk 
 Glutinous rice 
 Hsi htamin 
 Htamanè 
 Sticky rice in bamboo 
 Htamin jin 
 Milk rice 
 Thingyan rice 
 Noodle dishes 
 Dry 
 Kat kyi kaik 
 Sigyet khauk swè 
 Noodle soups 
 Kawyay khauk swe 
 Kya zan hinga 
 Kyay oh 
 Meeshay 
 Misua 
 Mohinga 
 Nam ngiao 
 Ohn no khao swè 
 Other dishes 
 Burmese curry 
 Chicken curry 
 Goat curry 
 Nga thalaut paung 
 Shrimp curry 
 Burmese fritters 
 Baya gyaw 
 Banana fritters 
 Samuza 
 Burmese tofu 
 Lahpet 
 Breads 
 Chapati 
 Nanbya 
 Palata 
 Puri 
 Toshay 
 Soups 
 Thizone hin 
 Talabaw 
 Snacks 
 Burmese mont 
 Bein mont 
 Curry puff 
 Halawa 
 Pathein halawa 
 Htamane 
 Gyalabi 
 Khanon i 
 Khanon htok 
 Khauk mont 
 Kulfi 
 Kyaukkyaw 
 Ladu 
 Malaing lone 
 Masakat 
 Mayway mont 
 Mont baung 
 Mont kalama 
 Mont kywe the 
 Mont lin maya 
 Mont lone yay baw 
 Nankhatai 
 Nga mont 
 Ngapyaw baung 
 Ounhmangu 
 Pashu mont 
 Sanwin makin 
 Shwe htamin 
 Thagu 
 Thagu byin 
 Htanthi mont 
 Htoe mont 
 Burmese fruit preserves 
 Burmese pork offal skewers 
 Kawpyan 
 Drinks and beverages 
 Burmese tea 
 Burmese milk tea 
 Mont let saung 
 Palm wine 
 Phaluda 
 Shalabat 
 Sugarcane juice 
 Shwe yin aye 
 Yogurt 
 Zozu 
 Seasonings and ingredients 
 Dried shrimp 
 Jaggery 
 Ngachin 
 Ngapi 
 Mango pickle 
 Mohnyin tjin 
 Paw hsan hmwe 
 Pon ye gyi 
 Miscellaneous 
 Beef taboo 
 Daunglan 
 Satuditha 
 Tea culture 
 Teahouse 
 Tiffin carrier 
 Zhonghe Myanmar Street 
 
   Myanmar portal 
   Food portal 
   List of Burmese dishes 
   List of ingredients in Burmese cuisine 
   Category 
 
 v t e Myanmar   articles Myanmar is also known as  Burma History 
 Prehistory 
 Pyu city-states 
 Thaton Kingdom 
 Bagan Kingdom 
 Myinsaing Kingdom 
 Pinya Kingdom 
 Sagaing Kingdom 
 Kingdom of Ava 
 Prome Kingdom 
 Hanthawaddy Kingdom 
 Kingdom of Mrauk U 
 Toungoo dynasty 
 First Toungoo Empire 
 Restored Hanthawaddy Kingdom 
 Konbaung dynasty 
 Shan States 
 Karenni States 
 British rule 
 Japanese occupation 
 Union of Burma 
 Socialist Republic 
 8888 Uprising 
 State Peace and Development Council 
 2007 protests 
 2011–2015 political reforms 
 2021 coup 
 Protests 
 Civil war 
 Geography 
 Borders 
 Cities 
 Climate 
 Deforestation 
 Ecoregions 
 Islands 
 Lakes 
 Mountains 
 Protected areas 
 Rivers 
 Wildlife 
 Earthquakes 
 Volcanoes 
 Politics 
 Administrative divisions 
 Constitution 
 Corruption 
 Elections 
 Foreign relations 
 Human rights 
 LGBT 
 Internal conflicts 
 Law enforcement 
 Military 
 military rule 
 commander-in-chief 
 Parliament 
 State Administration Council 
 Political parties 
 President 
 list 
 Prime Minister 
 list 
 Economy 
 Agriculture 
 Central bank 
 Opium production 
 Telecommunications 
 Myanmar kyat (currency) 
 Tourism 
 Transportation 
 Units of measurement 
 Society 
 Crime 
 Demographics 
 Education 
 Ethnic groups 
 Health 
 Languages 
 Religion 
 Women 
 Prostitution 
 Sex trafficking 
 Culture 
 Anthem 
 Coat of arms 
 Calendar 
 Censorship 
 Cinema 
 Clothing 
 Cuisine 
 Dance 
 Etymology 
 Festivals 
 Flag 
 Folklore 
 Literature 
 Media 
 Music 
 National symbols 
 Public holidays 
 Tattooing 
 Twelve Auspicious Rites 
 Weddings 
 
   Myanmar portal 
 Category 
 Outline of Myanmar 
 
 v t e Asian cuisine Sovereign states 
 Afghanistan 
 Armenia 
 Azerbaijan 
 Bahrain 
 Bangladesh 
 Bhutan 
 Brunei 
 Burma (Myanmar) 
 Cambodia 
 China 
 Cyprus 
 East Timor (Timor-Leste) 
 Egypt 
 Georgia 
 India 
 Indonesia 
 Iran 
 Iraq 
 Israel 
 Japan 
 Jordan 
 Kazakhstan 
 North Korea 
 South Korea 
 Kuwait 
 Kyrgyzstan 
 Laos 
 Lebanon 
 Malaysia 
 Maldives 
 Mongolia 
 Nepal 
 Oman 
 Pakistan 
 Philippines 
 Qatar 
 Russia 
 Saudi Arabia 
 Singapore 
 Sri Lanka 
 Syria 
 Tajikistan 
 Thailand 
 Turkey 
 Turkmenistan 
 United Arab Emirates 
 Uzbekistan 
 Vietnam 
 Yemen 
 States with limited recognition 
 Abkhazia 
 Artsakh 
 Northern Cyprus 
 Palestine 
 South Ossetia 
 Taiwan 
 Dependencies and other territories 
 British Indian Ocean Territory 
 Christmas Island 
 Cocos (Keeling) Islands 
 Hong Kong 
 Macau 
 
 v t e Cuisines Continental 
 African 
 North 
 West 
 list 
 Americas 
 Caribbean 
 North 
 South 
 list 
 Asian 
 Caucasian 
 Central 
 Indian subcontinent 
 Levantine 
 list 
 European 
 Balkan 
 Central 
 Eastern 
 list 
 Oceanic 
 Intercontinental
 Global 
 Latin American 
 Mediterranean 
 Middle Eastern 
 National  and regional 
 Afghan 
 Albanian 
 Algerian 
 American 
 Californian 
 Floribbean 
 Hawaiian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Lowcountry (South Carolina) 
 New England 
 New Mexico 
 Pacific Northwest 
 Pennsylvania Dutch 
 Puerto Rican 
 Southern US 
 Southwest US 
 Texas 
 Angolan 
 Argentine 
 Armenian 
 Australian 
 Austrian 
 Azerbaijani 
 Bahraini 
 Bangladeshi 
 Barbadian 
 Belarusian 
 Belgian 
 Belizean 
 Beninese 
 Bhutanese 
 Bolivian 
 Bosnian-Herzegovinian 
 Botswana 
 Brazilian 
 British 
 Channel Islands 
 English 
 Gibraltarian 
 Northern Irish 
 Saint Helena 
 Scottish 
 Welsh 
 Bruneian 
 Bulgarian 
 Burkinabé 
 Burmese 
 Burundian 
 Cambodian 
 Cameroonian 
 Canadian 
 Acadian 
 Québécois 
 Central African Republic 
 Chadian 
 Chilean 
 Chinese 
 Cantonese 
 Hong Kong 
 Macanese 
 Tibetan 
 Xinjiang 
 Colombian 
 Congolese 
 Corsican 
 Croatian 
 Cuban 
 Cypriot 
 Czech 
 Danish 
 Faroese 
 Greenlandic 
 Djiboutian 
 Dominican 
 Dominican Republic 
 Dutch 
 East Timorese 
 Ecuadorian 
 Egyptian 
 Emirati 
 Equatorial Guinean 
 Eritrean 
 Estonian 
 Ethiopian 
 Fijian 
 Filipino 
 Finnish 
 French 
 Occitan 
 French Guianan 
 Gabonese 
 Gambian 
 Georgian 
 German 
 Ghanaian 
 Greek 
 Cretan 
 Epirotic 
 Greek Macedonian 
 Heptanesean 
 Guatemalan 
 Guinea-Bissauan 
 Guinean 
 Haitian 
 Honduran 
 Hungarian 
 Icelandic 
 Indian 
 Arunachalese 
 Assamese 
 Bengali 
 Bihari 
 Goan 
 Gujarati 
 Himachal Pradesh 
 Kashmiri 
 Jharkhandi 
 Karnataka 
 Kerala 
 Maharashtrian 
 Manipuri 
 Meghalayan 
 Mizo 
 Naga 
 Odia 
 Punjabi 
 Rajasthani 
 Sikkimese 
 Sindhi 
 Tamil 
 Telangana 
 Telugu 
 Indonesian 
 Acehnese 
 Balinese 
 Banjar 
 Batak 
 Betawi 
 Indo 
 Javanese 
 Madurese 
 Makassar 
 Minahasan 
 Minangkabau 
 Palembangese 
 Sundanese 
 Iranian 
 Iraqi 
 Irish 
 Israeli 
 Italian 
 Abruzzese 
 Ligurian 
 Lombard 
 Lucanian 
 Neapolitan 
 Roman 
 Sardinian 
 Sicilian 
 Venetian 
 Ivorian 
 Jamaican 
 Japanese 
 Okinawan 
 Jordanian 
 Kazakh 
 Kenyan 
 Korean 
 North Korean 
 South Korean 
 Kosovan 
 Kuwaiti 
 Kyrgyz 
 Lao 
 Latvian 
 Lebanese 
 Lesotho 
 Liberian 
 Libyan 
 Liechtensteiner 
 Lithuanian 
 Luxembourg 
 Macedonian 
 Malagasy 
 Malawian 
 Malaysian 
 Sabahan 
 Sarawakian 
 Maldivian 
 Malian 
 Maltese 
 Mauritanian 
 Mauritian 
 Mexican 
 Moldovan 
 Monégasque 
 Mongolian 
 Montenegrin 
 Moroccan 
 Mozambican 
 Namibian 
 Nauruan 
 Nepalese 
 New Zealand 
 Nicaraguan 
 Niger 
 Nigerian 
 Niuean 
 Norwegian 
 Omani 
 Pakistani 
 Palestinian 
 Panamanian 
 Peruvian 
 Polish 
 Portuguese 
 Qatari 
 Romanian  (incl.  Transylvanian Saxon ) 
 Russian 
 Bashkir 
 Chechen 
 Circassian 
 Komi 
 Mordovian 
 Sakha 
 Tatar 
 Udmurt 
 Yamal 
 Rwandan 
 Saint Lucian 
 Salvadoran 
 Sammarinese 
 São Tomé and Príncipe 
 Saudi Arabian 
 Senegalese 
 Serbian 
 Seychellois 
 Sierra Leonean 
 Singaporean 
 Slovak 
 Slovenian 
 Somali 
 South African 
 Spanish 
 Andalusian 
 Asturian 
 Balearic 
 Basque 
 Canarian 
 Cantabrian 
 Catalan 
 Extremaduran 
 Galician 
 Manchegan 
 Valencian 
 Sri Lankan 
 Sudanese 
 Swazi 
 Swedish 
 Swiss 
 Syrian 
 Taiwanese 
 Tajik 
 Tanzanian 
 Zanzibari 
 Thai 
 Togolese 
 Tunisian 
 Turkish 
 Turkmen 
 Trinidadian and Tobagonian 
 Ugandan 
 Ukrainian 
 Uruguayan 
 Uzbek 
 Venezuelan 
 Vietnamese 
 Western Saharan 
 Yemeni 
 Zambian 
 Zimbabwean 
 Ethnic 
 Ainu 
 Arab 
 Indonesian 
 Aromanian 
 Assyrian 
 Balochi 
 Berber 
 Cajun 
 Chinese 
 American 
 Canadian 
 Chifa 
 Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Crimean Tatar 
 Greek American 
 Hazaragi 
 Indian 
 Anglo-Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Indigenous American 
 Inuit 
 Italian American 
 Kurdish 
 Livonian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Malay 
 Ossetian 
 Parsi 
 Pashtun 
 Peranakan 
 Romani 
 Sámi 
 Soul food 
 Sylheti 
 Transylvanian Saxon 
 Yup'ik 
 Religious 
 Buddhist 
 Christian 
 Goan Catholic 
 Mangalorean Catholic 
 Mennonite 
 Hindu 
 Islamic 
 Chinese 
 Ital 
 Jain 
 Jewish 
 American 
 Ashkenazi 
 Bukharan 
 Ethiopian 
 Mizrahi 
 Sephardic 
 Syrian 
 Ritual slaughter 
 Sikh 
 Historical 
 Ancient Egyptian 
 Ancient Greek 
 Ancient Israelite 
 Ancient Roman 
 Antebellum America 
 Aztec 
 Byzantine 
 Early modern European 
 Historical Chinese 
 Historical Indian subcontinent 
 Historical North Indian and Pakistani 
 History of agriculture 
 History of alcoholic drinks 
 History of bread 
 History of seafood 
 History of vegetarianism 
 Historical Argentine 
 Historical Japanese 
 Inca 
 Mayan 
 Muisca 
 Mughal 
 Medieval 
 Ottoman 
 Peasant 
 Soviet 
 Thirteen Colonies 
 Styles 
 Classique 
 Fast food 
 Fusion 
 New American 
 Eurasian 
 Haute 
 Molecular gastronomy 
 Note by Note 
 Nouvelle 
 Lists 
 List of cuisines 
 List of historical cuisines 
 Lists of prepared foods 
 Related 
 Cookbook 
 Cooking 
 Culinary arts 
 Drink 
 Food 
 history 
 Diet 
 Meal preparation 
 
   Food portal 
   Drink portal 
   Category 
   Commons 
   Cookbook 
   WikiProject 
   Outline 
 
  
NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw2380
Cached time: 20230310232628
Cache expiry: 1814400
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc, no‐toc‐conversion]
CPU time usage: 1.524 seconds
Real time usage: 1.769 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 27946/1000000
Post‐expand include size: 407979/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 29357/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 60/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 306835/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.827/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 18772169/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/400
 
 
Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1433.221      1 -total
 33.79%  484.247      1 Template:Reflist
 14.86%  212.931     35 Template:Cite_book
 14.48%  207.568      4 Template:Navbox
 10.86%  155.684     42 Template:Cite_web
 10.40%  149.072      1 Template:Asian_topic
  8.47%  121.377      1 Template:Culture_of_Burma
  8.27%  118.510      1 Template:Culture_of_region
  8.09%  115.931      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  7.58%  108.647     89 Template:My
 
  Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:idhash:2249745-0!canonical and timestamp 20230310232626 and revision id 1143677787. Rendering was triggered because: page-view
  
 esi <esi:include src="/esitest-fa8a495983347898/content" />  
 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Burmese_cuisine&oldid=1143677787 " 
 Categories :  Burmese cuisine Burmese culture Southeast Asian cuisine Hidden categories:  Articles containing Burmese-language text CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list CS1 Burmese-language sources (my) CS1 maint: url-status Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata EngvarB from November 2015 Use dmy dates from November 2015 Articles to be expanded from January 2021 All articles to be expanded Articles using small message boxes Commons category link is on Wikidata Region topic template using suffix 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  This page was last edited on 9 March 2023, at 06:13  (UTC) . 
 Text is available under the  Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0 ;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the  Terms of Use  and  Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the  Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. 
 
 
 Privacy policy 
 About Wikipedia 
 Disclaimers 
 Contact Wikipedia 
 Mobile view 
 Developers 
 Statistics 
 Cookie statement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
