
 
 
 Jump to content 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle sidebar 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Create account Log in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Personal tools 
 
 
 
 
   Create account   Log in 
 
 
 
 
		Pages for logged out editors  learn more 
 
 
 Contributions Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Navigation 
 
 
 Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate 
 
 
 
 
 Contribute 
 
 
 Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file 
 
 
 
 
 Tools 
 
 
 What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item 
 
 
 
 
 Print/export 
 
 
 Download as PDF Printable version 
 
 
 
 
 In other projects 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons 
 
 
 
 
 Languages 
 
 On this Wikipedia the language links are at the top of the page across from the article title.  Go to top . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CentralNotice  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Contents 
 move to sidebar 
 hide 
 
 
 
 
 (Top) 
 
 
 
 
 
 1 Diet 
 
 
				Toggle Diet subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 1.1 Grains 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.2 Meat 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.3 Seafood 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.4 Non-meat animal products 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.5 Sweets 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 Drink 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 Nutrition 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4 Food preservation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5 Tableware and customs 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6 See also 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 7 Notes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8 References 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 9 Sources 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 10 External links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
						Toggle the table of contents
					 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle the table of contents 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Byzantine cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 14 languages 
 
 
 
 Azərbaycanca বাংলা Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Français Bahasa Indonesia Italiano ქართული Македонски Русский Türkçe Українська 中文 
 Edit links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Article Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 English 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 More 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
 
 
 Historical  regional cuisine 
 This article includes a list of general  references , but  it lacks sufficient corresponding  inline citations .  Please help to  improve  this article by  introducing  more precise citations.   ( March 2013 )  ( Learn how and when to remove this template message ) 
 This article  contains  weasel words : vague phrasing that often accompanies  biased  or  unverifiable  information .  Such statements should be  clarified or removed .   ( September 2019 ) 
 Byzantine culture 
 Aristocracy and bureaucracy 
 Army 
 Art 
 Architecture 
 Calendar 
 Cities 
 Coinage 
 Cuisine 
 Dance 
 Diplomacy 
 Dress 
 Economy 
 Gardens 
 Law 
 Literature 
 Medicine 
 Music 
 People 
 Science 
 v t e 
 Byzantine cuisine  was the continuation of local  ancient Greek cuisine ,  ancient Roman cuisine  and  Mediterranean cuisine .  Byzantine trading with foreigners  brought in  grains , sugar,  livestock , fruits, vegetables and  spices  that would otherwise be limited to specific geographical climates. 
 Cooks experimented with new combinations of food, creating two styles in the process. These were the Eastern ( Asia Minor  and the Eastern Aegean), consisting of Byzantine  cuisine  supplemented by trade items, and a leaner style primarily based on local  Greek cuisine culture .
 
 
 Diet [ edit ] 
 Byzantine food consumption varied by class, location and time period. The Imperial Palace was a metropolis of spices and exotic recipes; guests were entertained with fruits, honey-cakes and syrupy  sweetmeats . Ordinary people ate more conservatively.
 Thanks to the location of Constantinople between popular trade routes, Byzantine cuisine was augmented by cultural influences from several locales—such as  Lombard Italy , the  Sassanid Empire , and an emerging  Muslim caliphate . The resulting melting pot continued during  Ottoman times  and therefore modern  Turkish cuisine ,  Greek cuisine  and  Balkan cuisine  have many similarities, and use a very wide range of ingredients.
 The Byzantines produced various cheeses, including  anthotiro ,  kefalotyri  and  Feta . [1]  They also relished shellfish and fish, both fresh and salt-water. They prepared eggs to make famous omelettes — called  sphoungata , i.e. "spongy" — mentioned by  Theodore Prodromos . Every household also kept a supply of  poultry . Salad was very popular; to the amazement of the  Florentines , the Emperor  John VIII Palaiologos  asked for it at most meals on his visit in 1439. [ citation needed ]  During the Middle Byzantine period, it seems that meat consumption increased while bread consumption decreased. [2] : 159  
 Byzantine citizens obtained other kinds of meat by hunting animals like deer and wild boar, a favourite and distinguished occupation of men. They usually hunted with dogs and  hawks , though sometimes employed trapping, netting, and  bird-liming . Larger animals were a more expensive and rare food. Citizens slaughtered  pigs  at the beginning of winter and provided their families with sausages, salt pork, and  lard  for the year. Only upper middle and higher  Byzantines  could afford  lamb . They seldom ate  beef , as they used cattle to cultivate the fields. 
 Middle and lower class citizens in cities such as  Constantinople  and  Thessaloniki  consumed the offerings of the  taverna . The most common form of cooking was  boiling , a tendency which sparked a derisive Byzantine maxim— The lazy cook prepares everything by boiling.   Garos  fermented fish sauce in all its varieties was especially favored as a condiment along with the  umami  flavoring  murri , a fermented barley sauce, which was similar to the modern umami flavoring, the fermented soy product  soy sauce .  Liutprand of Cremona , the ambassador to Constantinople from  Otto I , described being served food covered in an "exceedingly bad fish liquor," [3]  a reference to garos. [ citation needed ] 
 
 Grains [ edit ] 
 The two main grains in Byzantine Anatolia were  wheat  and  barley . [2] : 160–1   Barley has a relatively low nutritional value, and in the Byzantine world it was valued less than wheat and sold for a lower price. [2] : 161    Rye ,  millet ,  oats , and  vetch  were primarily cultivated as animal  fodder  and were not preferred for human consumption. [2] : 161   Millet in particular was not prized by Byzantine authors -  Anna Komnene , for example, called it "food of barbarians". [2] : 162   It was used to make  gruel  and  porridge  such as  trachanas  ( τραχανάς ), and  Symeon Seth  also mentions poor people eating millet mixed with milk. [2] : 162  
 Bread played a major part in the Byzantine diet. [2] : 162   The most valued bread was made from "finely sieved" wheat flour with no other grains mixed in. [2] : 162   Besides wheat and barley, bread was made using rye, millet,  egg yolks , and  chickpeas . [2] : 162    Bulgur  was also eaten. [2] : 161  
 
 Meat [ edit ] 
 Meat was probably not a luxury food in Byzantine times – most people could afford to eat it relatively often. [2] : 167   If the  typikon  of the monastery of St. John the Baptist is anything to go by, a typical Byzantine citizen might eat about two and a half pounds of meat in a single day. [2] : 167   The  Prodromic poems  also describe a cobbler eating meat for four meals in one day: tripe for breakfast, boiled meat for lunch, then meat cooked in wine for the third meal, and finally a  hot pot  for the fourth. [2] : 167    Fresh  meat, however, was mostly eaten by the wealthy, while poorer citizens ate more salted meat. [2] : 167   Dried and salted meat formed was one of the basic rations served to Byzantine soldiers. [2] : 168  
 In general, the Byzantines seem to have especially liked fatty meat. [2] : 167   Many meat dishes were cooked in large amounts of fat. [2] : 167   Meat from livestock was preferred over game meat. [2] : 167   Meat from young animals was especially preferred. [2] : 167   Diverse animal bones found at  Corinth , dated to sometimes after the mid-1200s, indicate that a wide range of meats was eaten during the Late Byzantine period. [2] : 168  
 The single most common preserved meat was salted pork. [2] : 168   Pork was also used as a source of lard and fat, as well as to make sausages. [2] : 167   Different types of sausages, such as  allantia  and  saltsikia , are mentioned in contemporary texts. [2] : 167   The hagiography of  Symeon the Holy Fool  also mentions bacon and a type of fried sausage eaten with mustard. [2] : 167   At the archaeological site of  Gritille  in eastern Turkey, pig bones made up nearly half of the total animal remains, while at other sites it was higher still. [2] : 167   Pork butchers had their own regulatory laws in Section 16 of the  Book of the Eparch . [2] : 168  
 Beef, on the other hand, was less commonly eaten than either pork, sheep, or goat because cattle were mostly used for working in the fields instead. [2] : 167   Meat from adult male goats was considered unappetizing by most Byzantines. [2] : 167  
 Many different birds were eaten. [2] : 168   The most common, based on animal bone finds at Corinth, was chicken. [2] : 168   Poultry was aged by hanging the bird carcasses up to enhance their taste and texture. [2] : 168  
 Meat was cooked in a variety of ways. [2]  It was either roasted or grilled, or boiled, steamed, and marinated in water with salt and herbs. [2] : 167   Innards were boiled or fried. [2] : 167   The  intestines  of animals would sometimes be used to make  Kokoretsi . [4] [5]  Poorer households would also boil the heads and feet of animals. [2] : 167  
 
 Seafood [ edit ] 
 In some regions, fish and seafood formed another important source of animal protein. [2] : 169   Seafood was especially popular on fast days. [2] : 169   Near the sea or rivers, fresh fish was consumed; farther away, fish was dried, salted, or smoked. [2] : 169   Before being preserved this way, the fish was marinated in water mixed with salt and thyme. [2]  Dried fish was eaten by soldiers on expeditions. [2] : 169    Sturgeon  was eaten by wealthier households. [2] : 169   Methods of cooking fish included boiling, frying, baking, grilling, and roasting. [2] : 169   Fish was often served with a sauce. [2] : 169   The Prodromic poems also depict an "unusual" dish of a fish stew with cheeses as well as a different dish involving fish seasoned with cloves, cinnamon, and other spices. [2] : 169   Poorer urban households also ate  tarichos  ( τάριχος ) – salted, pickled fish sold by grocers instead of fishmongers. [2] : 169  
 
 Non-meat animal products [ edit ] 
 Non-meat animal products like eggs and dairy were relatively cheap and provided an important source of nutrients. [2] : 168   Many different types of eggs were eaten, including chicken, goose, duck, partridge, and pheasant. [2] : 168   They could be scrambled or made into omelettes called  sphoungata . [2] : 169   The Prodromic poems mention a dish like this made with onions and other seasonings. [2] : 169   In Byzantine culture, eggs were considered food for people who were sick or fasting. [2] : 168  
 Cheese, another popular food, was derived from cows, sheep, goats, or water buffalo. [2] : 169   It came in various kinds, both hard and soft. [2] : 169    Paphlagonian  cheese was a popular variety eaten in Constantinople. [2] : 169   The Prodromic poems also describe Cretan and Vlach cheese, as well as a kind of soft mountain cheese that probably refers to  cottage cheese . [2] : 169   Cheese could also be curdled, using  rennet , fig juice and leaves, or artichokes. [2] : 169   It could also be breaded with crumbs or meal and then fried in hot oil. [2] : 169  
 Byzantine people also drank milk fairly commonly. [2] : 168   It was considered best to drink it warm, so it was often heated. [2] : 168   People would also drink milk straight from the animal. [2] : 168  
 Fats like butter and lard were used as a substitute for olive oil in colder inland regions that could not support olive tree cultivation. [2]  They were also used as preservatives and, especially in rugged inland areas such as the  Mecitözü  valley, eaten by themselves. [2] : 168  
 Beehives  from  Byzantine Greeks  allowed citizens to procure and sell honey on a large scale. The use of honey was noted in a variety of cooking, pastry and tea recipes. In 1152 a tax was introduced on beekeeping. [6] 
 
 Sweets [ edit ] 
 Honey  was used as the main sweetener. [2] : 171–2    Cane sugar  was also introduced during the Middle Byzantine period, but it was still a luxury product. [2] : 172  
 Many scholars state that Byzantine koptoplakous ( Medieval Greek :  κοπτοπλακοῦς ) and plakountas tetyromenous are the ancestors of modern  baklava  and  tiropita  ( börek ) respectively. [7] [8] [9]  Both variants descended from the ancient Greek  Placenta cake .
 
 Drink [ edit ] 
 Macedonia  was renowned for its  wines , served for upper class Byzantines. During the  crusades  and after, western Europeans valued costly Byzantine wines. The most famous example is the still extant  Commandaria  wine from Cyprus served at the wedding of King  Richard the Lionheart . [10]  Other renowned varieties were  Cretan  wines from  muscat  grapes,  Romania  or Rumney (exported from  Methoni  in the western Peloponnese), and  Malvasia  or Malmsey (likely exported from  Monemvasia ).   Retsina , wine flavored with pine resin, was also drunk, as it still is in Greece today, producing similar reactions from unfamiliar visitors, "To add to our calamity the Greek wine, on account of being mixed with pitch, resin, and plaster was to us undrinkable," complained  Liutprand of Cremona , who was the ambassador sent to Constantinople in 968 by the German Holy Roman Emperor Otto I. [3] 
 
 Nutrition [ edit ] 
 Archaeological studies in central Anatolia indicate that the average Byzantine peasant household was more or less self-sufficient in food supplies, and their diet would have been relatively well-balanced. [2] : 173   There were sufficient carbohydrates (from bread and grains) and vegetable proteins (from legumes), as well as lower but still sufficient amounts of animal-based proteins. [2] : 173   Vitamins and minerals, derived from seasonal and pickled vegetables, fruits, and nuts, were lower but still "minimally sufficient". [2] : 173   This diet would have been relatively high in  fiber  but low in things like  calcium ,  vitamin B12 , and  folic acid . [2] : 173  
 
 Food preservation [ edit ] 
 Food preservation  was seen as a necessity in the Byzantine empire to create surplus and maintain freshness for foods crossing trade routes. Methods of food preservation include smoking, pressing, salting, drying and sealing contents in dry areas. Both nuts and  fruits were sun dried . Alcohol and smoke were used to  disinfectant  products so bacteria wouldn’t grow and cause rot. [11] 
 
 Tableware and customs [ edit ] 
   A  ceramic  Clay Byzantine bowl with a interior decoration 
 While Byzantine pottery found at excavations in  Boeotia  was decorated with innovative techniques and designs that combined elements from local culture and  Islamic art , the shape and function of tablewares remained simple - jugs were uncommon, and the wide, shallow bowls and dishes were too porous to use as drinking vessels or for watery soups or stews. [12] 
 The personal table  fork  is suspected to have been invented in the Byzantine Empire where they were commonly used by the 4th century. [13] [14] 
 By the 13th-century, the previous style of dishes was replaced by bowls that were deeper and narrower, suitable as vessels for liquids, stews or beverages. Stylized and geometric floral patterns became more common than the animal and human figures of earlier tableware and the quality of lead glaze was dramatically improved over the coarse and non-durable, soft tableware of previous centuries. [12] 
 The extent to which changes in tableware were a result of changes in the style of foods consumed in Boetia is a matter of further study. Because written sources are lacking, scholars have taken into consideration the visual evidence depicted on pottery, medieval icons, and  Ottoman miniatures , noting differences in the dining culture represented on 11th and 14th century Byzantine frescoes and miniatures. The fresco of the  Last Supper  at the crypt of  Hosios Loukas  shows a single large communal plate at the center of the table, with two communal cups, one on either side of the plate. Jesus and the  twelve apostles  presumably ate with their hands, as no forks or other utensils are shown. [12] 
 Some scholars believe the dishes in the fresco may be symbolic rather than representations of historical dining habits. Fish are shown in the plate, but research on  early Christian  culture has not found evidence of a  Fish Eucharist . A similar pattern of a large communal plate with two communal cups is depicted in 11th-century miniatures, one from a Byzantine manuscript (now in Paris) that shows  The feast of Herod and Jesus sitting in the house of Simon the leper , and another showing several diners reaching into the communal plate with their hands. The  Last Supper  fresco at the  Dochiariou monastery  of  Mount Athos  from the 14th-century depicts food served in multiple bowls, with wine jugs, and beakers, individual bread rolls, and shared dishes and knives. There is archaeological evidence supporting the assertions that knives were used as culinary utensils at in 14th-century from excavations of medieval  Panakton . [12] 
 Based on studies of middle and lower class household goods,  Nikolaos Oikonomides  concluded that the average Byzantine household "often, if not always, ate with their fingers from a large serving plate and drank from a common cup or jar (made of clay). [12] 
 
 See also [ edit ] 
 
 Food portal History portal 
 Anthimus (physician) 
 Modern: 
 
 Cypriot cuisine 
 Arab cuisine 
 Lebanese cuisine 
 General: 
 
 Medieval cuisine 
 Notes [ edit ] 
 Scholarly opinion on what the average Byzantine citizen ate is divided. [2] : 158   Some, such as  John L. Teall ,  Alexander Kazhdan , and  Giles Constable , suggested that "the average Byzantine was undernourished, consuming only bread, vegetables, and wine, but rarely meat or fish". [2] : 158    Joanita Vroom , on the other hand, suggested that a much wider range of foods were available to the average Byzantine. [2] : 158   Grains, pulses, fresh fruits and vegetables, dairy products, fish and meat, wine, olive oil, and honey were all part of the typical Byzantine diet according to her. [2] : 158  
 
 References [ edit ] 
 
 
 ^   Chrysopouios, Phillip (2 June 2022).  "The Ancient Greek Roots of Feta, The Oldest Cheese in Recorded History" .  GreekReporter . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   e   f   g   h   i   j   k   l   m   n   o   p   q   r   s   t   u   v   w   x   y   z   aa   ab   ac   ad   ae   af   ag   ah   ai   aj   ak   al   am   an   ao   ap   aq   ar   as   at   au   av   aw   ax   ay   az   ba   bb   bc   bd   be   bf   bg   bh   bi   bj   bk   bl   bm   bn   bo   bp   bq   br   bs   Vroom, Joanita (2018). "Ceramics, Agricultural Resources, and Food".  In Haldon, John; Elton, Hugh; Newhard, James (eds.).  Archaeology and Urban Settlement in Late Roman and Byzantine Anatolia: Euchaïta-Avkat-Beyözü and its Environment . Cambridge University Press.  ISBN   978-1-108-47115-2 . 
 
 ^  a   b   "Internet History Sourcebooks Project" .  www.fordham.edu . 
 
 ^   Koukoules, Phaidon I. (1952).  Βυζαντινών βίος και πολιτισμός  (in Greek). Vol. 5. Papazisis Publishers. pp. 56–57.  ISBN   9789600201413 . 
 
 ^   Skordaki-Kasimi, Vasiliki (2019).  Η Παρουσία των διατροφικών αγαθών στα έθιμα του κύκλου της ζωής και του χρόνου στο Βυζάντιο  (Thesis) (in Greek).  University of Peloponnese . p. 47.  Οι Βυζαντινοί μεταχειρίζονταν τα λεπτά έντερα των αιγοπροβάτων όπως περίπου και οι σημερινοί Έλληνες όταν παρασκευάζουν κοκορέτσι· ονομάζονταν χορδαί ή χορδία (ή κόρδα στην βόρεια Πελοπόννησο) και με μια απλή διαδικασία αναστρέφονταν με την βοήθεια ενός μικρού ξύλου για να καθαριστούν. Τυλίγονταν στην συνέχεια σε πλεξούδες, με το ανάλογο σχήμα, ή γύρω από άλλα εντόσθια σε σούβλα, όπως το κοκορέτσι. Άλλες ονομασίες που εντοπίζονται σε μεσαιωνικά κείμενα είναι τα γαρδούμενον και γαρδούμιον, που θυμίζουν την ονομασία γαρδούμπα. 
 
 ^   Germanidou, Sophia (2018).  "Honey culture in Byzantium: an outline of textual, iconographic and archaeological evidence" .  Academia . 
 
 ^   Davidson, Alan (10 September 1983).  Food in Motion: The Migration of Foodstuffs and Cookery Techniques : Proceedings : Oxford Symposium 1983 . Oxford Symposium.  ISBN   9780907325161  – via Google Books. 
 
 ^   Faas, Patrick (2005).  Around the Roman Table .  University of Chicago Press . pp. 184–185.  ISBN   0226233472 . 
 
 ^   Speros Vryonis  The Decline of Medieval Hellenism in Asia Minor , 1971, p. 482 
 
 ^   Ktisti, Sarah (Aug 11, 2009).  "Ancient Cypriot wine enters vintage major league" .  Reuters . Retrieved  2009-08-12 . 
 
 ^   Leestemaker, Linda (14 December 2014).  "The need for preserved food in the Byzantine Empire" .  Academia . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   e   Vroom, Joanita (2000). "Byzantine garlic and Turkish delight".  Archaeological Dialogues .  7  (2): 199–216.  doi : 10.1017/S1380203800001756 . 
 
 ^   James, Peter; Thorpe, Nick; Thorpe, I. J. (1995).  Ancient inventions . Ballantine Books. p. 305.  ISBN   978-0-345-40102-1 . 
 
 ^   Casey, Wilson (2009).  Firsts: Origins of Everyday Things that Changed the World  (F ed.). Penguin.  ISBN   978-1-59257-924-2 . 
 
 
 Sources [ edit ] 
 Dalby, Andrew (2003),  Flavours of Byzantium , Totnes, England: Prospect Books,  ISBN   1-903018-14-5 
 External links [ edit ] 
 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons has media related to  Byzantine cuisine . 
 
 Byzantine Food on the Web 
 Byzantine Foods 
 Byzantine Cuisine: from Macedonian-Heritage.gr 
 v t e Cuisines Continental 
 African 
 North 
 West 
 list 
 Americas 
 Caribbean 
 North 
 South 
 list 
 Asian 
 Caucasian 
 Central 
 Indian subcontinent 
 Levantine 
 list 
 European 
 Balkan 
 Central 
 Eastern 
 list 
 Oceanic 
 Intercontinental
 Global 
 Latin American 
 Mediterranean 
 Middle Eastern 
 National  and regional 
 Afghan 
 Albanian 
 Algerian 
 American 
 Californian 
 Floribbean 
 Hawaiian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Lowcountry (South Carolina) 
 New England 
 New Mexico 
 Pacific Northwest 
 Pennsylvania Dutch 
 Puerto Rican 
 Southern US 
 Southwest US 
 Texas 
 Angolan 
 Argentine 
 Armenian 
 Australian 
 Austrian 
 Azerbaijani 
 Bahraini 
 Bangladeshi 
 Barbadian 
 Belarusian 
 Belgian 
 Belizean 
 Beninese 
 Bhutanese 
 Bolivian 
 Bosnian-Herzegovinian 
 Botswana 
 Brazilian 
 British 
 Channel Islands 
 English 
 Gibraltarian 
 Northern Irish 
 Saint Helena 
 Scottish 
 Welsh 
 Bruneian 
 Bulgarian 
 Burkinabé 
 Burmese 
 Burundian 
 Cambodian 
 Cameroonian 
 Canadian 
 Acadian 
 Québécois 
 Central African Republic 
 Chadian 
 Chilean 
 Chinese 
 Cantonese 
 Hong Kong 
 Macanese 
 Tibetan 
 Xinjiang 
 Colombian 
 Congolese 
 Corsican 
 Croatian 
 Cuban 
 Cypriot 
 Czech 
 Danish 
 Faroese 
 Greenlandic 
 Djiboutian 
 Dominican 
 Dominican Republic 
 Dutch 
 East Timorese 
 Ecuadorian 
 Egyptian 
 Emirati 
 Equatorial Guinean 
 Eritrean 
 Estonian 
 Ethiopian 
 Fijian 
 Filipino 
 Finnish 
 French 
 Occitan 
 French Guianan 
 Gabonese 
 Gambian 
 Georgian 
 German 
 Ghanaian 
 Greek 
 Cretan 
 Epirotic 
 Greek Macedonian 
 Heptanesean 
 Guatemalan 
 Guinea-Bissauan 
 Guinean 
 Haitian 
 Honduran 
 Hungarian 
 Icelandic 
 Indian 
 Arunachalese 
 Assamese 
 Bengali 
 Bihari 
 Goan 
 Gujarati 
 Himachal Pradesh 
 Kashmiri 
 Jharkhandi 
 Karnataka 
 Kerala 
 Maharashtrian 
 Manipuri 
 Meghalayan 
 Mizo 
 Naga 
 Odia 
 Punjabi 
 Rajasthani 
 Sikkimese 
 Sindhi 
 Tamil 
 Telangana 
 Telugu 
 Indonesian 
 Acehnese 
 Balinese 
 Banjar 
 Batak 
 Betawi 
 Indo 
 Javanese 
 Madurese 
 Makassar 
 Minahasan 
 Minangkabau 
 Palembangese 
 Sundanese 
 Iranian 
 Iraqi 
 Irish 
 Israeli 
 Italian 
 Abruzzese 
 Ligurian 
 Lombard 
 Lucanian 
 Neapolitan 
 Roman 
 Sardinian 
 Sicilian 
 Venetian 
 Ivorian 
 Jamaican 
 Japanese 
 Okinawan 
 Jordanian 
 Kazakh 
 Kenyan 
 Korean 
 North Korean 
 South Korean 
 Kosovan 
 Kuwaiti 
 Kyrgyz 
 Lao 
 Latvian 
 Lebanese 
 Lesotho 
 Liberian 
 Libyan 
 Liechtensteiner 
 Lithuanian 
 Luxembourg 
 Macedonian 
 Malagasy 
 Malawian 
 Malaysian 
 Sabahan 
 Sarawakian 
 Maldivian 
 Malian 
 Maltese 
 Mauritanian 
 Mauritian 
 Mexican 
 Moldovan 
 Monégasque 
 Mongolian 
 Montenegrin 
 Moroccan 
 Mozambican 
 Namibian 
 Nauruan 
 Nepalese 
 New Zealand 
 Nicaraguan 
 Niger 
 Nigerian 
 Niuean 
 Norwegian 
 Omani 
 Pakistani 
 Palestinian 
 Panamanian 
 Peruvian 
 Polish 
 Portuguese 
 Qatari 
 Romanian  (incl.  Transylvanian Saxon ) 
 Russian 
 Bashkir 
 Chechen 
 Circassian 
 Komi 
 Mordovian 
 Sakha 
 Tatar 
 Udmurt 
 Yamal 
 Rwandan 
 Saint Lucian 
 Salvadoran 
 Sammarinese 
 São Tomé and Príncipe 
 Saudi Arabian 
 Senegalese 
 Serbian 
 Seychellois 
 Sierra Leonean 
 Singaporean 
 Slovak 
 Slovenian 
 Somali 
 South African 
 Spanish 
 Andalusian 
 Asturian 
 Balearic 
 Basque 
 Canarian 
 Cantabrian 
 Catalan 
 Extremaduran 
 Galician 
 Manchegan 
 Valencian 
 Sri Lankan 
 Sudanese 
 Swazi 
 Swedish 
 Swiss 
 Syrian 
 Taiwanese 
 Tajik 
 Tanzanian 
 Zanzibari 
 Thai 
 Togolese 
 Tunisian 
 Turkish 
 Turkmen 
 Trinidadian and Tobagonian 
 Ugandan 
 Ukrainian 
 Uruguayan 
 Uzbek 
 Venezuelan 
 Vietnamese 
 Western Saharan 
 Yemeni 
 Zambian 
 Zimbabwean 
 Ethnic 
 Ainu 
 Arab 
 Indonesian 
 Aromanian 
 Assyrian 
 Balochi 
 Berber 
 Cajun 
 Chinese 
 American 
 Canadian 
 Chifa 
 Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Crimean Tatar 
 Greek American 
 Hazaragi 
 Indian 
 Anglo-Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Indigenous American 
 Inuit 
 Italian American 
 Kurdish 
 Livonian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Malay 
 Ossetian 
 Parsi 
 Pashtun 
 Peranakan 
 Romani 
 Sámi 
 Soul food 
 Sylheti 
 Transylvanian Saxon 
 Yup'ik 
 Religious 
 Buddhist 
 Christian 
 Goan Catholic 
 Mangalorean Catholic 
 Mennonite 
 Hindu 
 Islamic 
 Chinese 
 Ital 
 Jain 
 Jewish 
 American 
 Ashkenazi 
 Bukharan 
 Ethiopian 
 Mizrahi 
 Sephardic 
 Syrian 
 Ritual slaughter 
 Sikh 
 Historical 
 Ancient Egyptian 
 Ancient Greek 
 Ancient Israelite 
 Ancient Roman 
 Antebellum America 
 Aztec 
 Byzantine 
 Early modern European 
 Historical Chinese 
 Historical Indian subcontinent 
 Historical North Indian and Pakistani 
 History of agriculture 
 History of alcoholic drinks 
 History of bread 
 History of seafood 
 History of vegetarianism 
 Historical Argentine 
 Historical Japanese 
 Inca 
 Mayan 
 Muisca 
 Mughal 
 Medieval 
 Ottoman 
 Peasant 
 Soviet 
 Thirteen Colonies 
 Styles 
 Classique 
 Fast food 
 Fusion 
 New American 
 Eurasian 
 Haute 
 Molecular gastronomy 
 Note by Note 
 Nouvelle 
 Lists 
 List of cuisines 
 List of historical cuisines 
 Lists of prepared foods 
 Related 
 Cookbook 
 Cooking 
 Culinary arts 
 Drink 
 Food 
 history 
 Diet 
 Meal preparation 
 
   Food portal 
   Drink portal 
   Category 
   Commons 
   Cookbook 
   WikiProject 
   Outline 
 
 v t e Byzantine Empire   topics History Preceding 
 Roman Empire 
 Later Roman Empire 
 Early   (330–717) 
 Constantinian–Valentinianic era 
 Constantinian dynasty 
 Valentinianic dynasty 
 Theodosian era 
 Leonid era 
 Justinian era 
 Heraclian era 
 " Byzantine Dark Ages " 
 Twenty Years' Anarchy 
 Middle   (717–1204) 
 Isaurian era 
 Nikephorian era 
 Amorian era 
 Macedonian era 
 Doukid era 
 Komnenian era 
 Angelid era 
 Late   (1204–1453) 
 Sack of Constantinople 
 Fourth Crusade 
 Frankokratia 
 Latin Empire 
 Byzantine successor states ( Nicaea  /  Epirus – Thessalonica  /  Morea  /  Trebizond ) 
 Palaiologan era 
 Decline of the Byzantine Empire 
 Fall of Constantinople 
 By modern region or territory 
 Albania 
 Anatolia 
 Armenia 
 Bulgaria 
 Corsica 
 Crete 
 Cyprus 
 Dalmatia 
 Egypt 
 Greece 
 Italy 
 Sardinia 
 Sicily 
 Maghreb 
 Malta 
 Mesopotamia 
 Serbia 
 Spain (Iberian Peninsula and Balearic Islands) 
 Syria 
 Thrace 
 Governance Central 
 Emperors 
 Coronation 
 Family tree 
 Empresses 
 Imperial bureaucracy 
 Medieval Greek 
 Senate 
 Early 
 Praetorian prefects 
 Magister officiorum 
 Comes sacrarum largitionum 
 Comes rerum privatarum 
 Quaestor sacri palatii 
 Middle 
 Logothetes tou dromou 
 Sakellarios 
 Logothetes tou genikou 
 Logothetes tou stratiotikou 
 Chartoularios tou sakelliou 
 Chartoularios tou vestiariou 
 Epi tou eidikou 
 Protasekretis 
 Epi ton deeseon 
 Late 
 Megas logothetes 
 Mesazon 
 Provincial Early 
 Praetorian prefectures 
 Dioceses 
 Provinces 
 Quaestura exercitus 
 Exarchate of Ravenna 
 Exarchate of Africa 
 Middle 
 Themata 
 Kleisourai 
 Bandon 
 Catepanates 
 Late 
 Kephale 
 Despotates 
 Foreign relations 
 Treaties 
 Diplomats 
 Diplomacy 
 Military Army 
 Battle tactics 
 Battles 
 Generals 
 Mercenaries 
 Military manuals 
 Military units 
 Revolts 
 Wars 
 Early 
 Late Roman army 
 East Roman army 
 Foederati 
 Bucellarii 
 Scholae Palatinae 
 Excubitors 
 Middle 
 Themata 
 Kleisourai 
 Tourma 
 Droungos 
 Bandon 
 Tagmata 
 Domestic of the Schools 
 Hetaireia 
 Akritai 
 Varangian Guard 
 Late 
 Komnenian army 
 Pronoia 
 Vestiaritai 
 Palaiologan army 
 Allagion 
 Paramonai 
 Grand domestic 
 Navy 
 Karabisianoi 
 Maritime themata 
 Cibyrrhaeot 
 Aegean Sea 
 Samos 
 Dromon 
 Greek fire 
 Droungarios of the Fleet 
 Megas doux 
 Admirals 
 Naval battles 
 Religion and law Religion 
 Eastern Orthodoxy 
 Byzantine Rite 
 Hesychasm 
 Patriarchate of Constantinople 
 Saints 
 Oriental Orthodoxy 
 Alexandrian Rite 
 Armenian Rite 
 West Syriac Rite 
 Miaphysitism 
 Ecumenical councils 
 Arianism 
 Monophysitism 
 Paulicianism 
 Iconoclasm 
 Great Schism 
 Bogomilism 
 Mount Athos 
 Missionary activity
 Bulgaria 
 Moravia 
 Serbs 
 Kievan Rus' 
 Jews 
 Law 
 Codex Theodosianus 
 Corpus Juris Civilis 
 Code of Justinian 
 Ecloga 
 Basilika 
 Hexabiblos 
 Mutilation 
 Culture and society Architecture 
 Secular 
 Sacred 
 Cross-in-square 
 Domes 
 Constantinople 
 Basilica Cistern 
 Baths of Zeuxippus 
 Blachernae Palace 
 Chora Church 
 City Walls 
 Great Palace of Constantinople 
 Hagia Irene 
 Hagia Sophia 
 Hippodrome 
 Pammakaristos Church 
 Prison of Anemas 
 Thessalonica 
 Arch of Galerius and Rotunda 
 Byzantine Bath 
 Hagia Sophia 
 Hagios Demetrios 
 Panagia Chalkeon 
 Walls of Thessaloniki 
 Ravenna 
 San Vitale 
 Sant'Apollinare in Classe 
 Sant'Apollinare Nuovo 
 Other locations 
 Daphni Monastery 
 Hosios Loukas 
 Nea Moni of Chios 
 Panagia Gorgoepikoos 
 Saint Catherine's Monastery 
 Mystras 
 Art 
 Icons 
 Enamel 
 Glass 
 Mosaics 
 Early Byzantine mosaics 
 Painters 
 Macedonian period art 
 Komnenian renaissance 
 Economy 
 Agriculture 
 Coinage 
 Mints 
 Trade 
 silk 
 Silk Road 
 Varangians 
 Dynatoi 
 Literature 
 Novel 
 Acritic songs 
 Digenes Akritas 
 Alexander Romance 
 Historians 
 Everyday life 
 Calendar 
 Cities 
 Cuisine 
 Dance 
 Dress 
 Flags and insignia 
 Gardens 
 Music 
 Lyra 
 Octoechos 
 People 
 Byzantine Greeks 
 Women 
 Slavery 
 Units of measurement 
 Science Learning 
 Encyclopedias 
 Imperial Library 
 Inventions 
 Medicine 
 Philosophy 
 Rhetoric 
 Scholars 
 University 
 University of Constantinople 
 Impact 
 Byzantine commonwealth 
 Byzantine studies 
 Museums 
 Byzantinism 
 Cyrillic script 
 Neo-Byzantine architecture 
 Greek scholars in the Renaissance 
 Third Rome 
 Megali Idea 
 
 Byzantine Empire portal 
 
  
NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw2270
Cached time: 20230311123636
Cache expiry: 1814400
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc, no‐toc‐conversion]
CPU time usage: 1.297 seconds
Real time usage: 1.514 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 19655/1000000
Post‐expand include size: 266314/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 7414/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 16/100
Expensive parser function count: 6/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 83551/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.655/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 28969842/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/400
 
 
Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1230.968      1 -total
 35.34%  434.982     68 Template:Rp
 34.01%  418.605     68 Template:R/superscript
 17.41%  214.326    204 Template:R/where
 13.86%  170.670      1 Template:Reflist
  9.47%  116.547      2 Template:Lang
  8.32%  102.434     10 Template:Navbox
  6.57%   80.901      2 Template:Cite_news
  6.22%   76.548      1 Template:Byzantine_culture
  6.05%   74.480      1 Template:Sidebar
 
  Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:idhash:5771126-0!canonical and timestamp 20230311123635 and revision id 1143381021. Rendering was triggered because: page-view
  
 esi <esi:include src="/esitest-fa8a495983347898/content" />  
 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Byzantine_cuisine&oldid=1143381021 " 
 Category :  Byzantine cuisine Hidden categories:  CS1 Greek-language sources (el) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from March 2013 All articles lacking in-text citations Articles with weasel words from September 2019 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2022 Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Articles containing Medieval Greek-language text Commons category link from Wikidata 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  This page was last edited on 7 March 2023, at 11:08  (UTC) . 
 Text is available under the  Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0 ;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the  Terms of Use  and  Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the  Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. 
 
 
 Privacy policy 
 About Wikipedia 
 Disclaimers 
 Contact Wikipedia 
 Mobile view 
 Developers 
 Statistics 
 Cookie statement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
