
 
 
 Jump to content 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle sidebar 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Create account Log in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Personal tools 
 
 
 
 
   Create account   Log in 
 
 
 
 
		Pages for logged out editors  learn more 
 
 
 Contributions Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Navigation 
 
 
 Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate 
 
 
 
 
 Contribute 
 
 
 Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file 
 
 
 
 
 Tools 
 
 
 What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item 
 
 
 
 
 Print/export 
 
 
 Download as PDF Printable version 
 
 
 
 
 In other projects 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons 
 
 
 
 
 Languages 
 
 On this Wikipedia the language links are at the top of the page across from the article title.  Go to top . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CentralNotice  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Contents 
 move to sidebar 
 hide 
 
 
 
 
 (Top) 
 
 
 
 
 
 1 History 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 Cajun cooking methods 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 Ingredients 
 
 
				Toggle Ingredients subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 3.1 Grains 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.2 Fruits and vegetables 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.3 Meat and seafood 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.4 Seasonings 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.4.1 Blended 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.5 Cooking bases 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4 Cajun dishes 
 
 
				Toggle Cajun dishes subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 4.1 Primary favorites 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.2 Food as an event 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.2.1 Crawfish boil 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.2.2 Family  boucherie 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.2.3 Cochon de lait 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.2.4 Rural Mardi Gras 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.3 Other dishes and sides 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5 List of Cajun-influenced chefs 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6 In popular culture 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 7 See also 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8 References 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 9 External links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
						Toggle the table of contents
					 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle the table of contents 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cajun cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 15 languages 
 
 
 
 Afrikaans Català Deutsch Español Esperanto Français Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Jawa Latina Polski Português Русский ไทย 中文 
 Edit links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Article Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 English 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 More 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
 
 
 American Acadian cooking of Louisiana 
 Part of a series on American cuisine 
 Regional cuisines 
 Northeastern 
 
 New England 
 New Jersey 
 New York City 
 Philadelphia 
 Midwestern 
 
 Chicago 
 Michigan 
 North Dakota 
 Omaha 
 St. Louis 
 Wisconsin 
 Mid-Atlantic 
 
 Baltimore 
 Pittsburgh 
 Southern  ( list ) 
 
 Atlanta 
 Cajun 
 Floribbean 
 Kentucky 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Lowcountry 
 Houston 
 New Orleans 
 Texas 
 Tex-Mex 
 Western 
 
 California 
 California fusion 
 Los Angeles 
 Pacific Northwest 
 Rocky Mountain 
 Southwestern 
 
 New Mexican 
 Other 
 
 Hawaiian 
 Military rations 
 Puerto Rican 
 Roadkill 
 Tailgate party 
 
 History 
 Thirteen Colonies 
 Antebellum America 
 Chuckwagon 
 Culinary Revolution 
 
 Ingredients and foods 
 List of American foods 
 Apple 
 Beef 
 Blueberry 
 Chocolate 
 Collard greens 
 Corn 
 Okra 
 Pecan 
 Potato 
 Pumpkin 
 Sunflower seed 
 Tomato 
 Turkey 
 Vanilla 
 
 Styles 
 Barbecue in the United States 
 Kansas City 
 Memphis 
 North Carolina 
 Santa Maria 
 St. Louis 
 Texas 
 Fast food 
 Fusion 
 New American 
 Pizza in the United States 
 
 Ethnic and cultural 
 American Chinese 
 Filipino-American cuisine 
 Greek-American 
 Indian 
 Italian-American 
 Japanese 
 Jewish 
 Mexican-American 
 Native American 
 Pennsylvania Dutch 
 Soul food 
 Tlingit 
 
 Holidays and festivals 
 Fourth of July 
 Christmas 
 Thanksgiving 
 
   United States portal 
   Food portal v t e 
   Cornbread  is a staple Cajun starch. 
 Cajun cuisine  ( French :  cuisine cadienne   [kɥi.zin ka.dʒɛn] ,  Spanish :  cocina acadiense ) is a style of cooking developed by the  Cajun – Acadians  who were  deported  from  Acadia  to  Louisiana  during the 18th century and who incorporated  West African ,  French  and  Spanish  cooking techniques into their  original cuisine . 
 Cajun cuisine is sometimes referred to as a 'rustic cuisine', meaning that it is based on  locally available ingredients  and that preparation is relatively simple.
 An authentic Cajun meal is usually a three-pot affair, with one pot dedicated to the main dish, one dedicated to steamed  rice , specially made sausages, or some seafood dish, and the third containing whatever vegetable is plentiful or available.  Crawfish ,  shrimp , and  andouille  sausage are staple meats used in a variety of dishes.
 The aromatic vegetables  green bell pepper  ( piment doux ),  onion , and  celery  are called " the trinity " by chefs in Cajun and  Louisiana Creole cuisines . Roughly diced and combined in cooking, the method is similar to the use of the  mirepoix  in traditional  French cuisine  which blends roughly diced  carrot , onion, and celery. Additional characteristic aromatics for both the  Creole  and Cajun versions may include  parsley ,  bay leaf ,  thyme ,  green onions , ground  cayenne pepper , and ground  black pepper . Cayenne and Louisiana-style  hot sauce  are the primary sources of spice in Cajun cuisine, which usually tends towards a moderate, well-balanced heat, despite the national "Cajun hot" craze of the  1980s  and  1990s . [1] 
 
 
 History [ edit ] 
 The  Acadians  were a group of French colonists who lived in Acadia, what is today  Eastern Canada . In the mid-18th century, they were deported from Acadia by the  British  during the  French and Indian War  in what they termed  le Grand Dérangement , and many of them ended up settling in Southern Louisiana. [2] : 6  
 Due to the extreme change in climate, Acadians were unable to cook their original dishes. [3] : 20   Soon, their former culinary traditions were adapted and, in time, incorporated not only Indigenous American traditions, but also African-American traditions—as is exemplified in the classic Cajun dish " Gumbo ", which is named for its principal ingredient ( Okra ) using the West African name for that very ingredient: "Gumbo," in West Africa, means "Okra". 
 Many other meals developed along these lines, adapted in no small part from Haiti, to become what is now considered classic Cajun cuisine traditions  [3] : 19–20   (not to be confused with the more modern concept associated with  Prudhomme 's style). [4] 
 Up through the 20th century, the meals were not elaborate but instead, rather basic. [3] : 23   The public's false perception of "Cajun" cuisine was based on Prudhomme's style of Cajun cooking, which was spicy, flavorful, and not true to the classic form of the cuisine. [4] 
 Cajun and Creole cuisine have been mistaken to be the same, but the origins of Creole cooking began in New Orleans, and Cajun cooking came 40 years after the establishment of New Orleans. [5]  Today, most restaurants serve dishes that consist of Cajun styles, which  Paul Prudhomme  dubbed "Louisiana cooking". [6]  In home-cooking, these individual styles are still kept separate. [6]  However, there are fewer and fewer people cooking the classic Cajun dishes that would have been eaten by the original settlers. [3] : 30  
 
 Cajun cooking methods [ edit ] 
 Barbecuing —similar to  
"low and slow"  Southern barbecue traditions, but with Creole/Cajun seasoning. A classic example is Johnson's Boucaniere ("smokehouse") in  Lafayette , which was named best barbecue in Louisiana by the Food Network in July 2022. [7]  In the  Ville Platte  area, a unique sauce is made from dried onions reconstituted in water and vegetable oil thick with  ketchup ,  mustard ,  Worcestershire sauce , and seasonings. [8]  The flavorful oil that rises to the top is applied directly to meats being cooked as a baste. Two popular brands are Jack Miller's and Pig Stand, which are available online and in grocery stores across the state. [9] [10]  This sauce is also commonly used on  hamburgers ,  hot dogs ,  pork chops , chicken, and other grilled items. 
 Baking —direct and indirect dry heat in a furnace or oven, faster than  smoking  but slower than grilling 
 Grilling —direct heat on a shallow surface, fastest of all variants; sub-variants include:
 Charbroiling —direct dry heat on a solid surface with wide raised ridges 
 Gridironing —direct dry heat on a solid or hollow surface with narrow raised ridges 
 Griddling —direct dry or moist heat along with the use of oils and butter on a flat surface 
 Braising —combining a direct dry heat charbroil-grill or gridiron-grill with a pot filled with broth for direct moist heat, faster than smoking but slower than regular grilling and baking; time starts fast, slows down, then speeds up again to finish 
 Boiling —as in boiling of  crabs , crawfish, or shrimp, in seasoned liquid, often with side items like  corn  on the cob, whole new  potatoes , and  mushrooms  cooked in the same boiling pot. A  seafood boil  is often a large outdoor social event. 
 Deep frying —lightly breaded and fried seafood including various fish, shrimp, oysters, and soft-shell crab is universally popular in Cajun cuisine, often on  French bread   po-boys  in the  New Orleans style , along with traditional Southern favorites like  fried chicken ,  okra , and pork chops. 
 Smothering —cooking a vegetable or meat over low heat with the sauteed "trinity," plus small amounts of water or stock, similar to  braising . This forms a pan sauce or gravy, and the finished product is served over rice.  Étouffée  is a popular variant done with crawfish or shrimp. A meatless version might feature mushrooms and eggplant. [11]  Two commonly smothered meats are pork chops and  round steak ; these heartier meats may sometimes have a bit of roux added to the gravy. [12] [13] 
 Pan- broiling  or  pan-frying 
 Injecting —using a large  syringe -type setup to place seasoning deep inside large cuts of meat; this technique is much newer than the others on this list, but very common in Cajun cuisine 
 Stewing , also known as  fricassée ; a whole chicken cut into pieces is a popular choice for this method, particularly an older hen. [14] 
 Deep-frying  of  turkeys  or oven-roasted  turduckens  entered southern Louisiana cuisine more recently. Also,  blackening  of fish or chicken and barbecuing of shrimp in the shell are excluded because they were not prepared in traditional Cajun cuisine. Blackening was actually an invention by chef  Paul Prudhomme  in the 1970s, becoming associated with Cajun cooking, and presented as such by him, but is not a true historical or traditional Cajun cooking process. [15] 
 
 Ingredients [ edit ] 
 The following is a partial list of ingredients used in Cajun cuisine and some of the  staple ingredients  of the Acadian food culture.
 
 Grains [ edit ] 
 Corn 
 Rice 
 Scotch barley 
 Wheat —for baking bread 
 Fruits and vegetables [ edit ] 
 Bell peppers  (green or red) 
 Blackberries 
 Cayenne peppers 
 Celery  (seed, leaf and stalk) 
 Collard greens 
 Cucumbers 
 Figs 
 Leek 
 Limes 
 Lemons 
 Mirlitons  (chayotes or  vegetable pears) 
 Muscadines 
 Okra 
 Onions 
 Parsnip 
 Parsley 
 Pecans 
 Satsuma oranges 
 Scallions  (green onions or onion tops) 
 Squash 
 Strawberries 
 Sweet potatoes 
 Tabasco pepper 
 Tomatoes 
 Meat and seafood [ edit ] 
 Cajun  foodways  include many ways of preserving meat, some of which are waning due to the availability of refrigeration and  mass-produced  meat at the grocer. Smoking of meats remains a fairly common practice, but once-common preparations such as turkey or  duck confit  (preserved in poultry fat, with spices) are now seen even by Acadians as quaint rarities.
 Game (and  hunting ) are still uniformly popular in Acadiana.
 The recent increase of  catfish   farming  in the  Mississippi Delta  has brought about an increase in its usage in Cajun cuisine in the place of the more traditional wild-caught trout (the saltwater species).
 Seafood 
 
 Freshwater
 Bass 
 Catfish 
 Sac-à-lait  (white perch or crappie) 
 Yellow perch 
 Saltwater or brackish water species
 Trout 
 Redfish 
 Pompano 
 Drumfish 
 Flounder 
 Grouper 
 Perch —many varieties 
 Snapper —many varieties 
 Shellfish
 Crawfish  ( ecrevisse )—either wild swamp or farm-raised 
 Shrimp , or  crevette  ( chevrette  in  Louisiana French ) 
 Oysters 
 Blue crab 
 Also included in the seafood mix are some so-called  trash fish  that would not sell at market because of their high bone to meat ratio or required complicated cooking methods. These were brought home by fishermen to feed the family. Examples are garfish, black drum also called  gaspergou  or just "goo", croaker, and bream.
 Poultry 
 
 Farm-raised
 Turkey  (and turkey confit) 
 Chicken  (and guinea hen) 
 Game birds
 Dove 
 Duck  (and duck confit) 
 Goose 
 Quail 
 Pork 
 
 Andouille —a spicy smoked pork sausage, characterized by a coarse-ground texture and large-diameter casing. 
 Boudin —a cooked sausage made with green onions, pork, and rice, and usually a large amount of ground pork or chicken livers. Boudin may be thought of as "dirty rice in a casing." Some locals prefer to eat the sausage with the casing on, while others squeeze the contents out. Boudin filling is completely cooked before being stuffed into casings and may be consumed immediately after purchase, although it is also popularly grilled at cookouts. Pork blood is sometimes added to produce  boudin rouge . Other versions can contain seafood, such as crawfish. 
 Chaurice , a sausage similar to Spanish  chorizo 
 Chaudin  or  ponce —a pig's stomach, stuffed with spiced pork & smoked. 
 Ham hocks 
 Wild boar  or feral hog 
 Head cheese 
 Gratons —hog cracklings or pork rinds; fried, seasoned pork fat & skin, sometimes with small bits of meat attached. Similar to Spanish  chicharrones . 
 Hot link  sausage 
 Pork sausage (fresh)—distinctively seasoned and usually smoked, this sausage is often used in gumbos as is andouille, but it may also be grilled or pan-cooked to produce a rice and gravy dish. The sausage itself does not include rice, separating it from  boudin . In Cajun country, a distinction exists between this sausage, which is simply called "pork sausage," is finer ground, and uses smaller pork casings, and the similar andouille, which has a coarser grind and larger beef casings. [16] [17] 
 Salt pork 
 Tasso —a highly seasoned, smoked pork shoulder of the Choctaw 
 Beef and dairy 
Though parts of Acadiana are well suited to cattle or  dairy farming , beef is not often used in a pre-processed or uniquely Cajun form. It is usually prepared fairly simply as chops, stews, or steaks, taking a cue from Texas to the west. Ground beef is used as is traditional throughout the US, although seasoned differently.
 Dairy farming is not as prevalent as in the past, but there are still some farms in the business. There are no unique dairy items prepared in Cajun cuisine. Traditional Cajun and New Orleans Creole-influenced desserts are common.
 Other game meats 
 
 Alligator 
 Alligator gar , or gator gar 
 Frog , usually bullfrogs (not just the legs, but the entire creature) 
 Gros bec , commonly called night heron 
 Nutria 
 Squirrel 
 Rabbit 
 Skunk , or  mouffette 
 Turtle 
 Snake 
 Virginia opossum , or  sarigue 
 Venison 
   Cajun woman reaching for strings of garlic suspended from rafters. Near  Crowley, Louisiana , 1938. 
 Seasonings [ edit ] 
 Basil 
 Bay leaf 
 Black pepper 
 Cayenne pepper 
 Chili pepper 
 Chervil 
 Chives 
 Cloves 
 Dried shrimp 
 Garlic 
 Green mint 
 Marjoram 
 Onion  (bell pepper, onion, and celery used together are known as the "holy trinity" of Cajun cuisine) 
 Oregano 
 Parsley , flat leaf 
 Sage 
 Sassafras  leaves (dried & ground into the spice known as filé for gumbo of the Choctaw) 
 Sugarcane , also cane syrup,  brown sugar  and molasses 
 Summer savory 
 Thyme 
 Thyme, sage, mint, marjoram, savory, and basil are considered sweet herbs. In Colonial times a  herbes de Provence  would be several sweet herbs tied up in a  muslin . [18] 
 
 Blended [ edit ] 
 "Creole/Cajun spice" blends such as  Tony Chachere's  are sometimes used in Cajun kitchens, but do not suit every cook's style because Creole- and Cajun-style seasoning is often achieved from scratch, even by taste.   
 Cajun seasonings consist of a blend of salt with a variety of spices, most common being cayenne pepper and garlic. The spicy heat comes from the cayenne pepper, while other flavors come from bell pepper, paprika, green onions, parsley and more. [19] 
 Curry 
 Hot sauce , including  Tabasco sauce , which by 1885 was well known in Louisiana and abroad. 
 Marinades  made with  olive oil ,  brown sugar , and  citrus  juices 
 Mushroom catsup 
 Persillade 
 Seafood boil  mix 
 Various barbecue rubs similar to those in other states. 
 Vinegar  seasoned with small, pickled, hot green peppers is a common condiment with many Cajun meals. 
 Walnut catsup 
 Worcestershire sauce 
 Cooking bases [ edit ] 
 Dark  roux —Cajuns inherited roux from the French. However, unlike the French, theirs is made with oil or  bacon  fat and more lately with  olive oil , and not normally with butter. It is used as a thickening agent, especially in gumbo and  étouffée .   
 Preparation of a dark roux is probably the most involved or complicated procedure in Cajun cuisine, [20]  involving heating fat and flour very carefully, constantly stirring for about 15–45 minutes (depending on the color of the desired product), until the mixture has darkened in color and developed a nutty flavor. The temperature should not be too high, as a burnt roux renders a dish unpalatable. 
 Light roux—The secret to making a good gumbo is pairing the roux with the protein. [ citation needed ]  A dark roux, with its strong (dense) nutty flavor will completely overpower a simple seafood gumbo, but is the perfect complement to a gumbo using chicken, sausage, crawfish or alligator. [21]   
 A light roux, on the other hand, is better suited for strictly seafood dishes and unsuitable for meat gumbos for the reason that it does not support the heavier meat flavor as well. Pairing roux with protein follows the same orthodox philosophy as pairing wine with protein. 
 Stocks : Cajun stocks are more heavily seasoned than Continental counterparts, and the shellfish stock sometimes made with shrimp and crawfish heads is unique to Cajun cuisine.
 Fish stock and  Court-bouillon 
 Shellfish stock 
 Chicken stock 
 Cajun dishes [ edit ] 
 Primary favorites [ edit ] 
   Boudin  that has been  smoked 
   Seafood gumbo 
 Boudin —a type of  sausage  made from pork, pork liver, rice, garlic,  green onions  and other spices. It is widely available by the link or pound from butcher shops.  Boudin  is typically stuffed in a  natural casing  and has a softer consistency than other, better-known sausage varieties. It is usually served with side dishes such as rice dressing,  maque choux  or bread.  Boudin  balls are commonly served in southern Louisiana restaurants and are made by taking the  boudin  out of the case and frying it in spherical form.
 Gumbo —High on the list of favorites of Cajun cooking are the soups called  gumbos . Contrary to non-Cajun or Continental beliefs, gumbo does not mean simply "everything in the pot". Gumbo exemplifies the influence of French, Spanish, African and  Native American food  cultures on Cajun cuisine. 
 There are two theories as to the etymological origins of the name. "Some believe that gumbo gets its name from the Choctaw word for filé powder, kombo; others suggest it’s taken from the West African Bantu name for okra, ki ngombo." [22]  Both filé and okra can be used as thickening agents in gumbo. Historically, large amounts of filé were added directly to the pot when okra was out of season. While a distinction between filé gumbo and okra gumbo is still held by some, many people enjoy putting filé in okra gumbo simply as a flavoring. Regardless of which is the dominant thickener, filé is also provided at the table and added to taste.
 Many claim that gumbo is a Cajun dish, but gumbo was established long before the Acadian arrival. 
 Its early existence came via the early French Creole culture In New Orleans, Louisiana, where French, Spanish and Africans frequented and also influenced by later waves of Italian, German and Irish settlers.
 The backbone of a gumbo is roux, as described above. Cajun gumbo typically favors darker roux, often approaching the color of chocolate or coffee beans. Since the starches in the flour break down more with longer cooking time, a dark roux has less thickening power than a lighter one. While the stovetop method is traditional, flour may also be dry-toasted in an oven for a fat-free roux, or a regular roux may be prepared in a  microwave oven  for a hands-off method. If the roux is for immediate use, the "trinity" may be sauteed in it, which stops the cooking process.
 A classic gumbo is made with  chicken  and  andouille , especially in the colder months, but the ingredients vary according to what is available. Seafood gumbos are also very popular in Cajun country.
 Jambalaya —The only certain thing that can be said about  jambalaya  is that it contains  rice , some sort of meat (often chicken, ham, sausage, or a combination), seafood (such as shrimp or crawfish), plus other items that may be available. Usually, it will include green peppers, onions, celery, tomatoes and hot chili peppers. This is also a great pre-Acadian dish, established by the Spanish in Louisiana. Jambalaya may be a tomato-rich New Orleans-style "red" jambalaya of Spanish Creole roots, or a Cajun-style "brown" jambalaya which draws its color and flavor from browned meat and caramelized onions. Historically, tomatoes were not as widely available in Acadiana as the area around New Orleans, but in modern times, both styles are popular across the state. Brown is the style served at the annual World Jambalaya Festival in  Gonzales . [23] 
 Rice and gravy — Rice and gravy  dishes are a  staple  of Cajun cuisine [24]   and is usually a  brown gravy  based on pan drippings, which are  deglazed  and simmered with extra seasonings and served over steamed or boiled rice. 
 The dish is traditionally made from cheaper cuts of meat and cooked in a  cast-iron pot , typically for an extended time period in order to let the tough cuts of meat become tender. [25]  Beef, [26]  pork, chicken or any of a large variety of game meats are used for its preparation. [27]  Popular local varieties include  hamburger steak , smothered  rabbit , [28]  turkey necks, [29]  and  chicken fricassee . [30] 
 
 Food as an event [ edit ] 
 Crawfish boil [ edit ] 
   Louisiana-style crawfish boil 
 The  crawfish boil  is a celebratory event where Cajuns boil crawfish, potatoes, onions and corn in large pots over propane cookers. Lemons and small muslin bags containing a mixture of bay leaves, mustard seeds, cayenne pepper, and other spices, commonly known as "crab boil" or "crawfish boil" are added to the water for seasoning. 
 The results are then dumped onto large, newspaper-draped tables and in some areas covered in Creole/Cajun spice blends, such as REX,  Zatarain's , Louisiana Fish Fry, or Tony Chachere's. Also,  cocktail sauce , mayonnaise, and  hot sauce  are sometimes used. The seafood is scooped onto large trays or plates and eaten by hand. 
 During times when crawfish are not abundant, shrimp and crabs are prepared and served in the same manner. [31] 
 Attendees are encouraged to "suck the head" of a crawfish by separating the head from the abdomen of the  crustacean  and sucking out the fat and juices from the head. [32] 
 Often, newcomers to the crawfish boil or those unfamiliar with the traditions are jokingly warned "not to eat the dead ones." This comes from the common belief that when live crawfish are boiled, their tails curl beneath themselves, but when dead crawfish are boiled, their tails are straight and limp.
Seafood boils with crabs and shrimp are also popular. [33] 
 
 Family  boucherie [ edit ] 
   A traditional  boucherie  near  Eunice, Louisiana 
 The traditional Cajun outdoor food event hosted by a farmer in the rural areas of the Acadiana. Family and friends of the farmer gather to socialize, play games, dance, drink, and have a copious meal consisting of hog and other dishes. [2] : 111   Men have the task of slaughtering a hog, cutting it into usable parts, and cooking the main pork dishes while women have the task of making  boudin . [2] : 110  
 
 Cochon de lait [ edit ] 
 Similar to a family  boucherie , the  cochon de lait  is a food event that revolves around pork but does not need to be hosted by a farmer. Traditionally, a  suckling pig  was purchased for the event, but in modern  cochon de laits , adult pigs are used. [2] : 111  
 Unlike the family  boucherie , a hog is not butchered by the hosts and there are generally not as many guests or activities. [2] : 112   The host and male guests have the task of roasting the pig (see  pig roast ) while female guests bring side dishes.
 
 Rural Mardi Gras [ edit ] 
 The traditional Cajun Mardi Gras (see:  Courir de Mardi Gras ) is a Mardi Gras celebration in rural Cajun Parishes. The tradition originated in the 18th century with the Cajuns of Louisiana, but it was abandoned in the early 20th century because of unwelcome violence associated with the event. In the early 1950s the tradition was revived in  Mamou  in  Evangeline Parish . [2] : 112  
 The event revolves around male maskers on horseback who ride into the countryside to collect food ingredients for the party later on. They entertain householders with Cajun music, dancing, and festive antics in return for the ingredients. The preferred ingredient is a live chicken in which the householder throws the chicken to allow the maskers to chase it down (symbolizing a hunt), but other ingredients include rice, sausage, vegetables, or frozen chicken. [2] : 112  
 Unlike other Cajun events, men take no part in cooking the main course for the party, and women prepare the chicken and ingredients for the gumbo. [2] : 113   Once the festivities begin, the Cajun community members eat and dance to Cajun music until midnight after which is the beginning of  Lent . [2] : 113  
 
 Other dishes and sides [ edit ] 
   Boudin balls 
 Alligator meat 
 Andouille sausage 
 Boiled crawfish 
 Boudin  balls — Boudin  sausage filling that is rolled into a ball, battered and deep fried, instead of being stuffed into pork casings. [34] 
 Brochette 
 Creole rice 
 Catfish  (or  redfish )  court-bouillon 
 Cochon de lait —suckling pig 
 Couche couche  (Creole  corn mush ) 
 Crawfish   bisque 
 Crawfish  étouffée 
 Crawfish pie 
 Dirty rice 
 Étouffée 
 Fried  frog legs 
 Gumbo z'herbes   / ˈ ɡ ʌ m b oʊ   ˈ z æ b / 
 Hog's head cheese 
 Maque choux 
 Pecan   pralines 
 Pepper jelly 
 Potato salad —generally made with egg, potato, celery, onions, mayonnaise, mustard and sometimes bell pepper 
 Seafood-stuffed  mirliton 
 Tarte à la Bouillie —sweet-dough custard tarts 
 Tasso ham 
 List of Cajun-influenced chefs [ edit ] 
 Frank Joseph Davis 
 John Folse 
 Emeril Lagasse 
 Paul Prudhomme 
 Justin Wilson 
 Isaac Toups [35] 
 In popular culture [ edit ] 
 Three popular local dishes in Acadiana are noted in the  Hank Williams  song " Jambalaya ", namely "Jambalaya and-a crawfish pie and filé gumbo".
 
 See also [ edit ] 
 Cuisine of New Orleans 
 Cuisine of the United States 
 List of festivals in Louisiana 
 Louisiana Creole cuisine 
 Acadian cuisine 
 References [ edit ] 
 
 
 ^   "Cajun Restaurant Lake Charles - 3 Cajun Food Myths You Shouldn't Believe" . 21 September 2019. 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   e   f   g   h   i   Gutierrez, Paige C. (1992).  Cajun Foodways . University Press of Mississippi.  ISBN   0-8780-5563-0 .  Retrieved 2014-04. 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   Bienvenu, Marcelle; Brasseaux, Carl A.; Brasseaux, Ryan A. (June 2008).  Stir the Pot: The History of Cajun Cuisine . Hippocrine Books.  ISBN   978-0-7818-1212-2 .  Retrieved 2014-04. 
 
 ^  a   b   Read, Mimi. "Real Cajun Food, From Swamp to City: [Dining In, Dining Out / Style Desk]".  New York Times .  ProQuest   434010916 . 
 
 ^   Gonsoulin, Brandy (February 5, 2015).  "70 Miles of Distinction; Exploring the differences between Cajun and Creole cuisines" . No. 4pp. Orland. Tribune Newspapers. 
 
 ^  a   b   Prudhomme, Paul (1984).  Chef Paul Prudhomme's Louisiana Kitchen . William and Morrow Company, Inc. p.  16 .  ISBN   0-6880-2847-0 .  Retrieved 2014-04. 
 
 ^   "Food Network names Lafayette's Johnson's Boucaniere top barbecue restaurant in Louisiana" . 
 
 ^   "Ville Platte Barbecue Sauce, passion fruit juice recipes from Exchange Alley" . 
 
 ^   "About Jack Millers - BBQ Sauces and Cajun Products" . 
 
 ^   "Pig Stand Bar-B-Q Sauce" . 
 
 ^   W, Wendy (2004).  "EGGPLANT ETOUFFEE" . {{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: url-status ( link ) 
 
 ^   "Smothered Round Steak & Gravy" . 
 
 ^   "Pork Chops and Andouille in Roux Gravy" . 10 January 2022. 
 
 ^   "Old Fashioned Cajun Chicken Fricassée (Stew) Recipe" . 
 
 ^   " Blacken fish and recipe  a la  Prudhomme" ".  Astray.com . Retrieved 2014-09-21 
 
 ^   "Smoked Andouille Sausage 1#" . 
 
 ^   "Smoked Pure Pork Sausage" . 
 
 ^   herbs and spices - Retrieved 2014-09-25 
 
 ^   Peterson, Jenny (July 2014). "Louisiana Life".  Chachere's Creole Foods .  34  (6): 8. 
 
 ^   Les Vingt, Quatre Club (1954).  First-- you make a roux . Lafayette, La: Les Vingt Quatre Club. p. 47. 
 
 ^   Hand, Edie (2007).  Cajun and Creole cooking with Miss Edie and the Colonel: The folklore and art of Louisiana cooking . Nashville, Tenn.: Cumberland House Pub. pp. 1–281. 
 
 ^   "The Best Gumbo in New Orleans" .  Serious Eats . Retrieved  2022-04-08 . 
 
 ^   "Welcome to the Gonzales Jambalaya Festival Website!" .  Jambalaya Festival Association . Retrieved  9 March  2023 . 
 
 ^   "Eat" . Lafayettetravel.com . Retrieved  2012-11-24 . 
 
 ^   Reed, David W.  "Smothered Meat With Rice and Gravy" .  Texas A&M University . Retrieved  2012-11-24 . 
 
 ^   "Smothered seven steaks" .  WAFB . Retrieved  2012-11-26 . 
 
 ^   "Rice and Gravy" . Realcajunrecipes.com . Retrieved  2012-11-24 . 
 
 ^   "Smothered rabbit with mushrooms" .  Louisiana Public Broadcasting . Archived from  the original  on 2013-02-07 . Retrieved  2012-11-26 . 
 
 ^   "Smothered Turkey Necks in Onion Gravy" . Chef John Folse & Company . Retrieved  2012-11-26 . 
 
 ^   "Chicken Fricassee" . Allrecipes.com . Retrieved  2012-11-28 . 
 
 ^   Barton, Eric.  "How to Throw a Louisiana Crawfish Boil (Even If You're Landlocked)" .  Food & Wine . Meredith Corporation Allrecipes Food Group . Retrieved  7 April  2019 . 
 
 ^   McCarthy, Amy (6 April 2017).  "To Suck or Not to Suck? A Definitive Guide to the Most Controversial Crawfish Question" .  Eater.com . Vox Media, Inc . Retrieved  7 April  2019 . 
 
 ^   "Crawfish Myths: Can You Eat Straight-Tail Crawfish?" .  cajuncrawfish.com . Cajun Crawfish. 7 September 2016 . Retrieved  7 April  2019 . 
 
 ^   Stern, Michael (2009).  500 Things to Eat Before It's Too Late: And the Very Best Places to Eat Them . Houghton Mifflin Harcourt. p. 141.  ISBN   978-0-547-05907-5 . Retrieved  2009-11-24 . 
 
 ^   "Isaac Toups" .  Emeril Lagasse Foundation . Retrieved  2021-03-31 . 
 
 
 External links [ edit ] 
 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons has media related to  Cajun cuisine . 
 
 v t e Cajun cuisine Ingredients 
 Andouille 
 Crawfish 
 Filé 
 Holy trinity 
 Louisiana Hot Sauce 
 Rice 
 Roux 
 Steen's syrup 
 Tasso ham 
 Tabasco sauce 
 Trappey's Hot Sauce 
 Methods 
 Baking 
 Blackening 
 Brochette 
 Deep frying 
 Fricassée 
 Grilling 
 Seafood boil 
 Smoked meat 
 Smothering 
 Dishes 
 Boudin 
 Chaudin 
 Couche Couche 
 Cracklins 
 Crawfish pie 
 Dirty rice 
 Cochon de Lait 
 Étouffée 
 Gumbo 
 Gumbo des Herbes 
 Hog's Head Cheese 
 Jambalaya 
 Maque choux 
 Pecan praline 
 Pistolette 
 Red beans and rice 
 Rice and gravy 
 Sauce Piquante 
 Shrimp Creole 
 Stuffed Mirliton 
 Turducken 
 Chefs 
 John Besh 
 Tony Chachere 
 John Folse 
 Emeril Lagasse 
 Kay Prudhomme 
 Paul Prudhomme 
 Justin Wilson 
 See also 
 Cuisine of New Orleans 
   Category: Cajun cuisine 
 v t e Cuisines Continental 
 African 
 North 
 West 
 list 
 Americas 
 Caribbean 
 North 
 South 
 list 
 Asian 
 Caucasian 
 Central 
 Indian subcontinent 
 Levantine 
 list 
 European 
 Balkan 
 Central 
 Eastern 
 list 
 Oceanic 
 Intercontinental
 Global 
 Latin American 
 Mediterranean 
 Middle Eastern 
 National  and regional 
 Afghan 
 Albanian 
 Algerian 
 American 
 Californian 
 Floribbean 
 Hawaiian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Lowcountry (South Carolina) 
 New England 
 New Mexico 
 Pacific Northwest 
 Pennsylvania Dutch 
 Puerto Rican 
 Southern US 
 Southwest US 
 Texas 
 Angolan 
 Argentine 
 Armenian 
 Australian 
 Austrian 
 Azerbaijani 
 Bahraini 
 Bangladeshi 
 Barbadian 
 Belarusian 
 Belgian 
 Belizean 
 Beninese 
 Bhutanese 
 Bolivian 
 Bosnian-Herzegovinian 
 Botswana 
 Brazilian 
 British 
 Channel Islands 
 English 
 Gibraltarian 
 Northern Irish 
 Saint Helena 
 Scottish 
 Welsh 
 Bruneian 
 Bulgarian 
 Burkinabé 
 Burmese 
 Burundian 
 Cambodian 
 Cameroonian 
 Canadian 
 Acadian 
 Québécois 
 Central African Republic 
 Chadian 
 Chilean 
 Chinese 
 Cantonese 
 Hong Kong 
 Macanese 
 Tibetan 
 Xinjiang 
 Colombian 
 Congolese 
 Corsican 
 Croatian 
 Cuban 
 Cypriot 
 Czech 
 Danish 
 Faroese 
 Greenlandic 
 Djiboutian 
 Dominican 
 Dominican Republic 
 Dutch 
 East Timorese 
 Ecuadorian 
 Egyptian 
 Emirati 
 Equatorial Guinean 
 Eritrean 
 Estonian 
 Ethiopian 
 Fijian 
 Filipino 
 Finnish 
 French 
 Occitan 
 French Guianan 
 Gabonese 
 Gambian 
 Georgian 
 German 
 Ghanaian 
 Greek 
 Cretan 
 Epirotic 
 Greek Macedonian 
 Heptanesean 
 Guatemalan 
 Guinea-Bissauan 
 Guinean 
 Haitian 
 Honduran 
 Hungarian 
 Icelandic 
 Indian 
 Arunachalese 
 Assamese 
 Bengali 
 Bihari 
 Goan 
 Gujarati 
 Himachal Pradesh 
 Kashmiri 
 Jharkhandi 
 Karnataka 
 Kerala 
 Maharashtrian 
 Manipuri 
 Meghalayan 
 Mizo 
 Naga 
 Odia 
 Punjabi 
 Rajasthani 
 Sikkimese 
 Sindhi 
 Tamil 
 Telangana 
 Telugu 
 Indonesian 
 Acehnese 
 Balinese 
 Banjar 
 Batak 
 Betawi 
 Indo 
 Javanese 
 Madurese 
 Makassar 
 Minahasan 
 Minangkabau 
 Palembangese 
 Sundanese 
 Iranian 
 Iraqi 
 Irish 
 Israeli 
 Italian 
 Abruzzese 
 Ligurian 
 Lombard 
 Lucanian 
 Neapolitan 
 Roman 
 Sardinian 
 Sicilian 
 Venetian 
 Ivorian 
 Jamaican 
 Japanese 
 Okinawan 
 Jordanian 
 Kazakh 
 Kenyan 
 Korean 
 North Korean 
 South Korean 
 Kosovan 
 Kuwaiti 
 Kyrgyz 
 Lao 
 Latvian 
 Lebanese 
 Lesotho 
 Liberian 
 Libyan 
 Liechtensteiner 
 Lithuanian 
 Luxembourg 
 Macedonian 
 Malagasy 
 Malawian 
 Malaysian 
 Sabahan 
 Sarawakian 
 Maldivian 
 Malian 
 Maltese 
 Mauritanian 
 Mauritian 
 Mexican 
 Moldovan 
 Monégasque 
 Mongolian 
 Montenegrin 
 Moroccan 
 Mozambican 
 Namibian 
 Nauruan 
 Nepalese 
 New Zealand 
 Nicaraguan 
 Niger 
 Nigerian 
 Niuean 
 Norwegian 
 Omani 
 Pakistani 
 Palestinian 
 Panamanian 
 Peruvian 
 Polish 
 Portuguese 
 Qatari 
 Romanian  (incl.  Transylvanian Saxon ) 
 Russian 
 Bashkir 
 Chechen 
 Circassian 
 Komi 
 Mordovian 
 Sakha 
 Tatar 
 Udmurt 
 Yamal 
 Rwandan 
 Saint Lucian 
 Salvadoran 
 Sammarinese 
 São Tomé and Príncipe 
 Saudi Arabian 
 Senegalese 
 Serbian 
 Seychellois 
 Sierra Leonean 
 Singaporean 
 Slovak 
 Slovenian 
 Somali 
 South African 
 Spanish 
 Andalusian 
 Asturian 
 Balearic 
 Basque 
 Canarian 
 Cantabrian 
 Catalan 
 Extremaduran 
 Galician 
 Manchegan 
 Valencian 
 Sri Lankan 
 Sudanese 
 Swazi 
 Swedish 
 Swiss 
 Syrian 
 Taiwanese 
 Tajik 
 Tanzanian 
 Zanzibari 
 Thai 
 Togolese 
 Tunisian 
 Turkish 
 Turkmen 
 Trinidadian and Tobagonian 
 Ugandan 
 Ukrainian 
 Uruguayan 
 Uzbek 
 Venezuelan 
 Vietnamese 
 Western Saharan 
 Yemeni 
 Zambian 
 Zimbabwean 
 Ethnic 
 Ainu 
 Arab 
 Indonesian 
 Aromanian 
 Assyrian 
 Balochi 
 Berber 
 Cajun 
 Chinese 
 American 
 Canadian 
 Chifa 
 Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Crimean Tatar 
 Greek American 
 Hazaragi 
 Indian 
 Anglo-Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Indigenous American 
 Inuit 
 Italian American 
 Kurdish 
 Livonian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Malay 
 Ossetian 
 Parsi 
 Pashtun 
 Peranakan 
 Romani 
 Sámi 
 Soul food 
 Sylheti 
 Transylvanian Saxon 
 Yup'ik 
 Religious 
 Buddhist 
 Christian 
 Goan Catholic 
 Mangalorean Catholic 
 Mennonite 
 Hindu 
 Islamic 
 Chinese 
 Ital 
 Jain 
 Jewish 
 American 
 Ashkenazi 
 Bukharan 
 Ethiopian 
 Mizrahi 
 Sephardic 
 Syrian 
 Ritual slaughter 
 Sikh 
 Historical 
 Ancient Egyptian 
 Ancient Greek 
 Ancient Israelite 
 Ancient Roman 
 Antebellum America 
 Aztec 
 Byzantine 
 Early modern European 
 Historical Chinese 
 Historical Indian subcontinent 
 Historical North Indian and Pakistani 
 History of agriculture 
 History of alcoholic drinks 
 History of bread 
 History of seafood 
 History of vegetarianism 
 Historical Argentine 
 Historical Japanese 
 Inca 
 Mayan 
 Muisca 
 Mughal 
 Medieval 
 Ottoman 
 Peasant 
 Soviet 
 Thirteen Colonies 
 Styles 
 Classique 
 Fast food 
 Fusion 
 New American 
 Eurasian 
 Haute 
 Molecular gastronomy 
 Note by Note 
 Nouvelle 
 Lists 
 List of cuisines 
 List of historical cuisines 
 Lists of prepared foods 
 Related 
 Cookbook 
 Cooking 
 Culinary arts 
 Drink 
 Food 
 history 
 Diet 
 Meal preparation 
 
   Food portal 
   Drink portal 
   Category 
   Commons 
   Cookbook 
   WikiProject 
   Outline 
 
 Authority control   National libraries 
 France 
 BnF data 
 Israel 
 United States 
 Other 
 FAST 
 IdRef 
 
  
NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw2275
Cached time: 20230310193908
Cache expiry: 1814400
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc, no‐toc‐conversion]
CPU time usage: 0.976 seconds
Real time usage: 1.255 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 8119/1000000
Post‐expand include size: 154724/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 3088/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 16/100
Expensive parser function count: 9/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 121374/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.538/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 24317082/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/400
 
 
Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  986.928      1 -total
 26.62%  262.691      1 Template:Reflist
 16.59%  163.733     24 Template:Cite_web
 10.89%  107.498      1 Template:Commons_category
 10.67%  105.304      1 Template:Sister_project
 10.59%  104.545      1 Template:American_cuisine
 10.45%  103.178      1 Template:Side_box
 10.39%  102.511      1 Template:Lang-fr
 10.32%  101.892      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  9.72%   95.941     13 Template:R
 
  Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:idhash:6186-0!canonical and timestamp 20230310193907 and revision id 1143689979. Rendering was triggered because: page-view
  
 esi <esi:include src="/esitest-fa8a495983347898/content" />  
 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cajun_cuisine&oldid=1143689979 " 
 Categories :  Cajun cuisine American cuisine by ethnic group Hidden categories:  CS1 maint: url-status Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing French-language text Articles containing Spanish-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2012 Articles containing Cajun French-language text Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with BNF identifiers Articles with J9U identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers Articles with FAST identifiers Articles with SUDOC identifiers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  This page was last edited on 9 March 2023, at 08:23  (UTC) . 
 Text is available under the  Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0 ;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the  Terms of Use  and  Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the  Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. 
 
 
 Privacy policy 
 About Wikipedia 
 Disclaimers 
 Contact Wikipedia 
 Mobile view 
 Developers 
 Statistics 
 Cookie statement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
