
 
 
 Jump to content 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle sidebar 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Create account Log in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Personal tools 
 
 
 
 
   Create account   Log in 
 
 
 
 
		Pages for logged out editors  learn more 
 
 
 Contributions Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Navigation 
 
 
 Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate 
 
 
 
 
 Contribute 
 
 
 Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file 
 
 
 
 
 Tools 
 
 
 What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item 
 
 
 
 
 Print/export 
 
 
 Download as PDF Printable version 
 
 
 
 
 In other projects 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons Wikivoyage 
 
 
 
 
 Languages 
 
 On this Wikipedia the language links are at the top of the page across from the article title.  Go to top . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CentralNotice  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Contents 
 move to sidebar 
 hide 
 
 
 
 
 (Top) 
 
 
 
 
 
 1 History 
 
 
				Toggle History subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 1.1 In the United States 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 Among other Southeast Asian cuisines 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 Ingredients 
 
 
				Toggle Ingredients subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 3.1 Fermented sauces 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.2 Herbs and spices 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.2.1 Kroeung 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.3 Vegetables 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.4 Fruits 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.5 Fish and meat 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.6 Noodles 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4 Dishes 
 
 
				Toggle Dishes subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 4.1 Noodle soups 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.2 Soups, stews and curries 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.3 Stir-fries and rice dishes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.4 Salads, rolls, and steamed foods 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.5 Pastries 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.6 Sticky rice dishes and dumplings 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.7 Puddings, sweet porridges and jellies 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5 Beverages 
 
 
				Toggle Beverages subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 5.1 Fermented beverages 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6 Meals and eating etiquette 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 7 International popularity 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8 Culinary diplomacy 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 9 Awards 
 
 
				Toggle Awards subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 9.1 Cookbooks 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 9.2 Restaurants 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 9.3 Chefs 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 10 See also 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 11 References 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 12 Bibliography 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 13 Further reading 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 14 External links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
						Toggle the table of contents
					 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle the table of contents 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cambodian cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 22 languages 
 
 
 
 অসমীয়া Čeština Eesti Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Jawa ქართული Latviešu Bahasa Melayu 日本語 ភាសាខ្មែរ Русский Svenska ไทย Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 
 Edit links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Article Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 English 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 More 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
 
 
 Culinary traditions of Cambodia 
 
 
   Fish amok , a Khmer  steamed  fish curry, one of the national dishes of  Cambodia 
 
 
 
 This article contains  Khmer  text.  Without proper  rendering support , you may see  question marks, boxes, or other symbols  instead of  Khmer script . 
 
 Part of  a series  on the Culture of Cambodia 
Society 
 Khmers 
 Ethnic groups 
 Folklore 
 History 
 Languages 
 Holidays 
 Religion 
 Script 
 Women 
 Youth 
 
Topics 
 Art 
 Architecture 
 Ceramics 
 Cinema 
 Clothing 
 Cuisine 
 Dance 
 Literature 
 Media 
 Newspapers 
 Radio 
 Television 
 Music 
 Sculpture 
 Sports 
 Theatre 
 
 Symbols 
 Flag 
 Coat of arms 
 Anthem 
 World Heritage Sites 
 
   Cambodia portal v t e 
 Cambodian cuisine  is an  umbrella term  for the cuisines of all  ethnic groups in Cambodia , whereas  Khmer cuisine  ( Khmer :  សិល្បៈធ្វើម្ហូបខ្មែរ ;  lit.   'Khmer culinary art') refers specifically to the more than thousand years old culinary tradition of the  Khmer people . [1] [2]  Over centuries, Cambodian cuisine has incorporated elements of  Indian ,  Chinese  and more recently  French cuisine , and due to some of these shared influences and mutual interaction, it has many similarities with the neighbouring  Thai ,  Vietnamese  and  Lao cuisines .
 Khmer cuisine can be classified into peasant, elite and royal cuisine, [3]  although the difference between the royal and popular cuisine is not as pronounced as in the case of  Thailand  and  Laos . [4]  The royal and elite dishes use more varied and higher quality ingredients, and contain more meat, while the peasant food is made from simpler and more accessible ingredients. [3] 
 
 
 History [ edit ] 
   Cambodian  aromatic   long-grain  ( សែនក្រអូប ,  sên krâ’ob ) rice, one of the best  paddy rice  varieties of Cambodia [5] 
   A  bas-relief  of the 12th/13th century  Bayon  temple depicting a Khmer outdoor kitchen  cooks   grilling   sang vak  and cooking a  wild boar  and servers carrying away trays of food. 
   The interior of a traditional Khmer kitchen 
   Toasted baguettes for sale in  Kampot 
 Because of Cambodia's geographic location, rice and fish, especially  freshwater fish , are the two most important sources of nutrients in the Cambodian diet.  Rice  is a  staple food  generally eaten at every meal. [6]  It is believed to have been cultivated in the territory of Cambodia since 5,000 to 2,000 B.C. [7]  The advanced  hydraulic engineering  developed during the  Khmer Empire  allowed the Khmer to harvest rice and other crops three to four times a year. [8]  According to the  International Rice Research Institute , there are approximately 2,000 rice varieties indigenous to Cambodia  bred  over the centuries by the Cambodian rice farmers. [9]  One of them – "Malys Angkor" ( ម្លិះអង្គរ ,  Mlih Ángkô ) – has been regarded the world's best rice. [10] 
 Many spices in Khmer cuisine were introduced by the Indian merchants around the 2nd century. The Indian influence on cuisine among other aspects of  Khmer culture  was already noted by a Chinese visitor around 400 AD. [11]  The trace of  Indianization  can be seen in the coconut-based  curries  ( ការី ,  kari ), as well as boiled red and white sweets. [12]  The Chinese began arriving in  Khmer Empire  in the 13th century, bringing  their cuisine  with them, from which Cambodian cuisine adopted an extensive use of  noodles  and stir frying. [12] 
 From the 9th to the 15th century the culinary influence of the growing Khmer Empire spread beyond the borders of modern-day Cambodia into what is now Thailand, Laos, Vietnam, and Indonesia. [13]  The Khmer palace food developed into a refined royal cuisine and through the Khmer royal  cooks  brought to the  Ayutthaya Kingdom [14]  strongly influenced the  Thai royal cuisine . [13]  The original Khmer palace recipes were modified in the Ayutthaya Kingdom, where during the reign of King  Narai  they also acquired a Portuguese influence and were eventually reintroduced back into Cambodia as the Siamese armies attacked into Cambodia. [15]  New Zealand Cambodian chef Kethana Dunnet has even dubbed Cambodian cuisine "the original Thai cuisine". [16] 
 In the 17th century, the Portuguese and Spanish began introducing various new food crops, such as tomatoes, papaya, pineapple, corn, potato, sweet potato, cassava and chilli from the  Americas [12]  that were incorporated into local dishes, while the French introduced  pâté , salads,  wine , coffee,  asparagus [17]  and  baguettes . [18]  After the  Vietnamese annexation of Cambodia  in 1834 and during the period of Vietnamese-controlled  People's Republic of Kampuchea  from 1979 to 1989 Khmer cuisine was subjected to  Vietnamization , adopting dishes such as  beef lok lak .
 In the decades after World War II, many Cambodian urban middle-class and elite families employed cooks trained to prepare French dishes, and the children of these households often did not learn cooking themselves. The transmission of Cambodian traditional culinary knowledge was even more disrupted by the subsequent war, starvation and  refugee crisis  in the 1970s and 1980s. [13]  In 1975 when the  Khmer Rouge  gained power the rice production in Cambodia had dropped by 84% in comparison with 1970, and the policies of the Khmer Rouge (such as the ban of private cultivation of food crops, ban of  foraging , ban of private ownership of foodstuff, ban of private cooking and ban of private eating combined with the unattainable rice production quotas, forced labour and insufficient food rations) resulted in one of the deadliest  famines  in modern history, during which from 1975 to 1979 an estimated 500,000 to 1.5 million Cambodians perished (10–20% of the country's population). [19] 
 
 With the fracturing of the Khmer society in recent years, like many of its cultural treasures, the finest of the traditional cuisine of Cambodia – both simple and elaborate – stands to be lost forever. Most of the people who cared deeply about food have been killed, have fled the country or have died of old age. At this point, I wouldn't know where to begin to look for the old women who used to guard the secrets of the best spice mixes for curry, preserving them for future generations to enjoy. I assume that these women are all gone. —  Longteine de Monteiro, "The Elephant Walk Cookbook" (1998) 
 Nowadays, more and more Asian  fast food chains  (such as  The Pizza Company ,  Lotteria ,  Pepper Lunch ,  Yoshinoya  and  Bonchon ) [20]  and Western fast food chains (such as  Burger King ,  KFC ,  Krispy Kreme  and  Carl's Jr. ) are entering the Cambodian market, especially in Phnom Penh, and fast food is becoming increasingly integrated into the Cambodian food scene, particularly among the younger generation. [21]  In 2004  Malis , the first Cambodian  fine dining  restaurant in  Phnom Penh , was opened. [22]  Since the early 2010s there has been an emerging  grassroots  culinary movement in  Siem Reap  termed "New Cambodian Cuisine" loosely consisting of six Cambodian chefs and restaurateurs (Pola Siv,  Sothea Seng ,  Pol Kimsan  and  Sok Kimsan , Mengly Mork and Pheak Tim) experimenting with and modernizing traditional Cambodian dishes. [23]  More recently,  mobile applications  dedicated to Khmer traditional recipes have also been developed, such as "Khmer Cooking Recipe" downloaded more than 100,000 times on  Google Play  and "Khmer Cooking". [24] 
 
 In the United States [ edit ] 
 Since the late 1970s, approximately 200,000 Cambodians have settled in the  United States of America , nearly half in  Southern California , fleeing the  Khmer Rouge  and the following economic and political turmoil in Cambodia.  Cambodian Americans  own about 9,000 businesses, predominantly restaurants and  grocery stores  catering to the local Cambodian American community. Interestingly, Cambodian Americans own around 90% of the 5,000 independently owned  doughnut shops  in California. [25]  The most successful of them was  Ted Ngoy  who at the peak of his success owned about 70 doughnut shops in California and was nicknamed "The Donut King". [26] 
 
   A variety of  ready-to-eat  Cambodian and other Asian meals, snacks, and desserts for sale at a supermarket in  Cambodia Town, Long Beach, California 
 Over time the food cooked by Cambodians in the United States developed into a distinct Cambodian American variety. Meat, especially  beef  and  chicken , plays a much more central role in Cambodian American meals, which also make much more extensive use of tomatoes and corn. [27]  The unhealthy eating habits, such as consumption of fatty meat, and  obesity  rates are higher for the Cambodian Americans who experienced a more severe food deprivation and  insecurity  in the past. [28]  The food of second and third generation Cambodian Americans has become more  Americanized . Cambodian cuisine is not well known within the United States and is usually compared to Thai food by many Americans. Most Cambodian restaurants are located in cities with a significant Cambodian population, such as  Lowell, Massachusetts ,  Long Beach, California  and  Seattle, Washington . Some of the Cambodian-owned restaurants, however, served other  Asian cuisines , especially Thai and Chinese, [27]  whereas in the ones that served Cambodian cuisine Chinese, Thai and Vietnamese-influenced dishes usually dominated over Khmer dishes. [29] 
 Long Beach, California  has the most Cambodian restaurants in the U.S. – twenty two, including Phnom Penh Noodle Shack and Sophy's. Some Cambodian-owned restaurants in the city, such as Little La Lune Cuisine and Crystal Thai Cambodian, serve Thai food, while others, such as Hak Heang or Golden Chinese Express, serve Chinese food. [27]   Lowell, Massachusetts , has at least twenty Cambodian restaurants, among them Tepthida Khmer and Simply Khmer. Other notable Cambodian restaurants include Sok Sab Bai in Portland, as well as  Phnom Penh Noodle House  and Queen's Deli in Seattle. The most famous Cambodian restaurant in the U.S. is The Elephant Walk serving French-inspired Khmer cuisine. [27]  It was opened in 1991 in  Cambridge, Massachusetts  by Longteine de Monteiro. The restaurant also created a cookbook of the same name, which is the first Cambodian American cookbook. [29] 
 In 2000 a part of Central Long Beach was officially designated as  Cambodia Town , where since 2005 an annual parade and culture festival takes place there that also features Cambodian cuisine. [30]  Since the late 2010s there has been an emerging wave of second-generation Cambodian American chefs and restaurants in the U.S. focusing on Cambodian cuisine. [31] [32] [33]  Among them is the award-winning restaurant Nyum Bai opened in  Fruitvale, Oakland, California  in 2018 by chef  Nite Yun . [34] 
 
 Among other Southeast Asian cuisines [ edit ] 
 Due to extended culinary contacts and shared extraregional influences from India, China and France, modern Cambodian cuisine has many similarities with the neighbouring  Thai ,  Vietnamese  and  Lao cuisines . Nowadays, the flavour principles of many Khmer dishes, such as sour fish soups, stews and coconut-based curries, including  fish amok , are very similar to  Central Thai cuisine , although Khmer dishes contain much less chilli and sugar [35]  and make greater use of aromatic herbs and spices. Both Thai and Khmer royal cuisines use special herbal spice pastes for curries, soups, and stews. [13] 
 Khmer cuisine has relatively less in common with  Northeast Thai  and  Lao  cuisines, however, they all utilize a  fish paste  in their cooking (called  prahok  in Khmer,  pla ra  in Thai and  padaek  in Lao), [35]  which is believed to be a Khmer influence as both Laos and  Northeast Thailand  historically was part of the Khmer Empire. [36]  With Vietnamese and Lao cuisine it shares the  French  influence as Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia were all part of the  French Indochina . Khmer dishes are less salty than Vietnamese food in general, [37]  and less sweet, sourer and more citrusy than South Vietnamese food. [38]  The ingredients and dishes of  Mekong Delta 's indigenous  Khmer Krom , most notably spices (cardamom, cinnamon, star anise, clove, ginger, turmeric and ground coriander), curries and  fermented food  (such as  mắm  and  mắm pò hóc ). have influenced the cuisine of modern-day  Southern Vietnam . [39] 
 
 Ingredients [ edit ] 
 Fermented sauces [ edit ] 
   Metal containers with fermented seafood ( mam ) at the Prahok market ( Psah Prahok ) in  Battambang . 
   Prahok  fried in banana leaves with steamed rice,  yardlong beans ,  cucumbers ,  spring onions  and  Thai eggplants . 
 In  Khmer , a distinction is made between fermented seafood depending on its consistency and the ingredient.  Mam  ( មាំ ) is the general term for seafood fermented with a special technique and usually includes more solid pieces of the fermented ingredient, whereas  prahok  ( ប្រហុក ,  prâhŏk ) and  kapi  ( កាពិ ,  kapĭ ) have more homogenous consistency than  mam .
 Mam  is prepared by adding a mixture of salt, roasted red sticky rice and palm sugar to  snakehead   fillets  and fermenting them for more than a year. The palm sugar and rice give  mam  an earthier and sweeter flavour and a reddish tone. [40] [41]   Prahok , on the other hand, can either be made from small fish with all the bones and less salt (called  prahok chhoeung ) or large deboned fish and more salt (called  prahok sach  ( ប្រហុកសាច់ ,  prâhŏk săch )), [36]  which in turn can be made from larger fish (such as the  striped snakehead  ( ត្រីរ៉ស់ )) or smaller fish (such as  trei kamplienh ), with or without  roe . Roe can be removed from the fish, cleaned, drained, and fermented separately. [40]  Lastly,  kapi  is made by pounding cleaned, dried and salted shrimp into a homogenous paste, sun-drying it for one day, pounding the paste again, sun-drying it for two more days and pounding the paste for the final time to attain a viscous consistency. [42] 
 Prahok  is used as flavouring for almost every Khmer dish, mixed with rice or served as a  dipping sauce  ( ទឹកជ្រលក់ ,  tœ̆k chrôluŏk ). [36]  It can also be prepared into dishes of its own, such as   prahok k'tis  ( ប្រហុកខ្ទិះ ,  prâhŏk khtih ),  prahok kap  ( ប្រហុកកប់ ,  prâhŏk káp ),  teuk khreung ,  teuk prahok [40]   prahok ang  ( ប្រហុកអាំង ,  prâhŏk ăng ), and  prahok chien  ( ប្រហុកចៀន ,  prâhŏk chiĕn ). Fermented roe ( ពងត្រី ,  pông trei ) are primarily eaten with steamed eggs,  omelettes  and other hen or duck egg dishes. [40]   Kapi  is often mixed with sugar, garlic, lime juice, chilli and crushed peanuts and used as a dipping sauce for vegetables, fruit, meat and fish. [43] 
 Other sauces used in the Cambodian cuisine include  fish sauce  ( ទឹកត្រី ,  tœ̆k trei ),  oyster sauce  ( ទឹកប្រេងខ្យង ,  tœ̆k préng khyâng ),  soy sauce  ( ទឹកស៊ីអ៊ីវ ,  tœ̆k si-iv ;  តៅអ៊ីវ ,  tau iv ;  សាអ៊ីវ ,  sa-iv  or  ស៊ីអ៊ីវ ,  si-iv ),  tamarind sauce  ( ទឹកអម្ពិល ,  tœ̆k âmpĭl ) and  hoisin sauce  ( ទឹកសៀង . Fish sauce is an important ingredient in Khmer cooking, used to add saltiness to soups and noodle dishes, marinating meats or as a dipping sauce for fish. Oyster sauce was introduced by Chinese immigrants [44]  and has become a common ingredient in Cambodian cooking used to add a tangy-sweet flavour to meats and stir-fried vegetables. Oyster sauce, along with fish sauce, and soy sauce, is commonly used together when seasoning foods. Soy sauce is also a common ingredient and condiment, mixed with garlic or aged radish to be eaten with primarily high protein dishes, as well as used to add saltiness when fish sauce is not used. Tamarind sauce is made from tamarind paste mixed with fish sauce, garlic, chilli peppers, lime juice, palm sugar, and  vinegar . [45]  Hoisin sauce is used to marinate grilled meat and especially for  kuyteav  or soups with  hand pulled noodles .
 
 Herbs and spices [ edit ] 
   Black, white, red and green  Kampot peppercorns  for sale at the Kep Crab Market 
 The most common herbs and spices in Cambodian cuisine are  sweet basil  ( ជីរនាងវង ,  chi néangvông ),  coriander  ( ជីរវ៉ាន់ស៊ុយ ,  chivănsŭy ),  hot mint  ( ជីរពងទាកូន ,  chi pông téa kon ),  turmeric  ( រមៀត ,  rômiĕt ),  garlic ,  ginger  ( ខ្ញី ,  khnhei ),  galangal  ( រំដេង ,  romdeng ),  kaffir lime  leaves (ស្លឹក ក្រូចសើច ,  slœ̆k kroch saeuch ),  neem leaves  (ស្លឹក ស្ដៅ ,  slœ̆k sdau ),  peppermint  ( ជីរអង្កាម ,  chi ángkam ),  lemongrass  ( ស្លឹកគ្រៃ ,  slœ̆k krey ),  chives  ( គូឆាយ ,  kuchhay ),  scallions ,  saw leaf herb  ( ជីរបន្លា ,  chi bánla ),  fingerroot  ( ខ្ខ្ជាយ ,  khchéay ) and  rice paddy herb . [11] [46] 
 Certain regions in Cambodia are known for their spices.  Kampot pepper [47]  and  Kampong Speu palm sugar [48]  ( ស្ករត្នោតកំពង់ស្ពឺ ,  Skor Thnaot Kompong Speu ) have been granted  Geographical Indications in Cambodia  and  protected geographical indication in the European Union .  Cardamom Mountains  in Southwest Cambodia are famous for their large population of wild  cardamon  plants [49]  and  Battambang Province  for its  turmeric .
 The cultivation to peppercorns in Cambodia dates back to at least the 13th century [50]  and because of its "uniquely strong yet delicate aroma" and "slightly sweet, eucalyptus taste" [51]  Kampot pepper is often regarded as the world's best pepper. [52] 
 
 Kroeung [ edit ] 
   Green  kroeung . 
 Main article:  Kroeung 
 Kroeung  ( គ្រឿង ,  krœăng     [krɨəŋ]  – 'ingredients') is a Khmer fresh flavouring paste commonly used in curries, soups and stir-fries, one of the essential ingredients of Cambodian cuisine. The base of the paste consists of pounded lemongrass, galangal, garlic, shallots, kaffir lime leaves and turmeric. There are five common types of  kroeung :  yellow  kroeung  ( kroeung samlar m’chu ),  green  kroeung  ( kroeung prâhoeur ) and  red  kroeung  ( kroeung samlar kari ), as well as  k’tis kroeung  ( kroeung samlar k’tis ), and  saraman kroeung  ( kroeung samlar saraman ) each with different uses. [53] 
 
 Vegetables [ edit ] 
 The Cambodian diet consists heavily of  leaf vegetables , such as  water morning glory  ( ត្រកួន ,  trâkuŏn ),  cabbage  ( ស្ពៃក្តោប ,  spey kdaôp ),  Chinese kale  ( ខាត់ណាចិន ,  khăt-na chĕn ),  betel  (ស្លឹក ម្លូ ,  mlu ),  vine spinach  ( វល្លិ៍ជន្លង់ ,  voă chónlóng ), and  watercress  ( ច្រាច់ ,  crac ), which are used in soups, stir-fries ( ឆា ,  chá ) and salads. [11] 
 Cambodian cuisine also uses different  squashes , such as  bitter melon  ( ម្រះ ,  mreăh ),  winter melon  ( ផ្លែត្រឡាច ,  phlê trâlach ),  kabocha , and  luffa  ( ននោង ,  nong ),  root vegetables , such as  carrots  ( ការ៉ុត ,  karŏt ),  cassava  ( ក្ដួច ,  kduŏch ),  lotus rhizomes  ( ឫសឈូក ,  rœ̆h chhuk ),  potatoes  ( ដំឡូង ,  dámlong ),  radish  ( រ៉ាឌី ,  radi ),  sweet potatoes  ( ដំឡូងជ្វា ,  dámlong chvéa ) and  jicama  ( ដំឡូងរលួស ,  dâmlong rôluŏh  or  ប៉ិកួៈ ,  pĕkuŏk ) and other vegetables, such as  cucumbers  ( ត្រសក់ ,  trâsák ),  eggplants  ( ត្រប់ ,  tráp ),  tomatoes  ( ប៉េងប៉ោះ ,  péngpaôh ),  cauliflower  ( ផ្កាខាត់ណា ,  phka khăt-na ),  chayote  ( ផ្លែស៊ូ ,  phlê su ),  shallots  ( ខ្ទឹមក្រហម ,  khtœ̆m krâhâm ),  yardlong beans  ( សណ្ដែកកួរ ,  sándêk kuŏ ) and  maize  ( ពោត ,  pot ). Many unripe fruits, such as papaya, green banana, and mango, are also used as vegetables. [11] [54] 
 
 Fruits [ edit ] 
   A Cambodian fruit vendor at the  Central Market  selling  pomelos ,  oranges ,  apples ,  kiwifruit  and  sugar bananas 
   A Cambodian fruit vendor at the  Central Market  selling  dragon fruit ,  persimmons ,  apples ,  winter melons ,  snake fruit  and  pomelos 
 Fruits in Cambodia are so popular that they have their own royal court. The  durian  ( ទុរេន ,  tŭrén ) is considered the "king", the  mangosteen  the "queen",  sapodilla  ( សាប៉ូឌីឡា ) the "prince" and the  milk fruit  ( ផ្លែទឹកដោះគោ ,  phlê tœ̆k daôh ko )  the "princess". Other popular fruit include  kuy fruit  ( ផ្លែគុយ ,  phlê kŭy ),  romduol ,  pineapple  ( ម្នាស់ ,  mnoăh ),  rose apple ,  jackfruit  (ផ្លែ ខ្នុរ ;  phlê khnŏl ),  papaya  ( ល្ហុង ,  lhŏng ),  watermelon  ( ឪឡឹក ,  âulœ̆k ),  banana  ( ចេក ,  chék ),  mango  ( ស្វាយ ,  svay ),  rambutan  ( សាវម៉ាវ ,  sav mav ), [55]   guava  ( ត្របែក ,  trɑbaek ),  longan  ( មៀន ,  miĕn ) and  tamarind  ( អម្ពិល ,  âmpĭl ). [11] 
 Although fruits are usually considered desserts, [11]  some such as ripe  mangoes ,  watermelon , and  pineapples  are eaten commonly with heavily salted fish with plain rice. Fruits are also made into  smoothies  ( ទឹកក្រឡុក ,  tœ̆k krâlŏk ). Popular fruits for smoothies are  durian ,  mangoes  and  bananas . Sun-dried limes boiled in sugar and  salt water  are used in chicken and duck soups, sauces with fish, as well as beverages. [56] 
 
 
 Apple  ( ប៉ោម ,  paôm ) 
 Breadfruit  ( សម្ ,  sam ) 
 Sugar cane  ( អំពៅ ,  ámpŏu ) 
 Cashew  ( ស្វាយចន្ទី ,  svaychănti ) 
 Coconut  ( ដូង ,  dong ) 
 Custard apple  ( ទៀប ,  tiĕp ) 
 Dragon fruit  ( ស្រការ ,  srâka ) 
 Key lime  ( ក្រូចឆ្មារ ,  krouc chmaa ) 
 Kumquat  ( ផ្លែកុមខ្វាត់ ;  phlê kŏmkhvăt ) 
 Langsat  ( ឡុងកុង ,  lŏng kŏng ) 
 Lotus seeds  ( គ្រាប់ពូជ ឈូក ,  kroăp puch chhuk ) 
 Lychee  ( គូលែន ,  kulén ) 
 Mango plum  ( ម៉ាក់ប្រាង ,  măprang ) 
 Mangosteen  ( មង្ឃុត ,  móngkhŭt ) 
 Palmyra fruit  seeds ( គ្រាប់ត្នោត ,  kroăp tnaôt ) 
 Persimmon  (ផ្លែ ទន្លាប់ ,  phlê tónloăp ) 
 Pomelo  (ផ្លែ ក្រូចថ្លុង ,  phlê kroch thlŏng ) 
 Snake fruit  (ផ្លែ សាឡាក់ ,  phlê salăk  or ផ្លែ រកាំ ,  phlê rôkăm ) 
 Soursop  ( ផ្លែទៀបបារាំង ,  phlê tiĕp barăng  – 'foreign custard apple fruit') 
 Star fruit  ( ផ្លែស្ពឺ ,  phlê spœ ) 
 Star gooseberry  ( កន្ទួត ,  kántuŏt ) 
 Since 2018,  Koh Trong pomelos  ( ក្រូចថ្លុងកោះទ្រង ,  kroch thlŏng Kaôh Trông ) are recognized as one of the  geographical indications  in Cambodia. Pomelos grown in the  Kratié Province 's  Koh Trong commune  are known for their sweeter taste and the absence of seeds after ripening. [57] 
 
 Fish and meat [ edit ] 
   Sun-dried  shark minnows  and  snakehead fish  at the Prahok market ( Psah Prahok ) in  Battambang 
   Dried fish and pork sausages for sale at  Psah Chas  in Siem Reap 
 There are more than 900 different  freshwater  and  saltwater fish  species found in Cambodia. Approximately 475,000 tons of fish ( ត្រី ,  trei ) are caught in Cambodia every year and a Cambodian annually consumes 63 kg of fish on average. They are fried, dried, smoked and fermented into  prahok  and fish sauce. Fish and fish products are eaten two to three times a day. [6]  Popular fish are snakeheads,  snappers ,  catfishes  ( ត្រី ,  trei chleang ), and  mackerels . [13]  Cambodian chef  Luu Meng  has estimated that approximately 40–50% of Cambodian dishes are made with fish. [58] 
 It is known that in the late-13th century Khmer Empire cows were not used for riding, meat or  hide , and the  geese  had been recently introduced by the Chinese sailors. [59]  Since the 1980s, the role of meat in the Cambodian diet has increased significantly and nowadays the consumption of meat, such as  beef  ( សាច់គោ ,  săch koo ),  pork  ( សាច់ជ្រូក ,  săch chruk ) and  poultry , has become common, especially in the capital region. [60]  In Siem Reap ground pork or beef is made into spicy or sweet and savoury sausages ( សាច់ក្រក ,  săch krɑɑk  (pork);  ខ្វាគោ ,  săch krɑɑk  (beef)) that are eaten with steamed white rice,  congee  or  baguettes . [61]  Beef and  chicken  ( សាច់មាន់ ,  săch mŏən ) is stewed, grilled or stir-fried, while  duck meat  ( សាច់ទា ,  săch tiə ) roasted in  char siu  style, is popular during festivals.
 Other seafood includes an array of shellfish such as  crabs  ( ក្ដាម ,  kdaam ), clams,  cockles  ( ងាវ ,  ngiəw ),  crayfish  ( បង្កង ,  bang kang ), shrimp and squid ( ត្រីមឹក ,  trei mik ). Boiled or fried cockles seasoned with salt, chili, and garlic are sold as a popular street food. [62]   Giant freshwater prawns  are usually only eaten by  middle  and  upper-class  Cambodians because of their price. More unusual varieties of meat include  frogs  ( កង្កែប ,  kɑngkaep ; most commonly eaten are  East Asian bullfrogs ,  rice field frogs ,  balloon frogs ,  banded bullfrogs ,  yellow frogs  and  Asian common toads ), [63]   turtles [64]  ( អណ្ដើក ,  ɑndaək ) and  arthropods  (such as  tarantulas  ( សត្វអាពីង ,  sata ping ),  fire ants ,  grasshoppers  ( កណ្ដូប ,  kandoup ),  giant water bugs  and  crickets  ( ចង្រិត ,  cɑngrət )). [65]  Crickets, water bugs, and tarantulas are seasoned with salt, sugar and oil, deep-fried and sold as street food. [62] 
 
 Noodles [ edit ] 
   Cambodian rice and wheat noodles 
 Cambodian noodles are made out of  rice ,  wheat  and  tapioca flour  ( banh kanh  ( បាញ់កាញ់ ,  bañ kañ )) in varying thickness. Wheat noodles, such as  hand-pulled noodles  ( មី ,  mii ) and the thinner  wheat vermicelli  ( មីសួ ,  mii suə ), have been adopted from the  Chinese cuisine , but incorporated into distinct Cambodian noodle soups and stir-fries. Rice noodles include the indigenous lightly-fermented  num banhchok  ( នំបញ្ចុក ), as well as  rice vermicelli  ( គុយទាវ ,  kŭytéav ),  banh sung  ( បាញ់ស៊ុង ,  bɑɲ song ),  silver needle noodles  ( លត ,  lat ) and  banh hoi  ( បាញ់ហយ ).
 
 Dishes [ edit ] 
   Cambodian street food  skewers 
 In Cambodia, street food ( ម្ហូបតាមផ្លូវ ) is considered a snack rather than a meal. Food stalls are called  hang bai  ( ហាងបាយ ) or simply  hang  ( ហាង ) in Khmer, which is a  borrowing  from Chinese  háng  ("store", "business"). More specifically the stalls are referred to by the main food served, for example, rice noodle stalls ( ហាងគុយទាវ ,  hang kŭytéav ) or coffee stalls ( ហាងកាហ្វេ ,  hang kafe ).
 
 Noodle soups [ edit ] 
 Dumpling noodle soup  ( មីគាវ ,  mii kiəv ) 
 A Cambodian rendition of the Chinese  wonton noodles . The broth is clear topped with  garlic chives  and the dumplings are filled with seasoned minced pork and shrimp. Variations are often served with wheat vermicelli, a mixture of rice-wheat noodles or flat rice noodles ( គុយទាវមីគាវ ,  kŭytéav mii kiəv ). 
   Kuyteav  Phnom Penh 
 Kuyteav  ( គុយទាវ ,  kŭytéav ) 
 A popular Chinese Cambodian breakfast rice vermicelli soup with meat (chicken, beef or pork) garnished with bean sprouts, chopped  scallions , chopped  coriander , fish sauce, lime, and  sriracha . It can either be served with all the garnish in the soup or the soup on the side. [66]  There are many regional variations of  kuyteav . In the Phnom Penh version ( kuyteav Phnom Penh )  pig blood , liver and heart are added, while near  Mekong  prawns and fish cakes are included. In modern versions of  kuyteav  pork is sometimes replaced with beef, seafood or chicken. It is similar to Vietnamese  hủ tiếu , Malaysian and Singaporean  kway teow  and Thai  kuai tiao  (ก๋วยเตี๋ยว). [67] 
 Kuyteav khor ko  ( គុយទាវខគោ ) 
 A rice noodle dish created from the stewed/braised beef combined with flat rice noodles. It features French influences including potatoes and carrots topped off with chives and coriander. It is eaten with bread as well. A similar dish exists in Vietnam called  hủ tiếu bò kho . 
   Num banhchok 
 Num banhchok  ( នំបញ្ចុក ) 
 A popular Cambodian breakfast soup, consisting of lightly fermented rice noodles with a fish gravy made from  prahok  and  yellow  kroeung  topped off with fresh mint leaves, bean sprouts, green beans, banana flowers, cucumbers and other greens. There is also a red curry version usually reserved for ceremonial occasions and wedding festivities. 
   Num banhchok samlar kari 
 Num banhchok samlar kari  ( នំបញ្ចុកសម្លការី ) 
 A rice noodle dish eaten with a Khmer curry soup. The curry may be yellow (turmeric soup base) or red (chilli curry soup base) depending on the type of soup created and generally include chicken (including legs) or beef, potatoes, onions, and carrots. 
 Num banhchok samlar namya  ( នំបញ្ចុកសម្លណាំយ៉ា ) 
 A rice noodle dish featuring a Thai sour soup base ( Thai :  นำ้ยา ,  RTGS :  nam-ya ) popular during festivals and family gatherings. It features the same vegetables and herbs in  num banhchok teuk prahok  ( នំបញ្ចុកទឹកប្រហុក ) although the base is created with  Thai green curry paste . 
 Num banhchok Kampot  ( នំបញ្ចុកកំពត ) 
 A speciality of  Kampot  featuring a cold rice noodle salad rather than a soup base. It features cuts of spring rolls, a variety of herbs, ground nuts, pork, and fish sauce. 
 Num banhchok teuk mrech  ( នំបញ្ចុកទឹកម្ហេច ) 
 A speciality soup of Kampot that features a clear fish broth (that does not feature the use of  prahok ) cooked with chives and vegetables. It is a regional speciality not found in Phnom Penh and other parts of Cambodia where Khmer and Vietnamese varieties of  num banhchok  are eaten. 
 Num banhchok samlar yuon 
 A rice noodle soup originating from the  Vietnamese Cambodians  living in the urban areas of Cambodia. It is most similar to Vietnamese  bún riêu  featuring a red blood pork soup base and balls of minced crab meat. It also features more variety of herbs and vegetables not used in Vietnam. 
 Soups, stews and curries [ edit ] 
 Samlar  ( សម្ល ) refers to soup dishes that are eaten with rice, while the  loanword   sup  ( ស៊ុប ) refers to dishes that can be eaten without rice, these usually being dishes of Chinese or French origin.
 
   Chicken  congee  ( បបរមាន់ ,  babor mŏən ) 
   Samlar kako 
   Saraman curry 
 Caramelized pork and eggs  ( ខសាច់ជ្រូក ,  khor săch chruk ) 
 Braised pork and egg stew flavoured in caramelized palm sugar, fish sauce, and Kampot black peppercorns. It may contain  tofu  or bamboo shoots and often substitutes quail eggs for chicken eggs. A typical  Khmer Krom  dish. [ citation needed ] 
 Curry soup ( សម្លការី ,  samlar kari ) 
 An Indian-influenced Cambodian soup. It is a traditional wedding and celebration dish, featuring coconut chicken  curry  gently spiced with paprika, with a soup-like consistency, often cooked with  sweet potatoes , and  julienned   onion . The soup is also used as a  dipping sauce  for fresh  baguettes , while  num banhchok samlar kari  is often served for breakfast the next day, featuring the same ingredients to make  num banhchok  but using the  samlar kari  broth instead of the traditional turmeric and fish-based broth that goes into making  num banhchok . 
 Congee  ( បបរ ,  babar ) 
 A Cambodian dish of Chinese origin. A type of white rice porridge with or without meat (chicken, pork, fish, dried fish, seafood, snails, or frog legs) served with a wide array of condiments ( fish floss , pickled vegetables, fried garlic, fish sauce, chilli flakes, chilli oil, and fresh herbs). [68] 
 Hot pot  ( ឆ្នាំងភ្លើង ,  chnang phləəng  – 'pot fire') 
 The most common form of hot pot in Cambodia contains shared meat and assorted vegetables cooked in a heated pot with a clear broth. There are different hot pot variations with other names and mixed influences from China. It is generally eaten during the colder dry season and during late-night gatherings.  Chap chai  soup eaten with  hand pulled noodles  or  wheat vermicelli  is called  chhnang dei , whereas a banquet-style hot pot for dipping beef, shrimp, spinach, dill, napa cabbage, rice noodles and mushrooms is called  yao hon  ( យ៉ៅហន ). It differs from the standard Cambodian hot pot or other Asian hot pots in that it features a tangy coconut broth rather than a clear broth.  Chhnang phnom plerng  or volcano hot pot is a Cambodian-style barbecue similar to Lao and Thai counterparts. It is served on a hot pot attached to a grill that allows meat to cook and release juices into the broth, making the soup tastier over time. [ citation needed ] 
 Koh Kong coconut-pineapple curry ( សម្លខ្ទិះកោះកុង ,  samlar khtih Koh Kong ) 
 A  Koh Kong  speciality dish made out of  red  kroeung , coconut cream, palm sugar and fish sauce with pieces of pineapple,  eggplant , and shallots. Garnished with coriander and basil and eaten with steamed rice. [69] 
 Pickled lime soup with chicken ( ស្ងោរមាន់ង៉ាំង៉ូវ ,  sngao mŏən ngamngəw ) 
 A chicken and vegetable soup flavoured with  pickled limes  or  lemons . [70] 
 Samlar machu  ( សម្លម្ជូរ ) 
 An entire class of  samlar , whereby the dominant flavour is an aromatic, citrusy tartness, and there are many different versions. Almost every town or province has its own unique version of  samlar machu  including  samlar machu kroeung  (featuring  kroeung , turmeric,  water morning glory , coriander, stewed beef ribs and tripe),  samlar machu Khmer Krom  (featuring tomato, pineapple, catfish,  lotus rhizome  and holy basil) and  samlar machu Siem Reap  (containing bamboo shoots and tiny freshwater shrimps). The sourness and citrus flavour can come from  prahok , tamarind, lemongrass, kaffir lime, lime juice, or herbs such as lemon basil. [71]  It is similar to the Vietnamese sour soup  canh chua . 
 Samlar kako  ( សម្លកកូរ ) 
 Traditional Cambodian stirring pot soup, one of Cambodia's national dishes. It consists of  green  kroeung ,  prahok , roasted ground rice,  catfish , pork or chicken, vegetables, fruits and herbs. [72] 
 Samlar prahal  ( សម្លប្រហើរ ) 
 A fish soup flavoured with  prahok  and a  kroeung  made from lemongrass, turmeric,  fingerroot  and garlic. The primary vegetables included in the stew are  kabocha ,  taro  and various mushrooms. Other local vegetables are added according to taste and availability. 
 Saraman curry  ( ការីសារ៉ាម៉ាន់ ,  kari saraman ) 
 A  Cham  beef curry. It is similar to Thai  Massaman curry  and Malaysian  Beef rendang . [73] 
 Stir-fries and rice dishes [ edit ] 
 The Khmer term  cha  ( ឆា ) refers to the stir-frying technique adopted from the Chinese. [14] 
 
   Beef lok lak 
   Cambodian seafood  fried rice 
   Cha kh'nhei 
   Kampot pepper  crab 
   Kola noodles 
 Bay sach chruk  ( បាយសាច់ជ្រូកោ ,  bai săch chruk  – 'pork rice') 
 A common breakfast street food featuring rice,  char siu  barbecue pork, egg (scrambled, steamed, fried, or caramelized), chive soup,  chrok  (pickled vegetables) or preserved radish, and soy sauce or fish sauce condiments. 
 Beef lok lak  ( ឡុកឡាក់សាច់គោ ,  loklak săch koo ) 
 A beef dish of  French Indochinese  (specifically  Vietnamese ) origin. It contains stir-fried marinated cubed beef with fresh  red onions , served on a bed of lettuce, cucumbers, and tomatoes and dipped in a sauce of lime juice, sea salt and Kampot black peppercorns. Regional variants include  lok lak Americain  distinguished by the addition of French fries instead of steamed rice and a fried egg. [74] 
 Cantonese noodles  ( មីកាតាំង ,  mee katang ) 
 A  Cantonese Cambodian  dish derived from the Cantonese  chow fun . It is made by stir-frying  flat rice noodles  in soy sauce and oyster sauce with eggs, carrots,  Chinese kale , and marinated meat (pork, beef, chicken, shrimps or mixed seafood), and sometimes topped off with a tapioca or corn starch gravy. The Cambodian-style Cantonese noodles are related to Thai  pad see ew  and  rat na  and Lao  lard na . [75] 
 Cambodian-style barbecue pork  ( សាច់ជ្រូកសាសុីវ ,  săch chruk sa səyv ) 
 A Cambodian rendition of the Chinese  char siu  barbecue pork that is often added to baguettes or eaten with rice for breakfast. 
 Cambodian-style roast pork  ( សាច់ជ្រូកខ្វៃ ,  săch chruk kvɑy ) 
 A Cambodian rendition of the Chinese  siu yuk  roast pork that is usually eaten with white rice,  prahok  or shrimp paste, and raw vegetables. 
 Chha kh'nhei  ( ឆាខ្ញី  – 'stir-fried ginger') 
 A spicy stir fry of meat, usually chicken, eel or frog flavoured with julienned gingerroot, Kampot black peppercorns, garlic, soy and sometimes fresh  jalapeños  or fresh peppers, for extra heat. 
 Chicken rice  ( បាយមាន់ ,  bay mŏən ) 
 A Cambodian street food dish similar to Malaysian/Singaporean  Hainanese chicken rice  with the exception of  kreoung  being mixed with the rice before steaming. 
 Kampot pepper  crab ( ក្តាមឆាម្រេចខ្ជី ,  kdam cha mrich khchei ) 
 A signature seafood dish from the coastal provinces of  Kep  and  Kampot . Crabs are stir-fried with garlic, spring onions, ground Kampot black peppercorns or Kampot green peppercorns, soy sauce and herbs. [76] 
 Fried rice  ( បាយឆា ,  bay cha ) 
 A Cambodian version of the Chinese fried rice which includes pork, sausages, eggs, garlic, soy sauce, and herbs. [77]  There are numerous variations of the dish in Cambodia, including shrimp fried rice ( បាយឆាកាពិ ,  bay cha kapĭ ) made with shrimps and shrimp paste. [78] 
 Grilled eggplant with pork ( ឆាត្រប់សាច់ជ្រូកចិញ្ច្រាំ ,  cha tráp săch chruk chenh chram ) 
 A typical dish from  Kampuchea Krom  consisting of  chargrilled  eggplant halves with stir-fried ground pork, garlic, shallots and lemongrass garnished with herbs. [79] 
 Kroeung  fishcakes  ( ប្រហិតត្រីគ្រឿង ,  prohet trei krœăng ) 
 Whitefish  fillets  mixed with  kreoung  and pounded in a  mortar and pestle . The mix is shaped into patties or meatballs and deep-fried. They are eaten with a sauce made out of Kampot black peppercorns mixed with lime juice. [80] 
 Kola noodles  ( មីកុឡា ,  mii kola ) 
 A vegetarian noodle dish created by the  Kola people  in the  Pailin Province . Boiled  rice vermicelli  is stir-fried in soy sauce and served with boiled eggs,  blanched  bean sprouts, grated  pickles  (papaya, cucumbers and carrots) garnished with  roasted peanuts  and herbs. Non-vegetarian versions of this dish contain dried shrimp and fish sauce. [81] 
 Pak lov  ( ផាក់ឡូវ ,  pak ḷūv ) 
 A dish of caramelized/braised organs, both a home dish and popular street food. 
 Stir-fried flat rice noodles  ( ឆាគុយទាវ ,  cha kŭytéav ) 
 A Cambodian version of a stir-fried  flat rice noodle  dish that is a speciality of the southern regions of Cambodia. [ citation needed ]  It often features dark and sweet soy sauce and an assortment of meats. It is topped with sautéed scallions, egg, pork ham, and cuts of spring rolls. 
 Stir-fried silver needle noodles ( លតឆា ,  lot cha ) 
 A Chinese Cambodian dish.  Silver needle noodles  stir-fried in fish sauce, soy sauce and palm sugar, with garlic, bean sprouts and scallions or chives, served with a fried egg. [82] 
 Stir-fried morning glory  ( ខាត់ណាឆាប្រេងា ,  khat na cha preng ) 
 Water morning glory  stir-fried with garlic, shallots, beef, palm sugar and soy sauce. [83] 
 Stir-fried wheat vermicelli ( ឆាមីសួ ,  cha mee sua ) 
 Wheat vermicelli  stir-fried with garlic, vegetables, mushrooms, and oyster, fish, and soy sauce. The dish is most commonly made for religious festivals such as  Pchum Ben , or during temple festivals as a food offering to monks. 
 Stir-fried hand-pulled noodles  ( មីឆា ,  mee cha ) 
 Hand-pulled noodles stir-fried with beef and vegetables, and topped with an egg and gravy. A common street food. 
 Salads, rolls, and steamed foods [ edit ] 
   Cambodian  fried spring rolls 
   Cambodian  green papaya salad 
   Pleah sach ko 
 There are two types of salads –  gnoam  with cooked meat and  p'lear  where the meat is either raw or  cured  in a citrus dressing.
 
 Banana flower salad ( ញាំត្រយ៉ូងចេក ,  gnoam trayong chek ) 
 A fresh salad consisting of cut banana flowers, shredded poached chicken, crushed roasted peanuts and various herbs and vegetables with a dressing made out of garlic, chillies, fish sauce, lime juice and palm sugar. [84] 
 Banh hoi  ( បាញ់ហយ ) 
 Wheat vermicelli  served in a bowl with assorted vegetables, stir-fried ground pork in soy sauce, oyster sauce, and fish sauce, and topped off with fish sauce and sweet coconut milk. Other variations include pork ham and grilled meat. Variations of this dish exist all over Southeast Asia. 
 Fish amok  ( អាម៉ុកត្រី ,  amŏk trei ) 
 A Khmer  steamed  fish curry ( amok ) with a  mousse -like consistency, one of  Cambodia 's  national dishes . Goby fish,  snakehead fish  or  catfish   fillets  are rubbed with  kroeung  mixed with  coconut cream  or  coconut milk  and eggs and steamed in a banana leaf container with  great morinda  leaves at the bottom for 20 to 30 minutes. Served hot and eaten with steamed rice. [85] 
 Fresh spring rolls  ( ណែម ,  naem chao  – 'raw rice paper') 
 A salad spring rolls with assorted vegetables and meats wrapped in edible  rice paper  ( num naem chhao ). 
 Fried spring rolls   ( ចៃយ៉ ,  chai yor  or  ណែមចៀន ,  naem chien ) 
 A Cambodian version of the Chinese fried spring rolls. Despite originating in the Chinese Cambodian community, nowadays fried spring rolls have spread throughout the country. They are different from Chinese spring rolls with their filling often not being cooked before frying, making Cambodian spring rolls lighter. In addition to that, fish sauce is usually used in the filling, instead of oyster or soy sauce, and Cambodian spring rolls, if not reheated, are fried only once. [86] 
 Green papaya salad  ( បុកល្ហុង ,  bok l'hong ) 
 A salad from  garlic ,  bird's eye chili peppers , dried shrimps, pickled crab,  papaya ,  green beans  and  tomatoes  pounded in a mortar and pestle and mixed with  Asian basil ,  coriander  or  long coriander  and kaffir lime leaves, as well as a savory dressing of lime juice and fish sauce, and garnished with peanuts. [87]  Cambodian green papaya salad is less spicy than the Thai variety and less sweet than the Vietnamese green papaya salad. [88] 
 Num por pia  ( នុំពពៀ ,  num pɔpəə ) 
 A dessert in which the wrapper originates from Chinese  popiah .  Porpear  can serve as a wrapper for dessert and for assorted meats; many various dishes exist. 
 Pleah sach ko  ( ភ្លាសាច់គោ ) 
 Lime and  prahok -cured beef salad, sometimes also including beef tripe, tossed with thinly sliced purple Asian shallots, finely shaved radish, crushed  roasted peanuts  and fresh herbs such as mint and basil. It is very popular at weddings and for special occasions. 
 Rice noodle rolls  ( គុយទាវកាត់ ,  kŭytéav kat  – 'cut flat rice noodles') 
 Steamed rice noodle rolls with minced pork filling cut into smaller pieces. It is served with assorted vegetables, cut spring rolls, nuts, fish sauce, and pork ham. It is a speciality in the  Phnom Penh  and  Ta Khmao  areas. 
 Pastries [ edit ] 
   Egg cakes ( num pong ),  sesame balls  ( num kroch ), and Cambodian doughnuts ( num kong ) 
   Deep-fried chive cakes 
   Coconut-rice crêpes with pork and  mung bean sprouts 
   Cambodian banana fritters  ( នំចេកចៀន ,  num chek chien ) 
     Num Pang Pâté 
   Palm sugar rice cakes 
   Cambodian  pumpkin-coconut custard 
 Most Cambodian pastries use either rice or tapioca flour, whereas in Chinese and French-influenced pastries (such as  num pao ) wheat flour may also be used.
 
 Cambodian doughnuts ( នំកង ,  num kong  – 'bracelet cake') 
 Rice flour pastries glazed with palm sugar and garnished with sesame seeds. Sold in markets and usually eaten as a to-go breakfast food. [89] 
 Chive cakes ( នំកាឆាយវៃ ,  num ka'chai ) 
 A Cambodian street food snack of Chinese origin. It is made from a mixture of glutinous rice flour, tapioca flour, chopped chives and garlic moulded into a flat dumpling shape and fried in oil in a large pan. [90]  In Cambodia, the cake is eaten in combination with other dishes to add texture or with sweet fish sauce. 
 Coconut-rice crêpes  ( បាញ់ឆែវ ,  num banh chao ) 
 Crêpes  made from coconut milk, rice flour and turmeric. Eaten with ground pork, lettuce leaves, carrot-chilli sauce and roasted peanuts. [91] 
 Coconut pancakes ( នំគ្រក់ ,  num krok ) 
 A street food snack made from a mixture of coconut milk, rice flour and scallions cooked on a cast iron  griddle  with half-spherical moulds. 
 Coconut waffles ( នំពុម្ព ,  num poum ) 
 Waffles made from rice flour and coconut milk originating in the French Indochina period. [92] 
 Egg cakes ( នុំពងៃ ,  num pɔɔng ) 
 An Asian-styled doughnut originating in China. The dough is deep-fried and flaked with milk. 
 Mung bean rice cakes [93]  ( នំពពាយ ,  num por peay ) 
 Boiled thin long rolls of glutinous rice dough filled with a mixture of mung beans and coconut milk, topped off with coconut shavings, and white sesame seeds. [94] 
 Num pang  ( នំបុ័ង  – 'bread') 
 A baguette with braised beef, chicken curry, [89]  raw and pickled vegetables as well as pâté ( ប៉ាតេរី ), butter, and mayonnaise. It is similar to Vietnamese  bánh mì  and Lao  khao jee pâté . 
 Num pao  ( នំប៉ាវ ) 
 A popular Cambodian street food of Chinese origin, leavened dumplings made from wheat flour, sometimes with the addition of milk and lemon juice, filled with a savoury, spicy or sweet filling. Savoury fillings are usually made from pork and different vegetables. [95] 
 Num pia  ( នំពារ ,  num piə ) 
 A Chinese Cambodian cake popular during the holidays. It is a speciality in the Siem Reap, Kampot, Phnom Penh, and  Ta Khmau  areas, and unique given the special red stamp on the top of the cake. 
 Num kaov/a'kaov 
 A steamed cupcake made from rice flour combined with palm sugar to create white (coconut), yellow (palm sugar), and pandan (green) variations. This is a popular dessert and street snack as well as being served during traditional weddings. 
 Pandan rice cakes ( នំបាញ់ឌុក ,  num banh duc ) 
 A dessert made with pandan, rice flour and tapioca. 
 Pandan tapioca balls ( saku dom ) 
 Sweet  tapioca balls  ( គុជខ្យងតាហ្គីកា ,  kŭch khyâng tagika ) flavoured with pandan leaves and salt. 
 Palm sugar rice cakes [96]  ( នំផ្លែអាយ ,  num ple ay ) 
 A tapioca dessert in different colours with a palm sugar filling, topped with coconut shavings. It is a traditional dessert featured in weddings alongside husband and wife cake, and pandan desserts. The dessert is humorously nicknamed "husband killer" because of how easy it is to choke on when consumed. [97] 
 Pumpkin-coconut custard  ( សង់ខ្យាល្ពៅ ,  sankya lapov ) 
 A dessert made of steamed pumpkin filled with coconut flan. The coconut flan is also often added to puddings. 
  Saku  (tapioca dessert) 
 A type of steamed dessert made from chestnut flour, coconut milk, and cooked mung beans. 
 Sesame balls  ( នំក្រូច ,  num kroch  – 'orange cake') 
 A fried pastry with a mung bean filling brought to Cambodia by Chinese immigrants. The Khmer name "orange cake" refers to the  fruit  it resembles. [98] 
 Spring onion bread  ( នំប៉័ងចិន ,  num pang chen  – 'Chinese bread') 
 A type of bread combining Chinese and French influences. It is flat and baked and fried simultaneously rather than simply being fried like its Chinese counterpart. [99] 
 Steamed layer cakes ( នំច័ក្កចន័ ,  num chak chan ) 
 A steamed rice cake made out of layers of pandan and coconut milk. It is often featured in the Cambodian wedding banquet. Similar to Vietnamese  bánh da lợn , Thai  khanom chan  and Indonesian  kue lapis . 
 Sticky rice in bamboo  ( ក្រឡាន ,  kralan ) 
 A cake made by roasting a mixture glutinous rice,  black-eyed peas  or  beans , coconut milk, grated coconut and palm sugar in  bamboo  tube over a fire [100]  for around 90 minutes.  Kralan  is often prepared and eaten at  Chinese  and  Khmer New Year . [101] 
 Sticky rice dishes and dumplings [ edit ] 
   An assortment of packaged Cambodian sweets sold at a street food market 
 Bai ben  ( បាយបិណ្ឌ ) 
 A sticky rice dessert that is moulded into a ball and topped with sesame seeds. It is very popular during  Pchum Ben . 
 Durian sticky rice ( បាយដំណើបទុរេន ,  bai damnaeb tŭrén ) 
 A sticky rice dessert topped with sweet coconut milk and slices of durian fruit. A variation of that is  mango sticky rice  ( បាយដំនើបស្វាយ ,  bai damnaeb svay ). 
 Mung bean dumplings ( បាញ់ចានឿក ,  banh chaneouk ) 
 Steamed glutinous rice or sago dumplings with mung bean filling served in a ginger and coconut sauce. Similar to Chinese  tong sui . 
 Sticky rice with sesame seeds ( នំទ្រាប ,  num treap ) 
 A slightly hardened glutinous rice and coconut dessert topped off with roasted sesame seeds. [102] 
 Siev mai  ( ស៊ីវម៉ៃ ) 
 A Cambodian rendition of a Chinese pork dumplings. In Khmer, "siev mai" refers not only to the dumpling but also a style of meatballs created by the southern Chinese immigrants in Phnom Penh. 
   Num ansom chrouk 
 Steamed sticky rice cakes 
 Glutinous rice flour  pastries steamed in banana leaves with different sweet or savoury fillings. The pyramid-shaped  num chang  are filled with pork, sausage, and beans and are derived from Chinese  zongzi , the pyramid-shaped  num bot  ( នំបត ) are filled with mung bean paste and the pyramid-shaped  num kom  ( នំគម ) are filled with a mixture of coconut shavings, toasted sesame seeds and palm sugar. The cylinder-shaped  num ansom  ( នំអន្សម ) can either be filled with  sugar bananas  ( នំអន្សមចេក ,  num ansom chek ) or jackfruits ( នំអន្សមខ្នុរ ,  num ansom khnao ), or pork ( នំអន្សមជ្រូក ,  num ansom chrouk ). In addition to steaming  num ansom  can also be fried or grilled depending on the occasion. [103]  The cylinder shape represents a  phallus , symbolizing  Shiva , the masculine principle of God, while the pyramid shape symbolizes the  Shakti , the feminine principle of God. Sticky rice cakes are given as offerings to the  manes  of the ancestors on  Pchum Ben  to gain their blessing to the rice fields. [104] 
 Tapioca pearl balls ( នំសាគូ ,  num saku ) 
 Tapioca balls with a meat filling. Minced meat is seasoned and cooked then wrapped in a tapioca mixture and steamed. The dish is often served with vegetables and sweet sauce. It is similar to Thai  sakhu sai mu , Lao  khao nom sakoo  and Vietnamese  bánh ít trần . 
 Puddings, sweet porridges and jellies [ edit ] 
 Cambodian desserts include puddings ( ចាហួយទឹក ,  cha houy teuk ), sweet porridges ( បបរផ្អែម ,  babor p'aem ) and  agar   jellies  ( សារាយ​ ,  sarai ).
 
 Banana coconut tapioca pudding ( ចេកខ្ទិះ ,  chek k'tis ) 
 A Khmer porridge made out of  sago  or tapioca pearls, slices of banana, coconut milk and palm sugar and garnished with grated coconut and toasted white sesame seeds. [105] 
 Grass jelly  ( ចាហ៊ួយខ្មៅ ,  cha huoy khmaw ) 
 Often eaten with soybean milk during a hot day because of its cooling properties. 
 Green bean porridge ( បបរសណ្តែកខៀវ ,  bang'aem babor sandaek khiev ) 
 One of the most popular desserts in Cambodia made from tapioca, mung beans, sugar, and coconut milk and usually eaten after lunch or after work in the evening. 
 Longan pudding ( បបរមៀន ,  babor miən ) 
 A pudding made out of coconut milk, palm sugar and tapioca topped with fresh longan. 
 Lotus seed and longan porridge ( babor skor krop phka chhuk mien ) 
 A watery sugar-based dessert that can be served cold or warm. It features longan and lotus seeds and can also be served as a drink. 
 Mung bean pudding ( បបរសណ្តែកខៀវ ,  babor sɑɑ tek khiəw ) 
 A dessert of Chinese origin that is very popular in the Chinese diaspora across Southeast Asian countries. It is made of split mung beans, palm sugar, flour and coconut milk. Chinese Cambodians prefer this bean pudding with  fried breadsticks  ( ឆាខ្វៃ ,  cha kway ). 
 Num lot 
 A green or white dessert made from rice flour in a liquid of coconut, milk, water and sugar. A similar dish is Indonesian  cendol . 
 Pandan coconut jelly ( សារាយ​ខ្ទិះ​ ,  sarai k'tis ) 
 A dessert with layers of pandan and coconut agar jelly. 
 Red lotus seed jelly ( tur tim krop ) 
 A coconut milk-based dessert that is very popular during hot weather. The small reddish/pinkish jewels are water chestnuts covered with tapioca, served with sweetened coconut milk and shaved ice. Shredded jackfruit and jellied coconut flesh can also be added to this dessert. Jellied coconut flesh occurs when the coconut lacks an enzyme that turns its flesh into normal coconut flesh. The flesh continues to develop in the jelly state. In Khmer,  tur tim  means either "ruby" or "pomegranate". Similar to Thai  thapthim krop . 
 Sweet corn porridge ( បបរស្ករពោត ,  babor skor bot ) 
 Sweet corn   kernels  and glutinous rice boiled in coconut milk sweetened with palm sugar. 
 Beverages [ edit ] 
   Sugarcane juice 
 Water is the most popular drink. As  drinking water  sources are not always easily accessible in rural areas water is boiled at home and consumed hot. In urban areas  bottled water , as well as soda and sweetened fruit beverages, is available.  Green tea  ( តែបៃតង ,  tê baitâng ) is consumed throughout the day. [11]  It is believed to have been introduced in the Khmer Empire by the Chinese, but despite the growing consumption and suitable climate nowadays most green tea is imported and very little is actually grown locally. [106]   Camellia sinensis cambodiensis , a local  strain  of the  tea plant , grows in the  Kirirom National Park , in the remnants of a former 300-hectare tea plantation [107]  established in the 1960s by the King  Norodom Sihanouk , [106]  and the area around Chamkar Te village in  Mondulkiri Province . Recently, there have been efforts to revive the Cambodian tea production. [108]   Lemon   iced tea  ( តែទឹកក្រូចឆ្មា ,  tae krouc chmaa ) is also prepared and consumed.
 In urban areas  coffee  ( កាហ្វេ ,  kaafee ) is also popular and is usually served with  sweetened condensed milk  rather than  black . [11]  Coffee can be consumed either  iced  ( កាហ្វេទឹកកក ,  kaafee tœ̆k kɑɑk ) or hot. [109]  It is sold in coffee carts,  coffeehouse  chains and specialty coffee shops. [110]  More than 90% of all coffee in Cambodia is imported from other countries, such as Vietnam, Laos, and Thailand. [111] 
 Smoothies  ( ទឹកក្រឡុក ,  tœ̆k krɑlok ) are an important part of an evening's consumption available at juice stalls in towns all over the country from the late afternoon. They can contain a mixture of fruits or just one or two; coconut milk, sugar syrup,  condensed milk  and shaved ice are also added, as is a raw egg (unless specified otherwise –  ot yoh pong mowan ).  Soy milk  ( ទឹកសណ្ដែក ,  tœ̆k sɑndaek ) is sold in the morning by street vendors; the green version is sweetened and thicker than the unsweetened white. Served either hot or cold, sweetened or unsweetened.  Sugarcane juice  ( ទឹកអំពៅ ,  tœ̆k ʼɑmpɨw ) is also a popular street drink made by pressing the juice out of sugarcane stalks with a special machine. Served with ice and sometimes flavoured with citrus to balance the sweetness. [62]   Pandan juice  ( ទឹកតើយ ,  tœ̆k taeuy ) is made from the extract of pandan leaves and usually sold in Cambodian food stalls.
 
 Fermented beverages [ edit ] 
   Hand-painted bottles of  Sombai  infused  rice wine 
   Bottles of  Angkor Beer  and Cambodia Beer 
 According to the Chinese diplomat  Zhou Daguan , five  fermented   alcoholic beverages  were produced in the late-13th century Khmer Empire:  mead ,  pengyasi  made from the leaves of an unidentified plant,  baolengjiao  made from  rice hulls  and rice leftovers, "sugar-shine wine" made from sugar and palm starch wine made from the starch of the leaves of a palm growing on the  riverbank . [112] 
 Nowadays, the most popular alcoholic beverage is  beer  ( ប៊ីយេរ ,  biiyɛɛ ). [113]  The first domestically brewed beer was produced in the 1930s during the French Indochina period by the  Brasseries & Glacières de L'Indochine  company in Phnom Penh. [114]  In 1995 the annual beer consumption per capita was only around two liters, [115]  but by 2004 it began to rise significantly and in 2010 beer overtook spirits as the most popular alcoholic beverage in Cambodia. [113]  Currently, the four biggest beer producers in Cambodia are the  Cambrew Brewery ,  Cambodia Brewery ,  Khmer Brewery  and  Kingdom Breweries . [116]  Recently, there has also been a quickly growing craft beer scene with 12  brewpubs  or  microbreweries  operating in Cambodia in 2019. [117] 
 A popular traditional alcoholic beverage is  rice wine  ( ស្រាស ,  sra sa ). It is produced by fermenting boiled and dried rice with a natural  fermentation starter  ( dom bai ) for at least 24 hours and  distilling  the resulting mixture. [118]  Modern distillation methods were introduced during the French Indochina period. [119]  Occasionally, there have been instances of  methanol poisoning  from low quality home-made rice wine. [120]  Rice wine can also be infused with various herbs, roots, bark and insects to create medicinal rice wines ( srah tinum ). [118]  A popular drink infused with  deer antlers  and different herbs is the Special Muscle Wine manufactured since 1968 by Lao Hang Heng Wine. [121]  The company also produces popular Golden Muscle Liquor and Wrestler Red Wine, [122]  whereas  Sombai  manufactures a line of premium infused rice wines. [123] 
 Another popular, albeit lower-prestige alcoholic beverage is  palm wine  ( ទឹកត្នោតជូរ ,  tœ̆k tnaot cuu ). It might have become popular during the French Indochina period as a cheap alternative to other wines. [124]  Palm wine is produced by fermenting  Asian palmyra palm  sap either through  spontaneous fermentation  by adding several plants to the sap and hanging the containers on trees or through the addition of a fermentation starter ( ម៉ែទឹកត្នោតជូរ ,  mae tœ̆k tnaot cuu ) made from fermented palm sap and various dried plant  xylems  and  bark . [125]  Confirel in  Pou Senchey District  uses the  Champagne method  to produce sparkling palm wine under the name "Thnot Sparkling Mekong Wine". [126] 
 A regional beverage of the  Mondulkiri province  is yellow and purple  passion fruit  wine, [127]  while wine from  jambolan  is produced by a company in  Takéo province . [128]   Samai Distillery , Cambodia's first rum distillery, produces rum and even uses Kampot peppercorns in one of its products. [129]  Cambodia's first and only winery Chan Thai Choeung In  Battambang  has been commercially producing grape wine since 2005. [130] 
 
 Meals and eating etiquette [ edit ] 
   A modern four-person Cambodian restaurant meal consisting of  steamed rice ,  samlar machu kroeung , bitter melon omelette, fried quails, fried chicken, sweet-and-sour stir-fried fish and sweet fish sauce 
 In Cambodia, meals are usually freshly prepared three times a day (for  breakfast ,  lunch  and  dinner ), although in rural areas only breakfast and dinner may be eaten. Due to a general lack of  refrigeration ,  leftovers  are usually discarded. A typical Cambodian breakfast consists of rice porridge with dried salted fish, rice with dried salted fish and vegetables, baguette with  condensed milk  or rice/egg noodles with meat and  leaf vegetables . For lunch and dinner, Cambodians usually eat steamed rice, soup with meat (fish, pork, chicken or beef) and leaf vegetables, fried fish or other meat and fruit. [11] 
 In Cambodian meals just like the rest of Southeast Asia, all dishes are served and eaten simultaneously, as opposed to the European course-based meal format or the Chinese meal with overlapping courses. [131]  The only exception is if the meal contains French-style dishes, in which case the dishes are served in courses. [13]  A number of  side dishes  are usually served alongside the main dishes. [131]  In addition to that, a variety of condiments, such as  chili jam , pickled green chillies, sugar, garlic flakes, fish sauce and soy sauce, are also available. [132]  While steamed rice and soups are usually served hot, side dishes may be served at room temperature. The balance of flavours and satisfaction of individual preferences are achieved by combining the individual dishes and rice. [131]  For example, a Cambodian meal may consist of a sour soup, a salty fish, fried vegetables and plain rice, which is different from Thai food where sourness, saltiness, sweetness and spiciness are usually contained within a single dish. [133] 
 Khmer food is traditionally eaten with hands, but nowadays spoons, forks and  chopsticks  are also used.  Knives  are rarely used as the majority of Cambodian food is already cut into bite-sized pieces.  Forks  and  spoons  were introduced by the French and are used for eating rice and/or soup-based dishes, whereas chopsticks were introduced by the Chinese and are used only for eating noodle dishes. [134] 
 
 International popularity [ edit ] 
   Restaurant "Le Cambodge" in Paris, France, offering a mix of Cambodian and Vietnamese specialties 
 Cambodian cuisine is not very known across the world.  Food Republic  has described Cambodian as "The Greatly Underappreciated Outlier In Asian Cooking". [135]   Fodor's Travel  has called Cambodian cuisine "the most underrated in Southeast Asia" and Siem Reap "SE Asia’s Most Underrated Food Destination", [136]  while the magazine  Time Out  has named  Kep  one of "18 of the world’s most underrated food cities" [137] 
 
 Over the past three decades, the West has fallen in love with the cuisines of Thailand, southern China, Vietnam and Malaysia, even Burma (for its barbecue), but somehow, Cambodia's food has slipped through the cracks. —  Matthew Fishbane, "Will Cambodian food ever catch on in America?" (2007) [138] 
 Outside of Cambodia, Cambodian cuisine can generally be found in countries with sizeable Cambodian immigrant communities, such as the  United States ,  France ,  Australia  and  Canada , especially in the  Little Cambodia   ethnic enclaves , but it is often aimed towards the local Cambodian community. Due to commercial considerations and the ethnic composition of the Cambodian diaspora many Cambodian-owned restaurants have chosen to serve the better-known Thai, Chinese and Vietnamese food instead.
 
 Culinary diplomacy [ edit ] 
   Cambodian chef  Luu Meng  (second from right) with his business partner Richard Gillet (second from left) in  Avignon ,  France  in 2016 promoting Cambodian cuisine 
 In December 2020, the  Ministry of Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation  launched an official "Food Diplomacy 2021–2023" campaign as part of a larger  economic diplomacy  strategy. At the launch  Minister of Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation   Prak Sokhonn  listed  prahok ,  fish amok , pomelo salad,  samlar kako , coconut-pineapple curry ( samlar k'tis ),  coconut prahok dip  and  num banhchok  as some of the Khmer dishes to be promoted in the campaign. The ministry also established a program to train Cambodian cooks for serving in  Cambodian embassies  and a program for providing ambassador spouses with knowledge about the Khmer cuisine. [139] 
 In February 2021, the ministry published a cookbook "The Taste of Angkor" as a culinary promotion tool for Cambodian diplomatic missions abroad. [140]  A 1960 Cambodian cookbook and culinary guide "The Culinary Art of Cambodia" by Princess Norodom Rasmi Sobbhana republished in May 2021 by Angkor Database was also included in the campaign. [141] [142]  In June 2021, a series of promotional videos under the slogan "Taste Cambodia" featuring Khmer foods and culinary activities in different Cambodian regions commissioned by the  Ministry of Tourism of Cambodia  were released. [143]  In May 2022, culinary training and representation facilities under the name of "Angkor Kitchen" were unveiled at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation. [144] [145] 
 
 Awards [ edit ] 
 Cookbooks [ edit ] 
 The cookbook "From Spiders to Water Lilies, Creative Cambodian Cooking with Friends" published by non-governmental organization  Friends-International  has received the 2009 Gourmand World Cookbook Award as the "Best Asian Cuisine Cookbook", becoming the first book from Cambodia to win the award. [146] 
 The French-language Khmer cookbook  Au Pays de la Pomme Cythère, de Mère en Fille, Authentiques Recettes Khmères  written and self-published by Kanika Linden and her mother Sorey Long [147]  has won the 2010 Gourmand Awards as the world's "Best Asian Cuisine Cookbook". The English-language version of the book "Ambarella, Cambodian Cuisine" has won the 2013 Gourmand Awards as the "Best Asian Cuisine Cookbook" in the UK [148]  and world's "Best Asian Cuisine Cookbook" in 2014.
 The cookbook "The Taste of Angkor" published by the  Ministry of Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation of Cambodia  has won the 2021 Gourmand World Cookbook Award as the "Best Asian Cookbook" [149] [150]  and 2022 Gourmand World Cookbook Awards as the "Best Asian Cuisine Book" and "Heads of State/Food" for the book's foreword written by Deputy Prime Minister  Prak Sokhon . [151] 
 The republished Cambodian cookbook and culinary guide "The Culinary Art of Cambodia" has received the "Special Award of the Jury" at the 2022 Gourmand World Cookbook Awards. [152] [153] 
 
 Restaurants [ edit ] 
 Joannès Rivière 's Cuisine Wat Damnak has been included in position No. 50 of  Asia's 50 Best Restaurants  in 2015, becoming the first Cambodian restaurant to make the list. [154]  In the 2016 list it rose to the 43rd position. [155]  In 2020, the restaurant Embassy spearheaded by the  Kimsan Twins  was included in the Asia's 50 Best Restaurants newly created 50 Best Discovery list. [156] 
 
 Chefs [ edit ] 
 Cambodian chef  Luu Meng  has received Asia's Top Chef award from the Malaysia-based business and lifestyle magazines "Top 10 of Malaysia" and "Top 10 of Asia" in 2014. [157] 
 Cambodian chefs from the Cambodia Chefs' Association have won the 2019 ASEAN Gourmet Challenge with three gold medals, as well as received six silver and 17 bronze medals in the Global Pastry Chefs Challenge and Global Young Chefs Challenge categories at the Thailand Ultimate Chef Challenge taking place from 28 May to 1 June in  Bangkok . [158] [159] 
 
 See also [ edit ] 
 Kula cuisine 
 Cham cuisine 
 References [ edit ] 
 
 
 ^   Dunston, Lara (26 June 2020).  "Mahob Khmer Chef Sothea Seng on Cambodia's Culinary Heritage" .  Grantourismo Travels . Retrieved  7 January  2021 .  Khmer food refers to the food cooked by Cambodia's predominantly Khmer population, while Cambodian food takes in everything: Khmer food, as well as Chinese-Cambodian, Chinese, and the specialties of Cambodia's Cham Muslims, such as Saraman curry, a cousin to Thailand's Massaman curry. 
 
 ^   Kimani, Rosemary (20 June 2017).  "What Makes Cambodian Food Rich And Unique With Chef Joannès Rivière" .  Authentic Food Quest . Retrieved  7 January  2021 .  Cambodia is the country and therefore encompasses the ethnic majority, the Khmers, along with the Chinese, the Lao, the Cham, the Viet, the Samre, the Jarai. Cambodian food is a mix of all those cuisines. Khmer cuisine relates to a specific group without the capital idea of the influence of other groups. 
 
 ^  a   b   McCafferty, Georgia; Tham, Dan (5 May 2017).  "Food for the soul: Resurrecting Cambodia's forgotten cuisine" .  CNN . Retrieved  7 January  2021 . 
 
 ^   "L'Art de la cuisine cambodgienne | The Culinary Art of Cambodia" . The Angkor Database . Retrieved  3 June  2021 . 
 
 ^   Chan, Sok (27 December 2017).  "Rice body chooses best paddies" .  Khmer Times . Retrieved  25 October  2019 . 
 
 ^  a   b   Vilain, Clarisse; Baran, Eric (2016).  Nutritional and health value of fish: the case of Cambodia   (PDF) . Inland Fisheries Research and Development Institute and  WorldFish . pp. 1–9.  ISBN   978-9924-9046-1-8 . 
 
 ^   Nhean, Moeun (7 March 2014).  "Cambodia's rich rice history" .  The Phnom Penh Post . Retrieved  16 November  2016 . 
 
 ^   Galloway, Monique (31 May 2021).  "How Did Hydro-Engineering Help Build The Khmer Empire?" . The Collector . Retrieved  3 June  2021 . 
 
 ^   Thaitawat 2000 , pp. 24 
 
 ^   Chan, Sok (15 October 2018).  "Malys Angkor crowned World's best rice" .  Khmer Times . Retrieved  25 October  2019 . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   e   f   g   h   i   Edelstein, Sari (2010).  Food, Cuisine, And Cultural Competency For Culinary, Hospitality, And Nutrition Professionals .  Jones & Bartlett Learning . pp. 245–249.  ISBN   978-0-763-75965-0 . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   Van Esterik 2008 , p. 12 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   e   f   Ken Albala, ed. (2011).  Food Cultures of the World Encyclopedia . Vol. 3.  Greenwood Publishing Group . pp. 43–47.  ISBN   978-0-313-37627-6 . 
 
 ^  a   b   Van Esterik 2008 , p. 7 
 
 ^   Van Esterik 2008 , p. 71 
 
 ^   Tyler, Leisa (19 September 2014).  "Cambodian Cuisine Out of the Shadows" .  Fine Dining Lovers . Retrieved  25 October  2019 . 
 
 ^   Van Esterik 2008 , pp. 13–14 
 
 ^   Rivière 2008 , p. 21 
 
 ^   Defalco, Randle C. (2014).  "Justice and Starvation in Cambodia: The Khmer Rouge Famine" .  Cambodia Law & Policy Journal .  45  (2).  SSRN   2499193 . 
 
 ^   Sotheavy, NouNou (2 April 2015).  "Fast Food Chains Hungry for Market" .  Khmer Times . Retrieved  25 October  2019 . 
 
 ^   Mengchou, Cheng; Spengler, Miriam (2016).  "How (un)healthy and (un)safe is food in Cambodia?" .  Konrad Adenauer Foundation . pp. 2–3. 
 
 ^   Gall, Darren (14 October 2015).  "Elegant Malis" .  Khmer Times . Retrieved  17 June  2021 . 
 
 ^   Dunston, Lara (10 April 2018).  "New Cambodian Cuisine – The Local Chefs Redefining Cambodian Food" .  Grantourismo Travels . Retrieved  25 October  2019 . 
 
 ^   Starkey, Tom (11 January 2021).  "App developers serve up Khmer cuisine to thriving digital recipe market" .  Khmer Times . Retrieved  17 May  2021 . 
 
 ^   Ling, Huping; Austin, Allan W. (2010).  Asian American History and Culture: An Encyclopedia .  Routledge . p. 102.  ISBN   978-0-765-68077-8 . 
 
 ^   Kramer, Gary M. (30 October 2020).  "The riveting saga of "The Donut King," who was seduced by dough, money and power" . Retrieved  7 January  2021 . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   Lucy M. Long, ed. (2015).  Ethnic American Food Today: A Cultural Encyclopedia .  Rowman & Littlefield Publishers . pp. 95–98.  ISBN   978-1-442-22730-9 . 
 
 ^   Peterman, Jerusha Nelson; Wilde, Parke E.; Liang, Sidney; Bermudez, Odilia I.; Silka, Linda; Rogers, Beatrice Lorge (October 2010).  "Relationship Between Past Food Deprivation and Current Dietary Practices and Weight Status Among Cambodian Refugee Women in Lowell, MA" .  American Journal of Public Health .  100  (10): 1930–1937.  doi : 10.2105/AJPH.2009.175869 .  PMC   2937002 .  PMID   20724691 . 
 
 ^  a   b   Jonathan H. X. Lee; Kathleen Nadeau, eds. (2010).  Encyclopedia of Asian American Folklore and Folklife .  ABC-CLIO . p. 199.  ISBN   978-0-313-35066-5 . 
 
 ^   "Cambodia Town Parade & Culture Festival" . Cambodia Town, Inc . Retrieved  7 January  2021 . 
 
 ^   Bennett, Sarah (September 2018).  "The Next Big Thing: Cambodian Food" .  Modern Adventure . Retrieved  3 June  2021 . 
 
 ^   Tomky, Naomi (12 October 2020).  "Finding the Heart of Cambodian Cuisine in the U.S."   Fine Dining Lovers . Retrieved  3 June  2021 . 
 
 ^   Jillani, Maryam (6 November 2021).  "Cambodian Americans Are Ready to Share Their Cuisine, On Their Terms" .  Condé Nast Traveler . Retrieved  9 November  2021 . 
 
 ^   Bitker, Janelle (4 March 2019).  "Nyum Bai's Cambodian Dishes Are Racking Up the Awards" .  Eater . Retrieved  25 October  2019 . 
 
 ^  a   b   Kofahl, Daniel; David, Wahyudi (2017).  Food Culture of Southeast Asia: Perspectives of Social Science and Food Science .  Kassel University Press . p. 22.  ISBN   978-3-737-60286-0 . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   LeGrand, Karen; Borarin, Buntong; Young, Glenn M. (6 May 2020).  "Tradition and Fermentation Science of  prohok , an ethnic fermented fish product of Cambodia" .  Journal of Ethnic Foods .  7 .  doi : 10.1186/s42779-019-0027-1 . 
 
 ^   Van Esterik 2008 , pp. 53–54 
 
 ^   Alford, Jeffrey ;  Duguid, Naomi  (2000).  Hot Sour Salty Sweet: A Culinary Journey Through Southeast Asia .  Workman Publishing Company . p. 16.  ISBN   978-1579-6511-4-5 . 
 
 ^   Vu-Hong, Lien (2016).  Rice and Baguette: A History of Food in VietnamVu Hong Lien .  Reaktion Books .  ISBN   978-1-780-23657-5 . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   Thaitawat 2000 , p. 31 
 
 ^   Phil, Lees (30 October 2006).  "Just the facts, Mam" . Phnomenon . Retrieved  15 June  2012 . 
 
 ^   Thaitawat 2000 , p. 23 
 
 ^   "Shrimp Paste Dipping Sauce" .  Cambodian Recipes . 25 June 2017 . Retrieved  25 October  2019 . 
 
 ^   Rivière 2008 , p. 63 
 
 ^   Allen, Gary (2019).  Sauces Reconsidered: Après Escoffier .  Rowman & Littlefield Publishers . p. 46.  ISBN   978-1538-1151-3-8 . 
 
 ^   Rivière 2008 , pp. 8–17 
 
 ^   Sopheng, Cheang (2 March 2016).  "Cambodia's Kampot pepper wins coveted EU protection" .  Associated Press . Retrieved  16 November  2016 . 
 
 ^   Vannak, Chea (26 June 2018).  "Kampong Speu Palm Sugar earns PGI status in Europe" .  Khmer Times . Retrieved  10 October  2019 . 
 
 ^   P. N. Ravindran (2017).  The Encyclopedia of Herbs and Spices .  Centre for Agriculture and Bioscience International . p. 170.  ISBN   978-1-78064-315-1 . 
 
 ^   George Edgar (1 November 2016).  "Reaping what you sow" .  The Phnom Penh Post . Retrieved  16 November  2016 . 
 
 ^   Ferrie, Jared (23 June 2010).  "As Champagne is to France, Kampot pepper is to Cambodia" .  The Christian Science Monitor .  ISSN   0882-7729 . Retrieved  16 November  2016 . 
 
 ^   Reid, Robert (16 January 2020).  "The world's most prized pepper?" .  BBC . Retrieved  29 June  2020 . 
 
 ^   Carter, Terence.  "Kroeung Cambodian Curry Paste — A Cambodian Cuisine Essential" .  Grantourismo Travels . Retrieved  25 October  2019 . 
 
 ^   Rivière 2008 , pp. 8–17 
 
 ^   Chanthul, Prak (March 2003).  "Cambodia Play Host To A Court Of..."   Leisure Cambodia . Vol. 3, no. 3 . Retrieved  5 June  2012 . 
 
 ^   Sassoon, Alessandro Marazzi; Taing, Rinith (18 January 2018).  "In pursuit of Phnom Penh's perfect pickle" .  The Phnom Penh Post . Retrieved  25 October  2019 . 
 
 ^   Chan, Sok (25 June 2018).  "Koh Trong pomelo gets GI recognition" .  Khmer Times . Retrieved  25 October  2019 . 
 
 ^   Van Ginhoven, Robin (May 2021).  "Cambodian cuisine with Luu Meng and his recipe for samlor korko" . Kuli-kuli . Retrieved  3 June  2021 . 
 
 ^   Zhou Daguan  (2007).  A Record of Cambodia: the Land and Its People . Translated by Peter Harris. Silkworm Books. p. 75.  ISBN   978-97-495-1124-4 . 
 
 ^   Sokneang, In; Lambré, Claude; Camel, Valérie; Ouldelhkim, Mostafa (2015).  "Regional and seasonal variations of food consumption in Cambodia"   (PDF) .  Malaysian Journal of Nutrition .  22  (2): 167–178.  ISSN   1394-035X . 
 
 ^   Taing, Rinith (11 May 2018).  "Siem Reap's unlikely culinary treasures" .  The Phnom Penh Post . Retrieved  25 October  2019 . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   Kraig, Bruce;  Sen, Colleen Taylor  (2013).  Street Food around the World: An Encyclopedia of Food and Culture .  ABC-CLIO . pp. 313–314.  ISBN   978-1-59884-955-4 . 
 
 ^   Neang, Thy; Eastoe, Toby (July 2010).  "An Investigation into Frog Consumption and Trade in Cambodia"   (PDF) .  Fauna and Flora International . pp. 6–7 . Retrieved  25 October  2019 . 
 
 ^   Murray, Bennett; Vandy, Muong (24 October 2014).  "Slippery ethics in the turtle eating business" .  The Phnom Penh Post . Retrieved  25 October  2019 . 
 
 ^   Burson, Tom (20 March 2018).  "Tarantulas, fire ants and other bugs go from street food to gourmet dishes in Cambodia" .  Mic . Retrieved  25 October  2019 . 
 
 ^   Dunston, Lara (20 August 2020).  "Cambodian Kuy Teav Recipe for a Classic Chicken Noodle Soup" .  Grantourismo Travels . Retrieved  3 June  2021 . 
 
 ^   Terei-Vigh, Kriszti (1 June 2018).  "Kuy teav" .  196 flavors . Retrieved  25 October  2019 . 
 
 ^   Dunston, Lara (18 June 2020).  "Cambodian Chicken Rice Porridge Recipe for Borbor Sach Moan" .  Grantourismo Travels . Retrieved  29 June  2020 . 
 
 ^   Dunston, Lara (3 May 2021).  "Cambodian Coconut Pineapple Fish Curry Recipe from Koh Kong" . Grantourismo Travels . Retrieved  17 May  2021 . 
 
 ^   Dunston, Lara (24 December 2020).  "Cambodian Pickled Lime Soup with Chicken Recipe for Sngor Ngam Ngov" . Grantourismo Travels . Retrieved  7 January  2021 . 
 
 ^   "Cambodian Sweet-and-Sour Soup" .  ' The Washington Post . 25 July 2007 . Retrieved  15 June  2012 . 
 
 ^   Dunston, Lara.  "Samlor Korko Recipe - How to Make Cambodian Stirring Pot Soup" . Grantourismo Travels . Retrieved  7 January  2021 . 
 
 ^   Carter, Terence (13 November 2014).  "A Recipe for Saraman Curry or Cari Saramann – a Cambodian curry" .  Grantourismo Travels . Retrieved  25 October  2019 . 
 
 ^   Phil, Lees (3 March 2007).  "Loc Lac" . Phnomenon . Retrieved  15 June  2012 . 
 
 ^   Dunston, Lara (14 September 2020).  "Cambodian Mee Katang Recipe for Quick and Easy Cantonese Noodles" .  Grantourismo Travels . Retrieved  7 January  2021 . 
 
 ^   Rivière 2008 , p. 71 
 
 ^   Carter, Terence.  "Cambodian Fried Rice Recipe – How to Make the Best Bai Cha" .  Grantourismo Travels . Retrieved  25 October  2019 . 
 
 ^   Dunston, Lara.  "Shrimp Fried Rice With Shrimp Paste Recipe for Cambodia's Bai Cha Kapi" .  Grantourismo Travels . Retrieved  7 January  2021 . 
 
 ^   Rivière 2008 , p. 60 
 
 ^   Carter, Terence.  "Cambodian Fish Cakes Recipe – How to Make Prohet Trei Kroeung" .  Grantourismo Travels . Retrieved  24 January  2021 . 
 
 ^   Dunston, Lara (14 September 2020).  "Mee Kola Recipe for the Vegetarian Noodles of Cambodia's Kola People" .  Grantourismo Travels . Retrieved  7 January  2021 . 
 
 ^   Dunston, Lara.  "Cambodian Lort Cha Recipe for Stir Fried Rice Pin Noodles" .  Grantourismo Travels . Retrieved  7 January  2021 . 
 
 ^   Rivière 2008 , p. 73 
 
 ^   Dunston, Lara (20 September 2020).  "Banana Flower Salad Recipe for Cambodia's Gnoam Trayong Chek" .  Grantourismo Travels . Retrieved  7 January  2021 . 
 
 ^   Dunston, Lara (23 May 2017).  "Cambodian Fish Amok Recipe – an Authentic Steamed Fish Curry in the Old Style" .  Grantourismo Travels . Retrieved  25 October  2019 . 
 
 ^   Dunston, Lara (5 January 2021).  "Cambodian Fried Spring Rolls Recipe for Crispy Deep-Fried Egg Rolls" .  Grantourismo Travels . Retrieved  7 January  2021 . 
 
 ^   Rivière 2008 , p. 29 
 
 ^   Dunston, Lara.  "Green Papaya Salad Recipe – How to Make Cambodian Bok Lahong" .  Grantourismo Travels . Retrieved  7 January  2021 . 
 
 ^  a   b   Goldberg, Lina (3 March 2017).  "How breakfast has shaped Cambodia's cultural identity" .  BBC . Retrieved  25 October  2019 . 
 
 ^   Gall, Darren (15 May 2017).  "Chive Talking" . Vindochine . Retrieved  17 June  2021 . 
 
 ^   Chau, Ratha (March 2008).  "Coconut-Rice Crêpes Filled with Pork" .  Food & Wine . Retrieved  15 June  2012 . 
 
 ^   Rivière 2008 , p. 90 
 
 ^   Sao Sopheak, ed. (2020).  The Taste of Angkor .  Ministry of Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation of Cambodia . p. 74.  ISBN   978-9924-9486-0-5 . 
 
 ^   Thmey, Thmey (18 March 2021).  "How to Make Mung Bean Rice Cake" .  Cambodianess . Retrieved  17 May  2021 . 
 
 ^   Renards Gourmets.  "Nom Pao" .  196 flavors . Retrieved  29 June  2020 . 
 
 ^   Sao Sopheak, ed. (2020).  The Taste of Angkor .  Ministry of Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation of Cambodia . p. 72.  ISBN   978-9924-9486-0-5 . 
 
 ^   Ramesh, Nisha.  "Nom Plae Ai" .  196 flavors . Retrieved  25 October  2019 . 
 
 ^   Gérard, Sabrina.  "Num Kroch" .  196 flavors . Retrieved  7 January  2021 . 
 
 ^   Phil, Lees (24 October 2006).  "Spring Onion Bread: Khmer focaccia" . Phnomenon . Retrieved  15 June  2012 . 
 
 ^   Taing, Rinit (21 February 2018).  "Hard work put into roadside snack favourite kralan" .  The Phnom Penh Post . Retrieved  25 October  2019 . 
 
 ^   Nhem, Chea Bunly (22 May 2004).  "Let Them Eat Cake" .  The Cambodia Daily . Retrieved  11 January  2009 . 
 
 ^   "Num Treap (Sticky Rice with Sesame Seeds)" .  AMCarmen's Kitchen . 10 February 2021 . Retrieved  31 May  2021 . 
 
 ^   Ramesh, Nisha (2 July 2018).  "Num Kom" .  196 flavors . Retrieved  25 October  2019 . 
 
 ^   Thompson, Nathan A. (25 April 2016).  "Cambodian Ghosts Love Sticky Rice Cakes" .  Vice .  Vice Media . Retrieved  16 November  2016 . 
 
 ^   Dunston, Lara (18 September 2021).  "Banana Coconut Tapioca Pudding Recipe for Cambodian Chek Ktis" .  Grantourismo Travels . Retrieved  21 September  2021 . 
 
 ^  a   b   Starkey, Tom (23 July 2020).  "Tea time for the Kingdom's next generation of drinkers?" .  Khmer Times . Retrieved  31 May  2021 . 
 
 ^   Smits, Johann (6 October 2009).  "Khmer brew: exploring the parviflora tea strain" .  The Phnom Penh Post . Retrieved  15 June  2012 . 
 
 ^   Kunmakara, May (7 September 2020).  "A master's quest for revival of Cambodian tea" .  The Phnom Penh Post . Retrieved  3 June  2021 . 
 
 ^   Rogers, Debbie (10 September 2016).  "Cambodian Coffee ~ A strong caffeine hit, both hot and cold!" .  Foodemag . Retrieved  25 October  2019 . 
 
 ^   "From Temples to Flat Whites: Coffee Culture in Cambodia" .  Perfect Daily Grind . 9 January 2018 . Retrieved  25 October  2019 . 
 
 ^   "Foreign brands dominate the coffee market in Cambodia" .  Cambodianess . 28 July 2019 . Retrieved  17 May  2021 . 
 
 ^   Zhou Daguan  (2007).  A Record of Cambodia: the Land and Its People . Translated by Peter Harris. Silkworm Books. p. 78.  ISBN   978-97-495-1124-4 . 
 
 ^  a   b   "The Alcohol industry in Cambodia: A Study of Taxation, Regulation, Distribution, and Consumption of Alcohol"   (PDF) .  The Asia Foundation . June 2016. p. 11. 
 
 ^   Kyne, Phelim (3 March 2000).  "Colonial ghosts: Ice and beer with the brothers Larue" .  The Phnom Penh Post . Retrieved  15 June  2012 . 
 
 ^   Postlewaite, Susan (5 May 1995).  "Beer brands battle for market share" .  The Phnom Penh Post . Retrieved  15 June  2012 . 
 
 ^   "The Alcohol industry in Cambodia: A Study of Taxation, Regulation, Distribution, and Consumption of Alcohol"   (PDF) .  The Asia Foundation . June 2016. p. 23. 
 
 ^   Pennington, John (13 May 2019).  "Brewing up nicely: Cambodia's rapidly growing taste for craft beer" . ASEAN Today . Retrieved  7 January  2021 . 
 
 ^  a   b   Mee, Stephanie (2 July 2009).  "How rice wine ferments the Cambodian spirit" .  The Phnom Penh Post . Retrieved  15 June  2012 . 
 
 ^   Nariddh, Moeun Chhean (8 December 2020).  "Rice wine, women and song" .  Khmer Times . Retrieved  31 May  2021 . 
 
 ^   Meta, Kong; Chen, Daphne (29 September 2017).  "Brewing rice wine is a way of life – until it turns deadly" .  The Phnom Penh Post . Retrieved  25 October  2019 . 
 
 ^   McDermid, Stephanie; Kimsong, Kay (19 October 2005).  "Local 'Muscle Wine' Brews Up a Following" .  The Cambodia Daily . Retrieved  15 June  2012 . 
 
 ^   Sherer, Kyle (29 June 2009).  "There's macho to like about booze" .  The Phnom Penh Post . Retrieved  15 June  2012 . 
 
 ^   Dunston, Lara (10 July 2014).  "Cambodian rice wine revival" .  Gourmet Traveller . Retrieved  25 October  2019 . 
 
 ^   Nariddh, Moeun Chhean (9 February 1996).  "Palm wine drinkers miffed at poor image" .  The Phnom Penh Post . Retrieved  15 June  2012 . 
 
 ^   Jyoti Prakash Tamang, ed. (2016). "Ethnic Fermented Foods and Beverages of Cambodia".  Ethnic Fermented Foods and Alcoholic Beverages of Asia .  Springer Publishing . pp. 257–258.  ISBN   978-81-322-2798-4 . 
 
 ^   "Confirel salutes local heritage with bubbly palm wine" .  The Phnom Penh Post . 4 February 2021 . Retrieved  7 January  2021 . 
 
 ^   Hong Sreyna; Sam Sopich (15 February 2022).  "Mondulkiri Passion Fruit Wine Seeks to Expand Internationally" .  Cambodianess . Retrieved  18 February  2022 . 
 
 ^   Pan Simala; Hong Raksmey (25 August 2022).  "Raising glasses: Takeo's jambolan wine" .  The Phnom Penh Post . Retrieved  18 June  2022 . 
 
 ^   "Samai Distillery firmly placing Kingdom's rum on world map" .  The Phnom Penh Post . 29 June 2020 . Retrieved  7 January  2021 . 
 
 ^   Fullerton, Jamie (16 October 2018).  "Battambang Burgundy | The Cambodian Couple Growing Grapes Where Few Others Dare" .  Amuse .  Vice Media . Retrieved  25 October  2019 . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   Van Esterik 2008 , pp. 56–57 
 
 ^   Gilbert, Abigail.  "Cambodian table manners" .  Travelfish . Retrieved  3 June  2021 . 
 
 ^   Shay, Christopher (4 November 2009).  "Food blog provides insight into Khmer cuisine" .  The Phnom Penh Post . Retrieved  15 June  2012 . 
 
 ^   Chorm, Evan (1 November 2018).  "Proper Eating Etiquette and Utensils Used in Khmer Culture" .  Angkor Food . Retrieved  17 May  2021 . 
 
 ^   Shott, Chris (13 July 2015).  "Cambodian Is The Greatly Underappreciated Outlier In Asian Cooking. This Needs To Change" .  Food Republic . Retrieved  16 November  2016 . 
 
 ^   "Siem Reap: SE Asia's Most Underrated Food Destination" .  Fodor's . 12 April 2013 . Retrieved  16 November  2016 . 
 
 ^   Olsen, Morgan (12 March 2021).  "18 of the world's most underrated food cities, according to chefs" .  Time Out . Retrieved  17 May  2021 . 
 
 ^   Fishbane, Matthew (26 June 2007).  "Will Cambodian food ever catch on in America?" .  Salon.com . Retrieved  16 November  2016 . 
 
 ^   Siow, Maria (3 January 2021).  "Cambodia is taking a pungent, potent approach to food diplomacy: prepare for prahok" .  South China Morning Post . Retrieved  14 April  2021 . 
 
 ^   Thmey, Thmey (6 February 2021).  "Foreign Ministry Offers the World a Taste of Khmer Culture" .  Cambodianess . Retrieved  17 May  2021 . 
 
 ^   Olszewski, Peter (27 May 2021).  "Right Royal Cookbook Republished" .  Khmer Times . Retrieved  31 May  2021 . 
 
 ^   Hong, Raksmey (2 June 2021).  "Kingdom's food and traditional culture in book of royal recipes" .  The Phnom Penh Post . Retrieved  3 June  2021 . 
 
 ^   "Taste Cambodia: Culinary Adventures in Siem Reap and Angkor" .  BoTree.asia . Retrieved  3 June  2021 . 
 
 ^   Gauchan, Darshana (4 May 2022).  "DPM Prak Sokhonn Inaugurates Angkor Kitchen to Promote Culinary Diplomacy" . EAC News . Retrieved  18 June  2022 . 
 
 ^   Chea, Vanyuth (4 May 2022).  "Angkor Kitchen to promote authentic Khmer dishes, desserts to foreigners" .  Khmer Times . Retrieved  18 June  2022 . 
 
 ^   "Friends cookbook wins at Gourmand World Cookbook Awards 2009" .  Friends-International . 2 July 2009 . Retrieved  16 November  2016 . 
 
 ^   "Mother-daughter cooking duo wins top culinary prize" .  The Phnom Penh Post . 4 February 2014 . Retrieved  16 November  2016 . 
 
 ^   "Khmer Cookbook Won Gourmand Awards for the "Best Asian Cuisine Cookbook" " .  Voice of America . 10 May 2014 . Retrieved  16 November  2016 . 
 
 ^   Vantha, Phoung (2 December 2021).  "Taste of Angkor Wins Top Cookbook Award" .  Cambodianess . Retrieved  7 December  2021 . 
 
 ^   " "The Taste of Angkor" crowned "Best Asian Cookbook" at the Gourmand World Cookbook Awards 2021" .  Khmer Times . 2 December 2021 . Retrieved  7 December  2021 . 
 
 ^   " "The Taste of Angkor" snags two Gourmand World Cookbook Awards 2022 awards" .  Khmer Times . 8 June 2022 . Retrieved  18 June  2022 . 
 
 ^   Olszewski, Peter (9 June 2022).  "Princess' cook book wins Swede award" .  Khmer Times . Retrieved  18 June  2022 . 
 
 ^   Rethea, Pann (16 June 2022).  "Late Princess' Khmer cookbook honoured" .  The Phnom Penh Post . Retrieved  18 June  2022 . 
 
 ^   Dunston, Lara (13 March 2015).  "Chef Rivière's restaurant named best in Cambodia" .  The Phnom Penh Post . Retrieved  16 November  2016 . 
 
 ^   Dunston, Lara.  "Cuisine Wat Damnak, Best Restaurant in Cambodia" .  Grantourismo Travels . Retrieved  16 November  2016 . 
 
 ^   McGonigle, Anthony (1 February 2019).  "Kimsan twins' culinary skills redefine Khmer cuisine" .  Khmer Times . Retrieved  18 June  2022 . 
 
 ^   Murray, Bannett (25 November 2014).  "Luu Meng named Asia's top chef" .  The Phnom Penh Post . Retrieved  9 July  2021 . 
 
 ^   Bunthoeun, Chhut (5 June 2019).  "Cambodian chefs shine at Asian contest" .  Khmer Times . Retrieved  31 May  2021 . 
 
 ^   Hong, Raksmey (21 June 2019).  "Cambodian chefs win gold in Best Asian Gourmet Challenge" .  The Phnom Penh Post . Retrieved  3 June  2021 . 
 
 
 Bibliography [ edit ] 
 Van Esterik, Penny (2008).  Food Culture of Southeast Asia .  Greenwood Press .  ISBN   978-0-313-34419-0 . 
 Rivière, Joannès  (2008).  Cambodian Cooking: A humanitarian project in collaboration with Act for Cambodia .  Periplus Editions .  ISBN   978-0-794-65039-1 . 
 Thaitawat, Nusara (2000).  The Cuisine of Cambodia . Thailand: Nusara & Friends Co. Ltd.  ISBN   978-9-748-77885-3 . 
 Further reading [ edit ] 
 de Monteiro, Longteine; Neustadt, Katherine (1 November 1998),  The Elephant Walk Cookbook: The Exciting World of Cambodian Cuisine from the Nationally Acclaimed Restaurant ,  Houghton Mifflin Harcourt ,  ISBN   978-0-395-89253-4 . * The Elephant Walk Cookbook  is the best-known English-language reference on Cambodian cuisine, and has been an important cultural record, as many of the more elaborate recipes died out in Cambodia following the communist takeover, and have been revived based on  The Elephant Walk Cookbook . {{ citation }} :  CS1 maint: postscript ( link ) 
 External links [ edit ] 
 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons has media related to  Cuisine of Cambodia . 
 
 
 
 
 Wikivoyage has a travel guide for  Cambodian cuisine . 
 
 Cambodia's Forgotten Food . 11 November 2018.  The Food Programme .  BBC Sounds 
 Dunston, Lara (16 August 2017).  Cambodian Food – Cooking with Fire, Foraging, Fermentation and Flowers . Grantourismo Travels. 
 Dunston, Lara (20 August 2016).  Dispelling Cambodian Cuisine Myths — It's Not 'Mild Thai'!  Grantourismo Travels. 
 Lees, Phil (18 August 2006).  Why travelers dislike Khmer food . Phnomenon. 
 Exploring Cambodian Food in Long Beach, CA with Phnom Penh Noodle Shack and Allen Prom . 21 January 2021.  Eating America with India 
 What A Royal Birthday Cake Looks Like . 30 August 2020.  Cooking For The Crown . Real Royalty with Foxy Games 
 Khmer Krom recipes 
 Taste Cambodia . 18 July 2021.  Visit Cambodia - Kingdom of Wonder . via  YouTube . 
 v t e   Cambodian cuisine Individual dishes 
 Bai pong moan 
 Bay sach chruk 
 Beef lok lak 
 Caramelized pork and eggs 
 Chha kh'nhei 
 Coconut prahok dip 
 Congee 
 Curry soup 
 Fish amok 
 Fried rice 
 Green papaya salad 
 Kho 
 Kola noodles 
 Kuyteav 
 Num banhchok 
 Phahut 
 Pleah sach ko 
 Pounded eggplant dip 
 Samlar kako 
 Samlar machu 
 Samlar prahal 
 Saraman curry 
 Stir-fried morning glory 
 Sauces, spices and flavourings 
 Fish sauce 
 Kroeung 
 Prahok 
 Shrimp paste 
 Tamarind sauce 
 Snacks, pastry 
 Banana fritters 
 Coconut-rice crêpes 
 Mango sticky rice 
 Nataing 
 Num ansom 
 Num pav 
 Pumpkin-coconut custard 
 Sticky rice in bamboo 
 Beverages 
 Angkor Beer 
 Green tea 
 Longan wine 
 Palm wine  ( Kampong Speu ) 
 Rice wine 
 Sra peang 
 Sugarcane juice 
   Category: Cambodian cuisine 
 v t e Cambodia   articles History 
 Timeline 
 Early history 
 Nokor Phnom 
 Chenla 
 Khmer Empire 
 Post-Angkor period 
 French protectorate of Cambodia 
 Japanese occupation 
 Sihanouk era  (1953–70) 
 Khmer Republic 
 Civil War 
 Democratic Kampuchea 
 Cambodian genocide 
 Cambodian–Vietnamese War 
 People's Republic of Kampuchea 
 Coalition Government of Democratic Kampuchea 
 State of Cambodia 
 UNTAC 
 Modern Cambodia 
 Geography 
 Administrative divisions 
 Borders 
 Cities 
 Climate change 
 Deforestation 
 Ecoregions 
 Islands 
 Lakes 
 Tonlé Sap 
 Protected areas 
 Rivers 
 Wildlife 
 World Heritage Sites 
 Politics 
 Cabinet 
 Elections 
 Foreign relations 
 Government 
 Human rights 
 LGBT 
 Judiciary 
 Law 
 Law enforcement 
 Military 
 Monarchy 
 Parliament 
 Political parties 
 Prime Minister 
 Economy 
 Agriculture 
 Banking 
 Energy 
 Economic history 
 Mining 
 Natural resources 
 Riel  (currency) 
 Science and technology 
 Special Economic Zones 
 Telecommunications 
 Tourism 
 Transportation 
 Society 
 Crime 
 Demographics 
 Education 
 Ethnic groups 
 Gambling 
 Health 
 HIV/AIDS 
 Human trafficking 
 Languages 
 Prostitution 
 Religion 
 Women 
 Sex trafficking 
 Social class 
 Social organization 
 Squatting 
 Youth 
 Culture 
 Architecture 
 Art 
 Cinema 
 Clothing 
 Courtship, marriage, and divorce 
 Cuisine 
 Dance 
 Epigraphy 
 Jewellery 
 Keyboard 
 Literature 
 Mat weaving 
 Media 
 Music 
 Ornamentation 
 Public holidays 
 Sport 
 Theatre 
 Outline Index 
 Category 
 Portal 
 v t e Asian cuisine Sovereign states 
 Afghanistan 
 Armenia 
 Azerbaijan 
 Bahrain 
 Bangladesh 
 Bhutan 
 Brunei 
 Burma (Myanmar) 
 Cambodia 
 China 
 Cyprus 
 East Timor (Timor-Leste) 
 Egypt 
 Georgia 
 India 
 Indonesia 
 Iran 
 Iraq 
 Israel 
 Japan 
 Jordan 
 Kazakhstan 
 North Korea 
 South Korea 
 Kuwait 
 Kyrgyzstan 
 Laos 
 Lebanon 
 Malaysia 
 Maldives 
 Mongolia 
 Nepal 
 Oman 
 Pakistan 
 Philippines 
 Qatar 
 Russia 
 Saudi Arabia 
 Singapore 
 Sri Lanka 
 Syria 
 Tajikistan 
 Thailand 
 Turkey 
 Turkmenistan 
 United Arab Emirates 
 Uzbekistan 
 Vietnam 
 Yemen 
 States with limited recognition 
 Abkhazia 
 Artsakh 
 Northern Cyprus 
 Palestine 
 South Ossetia 
 Taiwan 
 Dependencies and other territories 
 British Indian Ocean Territory 
 Christmas Island 
 Cocos (Keeling) Islands 
 Hong Kong 
 Macau 
 
 v t e Cuisines Continental 
 African 
 North 
 West 
 list 
 Americas 
 Caribbean 
 North 
 South 
 list 
 Asian 
 Caucasian 
 Central 
 Indian subcontinent 
 Levantine 
 list 
 European 
 Balkan 
 Central 
 Eastern 
 list 
 Oceanic 
 Intercontinental
 Global 
 Latin American 
 Mediterranean 
 Middle Eastern 
 National  and regional 
 Afghan 
 Albanian 
 Algerian 
 American 
 Californian 
 Floribbean 
 Hawaiian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Lowcountry (South Carolina) 
 New England 
 New Mexico 
 Pacific Northwest 
 Pennsylvania Dutch 
 Puerto Rican 
 Southern US 
 Southwest US 
 Texas 
 Angolan 
 Argentine 
 Armenian 
 Australian 
 Austrian 
 Azerbaijani 
 Bahraini 
 Bangladeshi 
 Barbadian 
 Belarusian 
 Belgian 
 Belizean 
 Beninese 
 Bhutanese 
 Bolivian 
 Bosnian-Herzegovinian 
 Botswana 
 Brazilian 
 British 
 Channel Islands 
 English 
 Gibraltarian 
 Northern Irish 
 Saint Helena 
 Scottish 
 Welsh 
 Bruneian 
 Bulgarian 
 Burkinabé 
 Burmese 
 Burundian 
 Cambodian 
 Cameroonian 
 Canadian 
 Acadian 
 Québécois 
 Central African Republic 
 Chadian 
 Chilean 
 Chinese 
 Cantonese 
 Hong Kong 
 Macanese 
 Tibetan 
 Xinjiang 
 Colombian 
 Congolese 
 Corsican 
 Croatian 
 Cuban 
 Cypriot 
 Czech 
 Danish 
 Faroese 
 Greenlandic 
 Djiboutian 
 Dominican 
 Dominican Republic 
 Dutch 
 East Timorese 
 Ecuadorian 
 Egyptian 
 Emirati 
 Equatorial Guinean 
 Eritrean 
 Estonian 
 Ethiopian 
 Fijian 
 Filipino 
 Finnish 
 French 
 Occitan 
 French Guianan 
 Gabonese 
 Gambian 
 Georgian 
 German 
 Ghanaian 
 Greek 
 Cretan 
 Epirotic 
 Greek Macedonian 
 Heptanesean 
 Guatemalan 
 Guinea-Bissauan 
 Guinean 
 Haitian 
 Honduran 
 Hungarian 
 Icelandic 
 Indian 
 Arunachalese 
 Assamese 
 Bengali 
 Bihari 
 Goan 
 Gujarati 
 Himachal Pradesh 
 Kashmiri 
 Jharkhandi 
 Karnataka 
 Kerala 
 Maharashtrian 
 Manipuri 
 Meghalayan 
 Mizo 
 Naga 
 Odia 
 Punjabi 
 Rajasthani 
 Sikkimese 
 Sindhi 
 Tamil 
 Telangana 
 Telugu 
 Indonesian 
 Acehnese 
 Balinese 
 Banjar 
 Batak 
 Betawi 
 Indo 
 Javanese 
 Madurese 
 Makassar 
 Minahasan 
 Minangkabau 
 Palembangese 
 Sundanese 
 Iranian 
 Iraqi 
 Irish 
 Israeli 
 Italian 
 Abruzzese 
 Ligurian 
 Lombard 
 Lucanian 
 Neapolitan 
 Roman 
 Sardinian 
 Sicilian 
 Venetian 
 Ivorian 
 Jamaican 
 Japanese 
 Okinawan 
 Jordanian 
 Kazakh 
 Kenyan 
 Korean 
 North Korean 
 South Korean 
 Kosovan 
 Kuwaiti 
 Kyrgyz 
 Lao 
 Latvian 
 Lebanese 
 Lesotho 
 Liberian 
 Libyan 
 Liechtensteiner 
 Lithuanian 
 Luxembourg 
 Macedonian 
 Malagasy 
 Malawian 
 Malaysian 
 Sabahan 
 Sarawakian 
 Maldivian 
 Malian 
 Maltese 
 Mauritanian 
 Mauritian 
 Mexican 
 Moldovan 
 Monégasque 
 Mongolian 
 Montenegrin 
 Moroccan 
 Mozambican 
 Namibian 
 Nauruan 
 Nepalese 
 New Zealand 
 Nicaraguan 
 Niger 
 Nigerian 
 Niuean 
 Norwegian 
 Omani 
 Pakistani 
 Palestinian 
 Panamanian 
 Peruvian 
 Polish 
 Portuguese 
 Qatari 
 Romanian  (incl.  Transylvanian Saxon ) 
 Russian 
 Bashkir 
 Chechen 
 Circassian 
 Komi 
 Mordovian 
 Sakha 
 Tatar 
 Udmurt 
 Yamal 
 Rwandan 
 Saint Lucian 
 Salvadoran 
 Sammarinese 
 São Tomé and Príncipe 
 Saudi Arabian 
 Senegalese 
 Serbian 
 Seychellois 
 Sierra Leonean 
 Singaporean 
 Slovak 
 Slovenian 
 Somali 
 South African 
 Spanish 
 Andalusian 
 Asturian 
 Balearic 
 Basque 
 Canarian 
 Cantabrian 
 Catalan 
 Extremaduran 
 Galician 
 Manchegan 
 Valencian 
 Sri Lankan 
 Sudanese 
 Swazi 
 Swedish 
 Swiss 
 Syrian 
 Taiwanese 
 Tajik 
 Tanzanian 
 Zanzibari 
 Thai 
 Togolese 
 Tunisian 
 Turkish 
 Turkmen 
 Trinidadian and Tobagonian 
 Ugandan 
 Ukrainian 
 Uruguayan 
 Uzbek 
 Venezuelan 
 Vietnamese 
 Western Saharan 
 Yemeni 
 Zambian 
 Zimbabwean 
 Ethnic 
 Ainu 
 Arab 
 Indonesian 
 Aromanian 
 Assyrian 
 Balochi 
 Berber 
 Cajun 
 Chinese 
 American 
 Canadian 
 Chifa 
 Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Crimean Tatar 
 Greek American 
 Hazaragi 
 Indian 
 Anglo-Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Indigenous American 
 Inuit 
 Italian American 
 Kurdish 
 Livonian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Malay 
 Ossetian 
 Parsi 
 Pashtun 
 Peranakan 
 Romani 
 Sámi 
 Soul food 
 Sylheti 
 Transylvanian Saxon 
 Yup'ik 
 Religious 
 Buddhist 
 Christian 
 Goan Catholic 
 Mangalorean Catholic 
 Mennonite 
 Hindu 
 Islamic 
 Chinese 
 Ital 
 Jain 
 Jewish 
 American 
 Ashkenazi 
 Bukharan 
 Ethiopian 
 Mizrahi 
 Sephardic 
 Syrian 
 Ritual slaughter 
 Sikh 
 Historical 
 Ancient Egyptian 
 Ancient Greek 
 Ancient Israelite 
 Ancient Roman 
 Antebellum America 
 Aztec 
 Byzantine 
 Early modern European 
 Historical Chinese 
 Historical Indian subcontinent 
 Historical North Indian and Pakistani 
 History of agriculture 
 History of alcoholic drinks 
 History of bread 
 History of seafood 
 History of vegetarianism 
 Historical Argentine 
 Historical Japanese 
 Inca 
 Mayan 
 Muisca 
 Mughal 
 Medieval 
 Ottoman 
 Peasant 
 Soviet 
 Thirteen Colonies 
 Styles 
 Classique 
 Fast food 
 Fusion 
 New American 
 Eurasian 
 Haute 
 Molecular gastronomy 
 Note by Note 
 Nouvelle 
 Lists 
 List of cuisines 
 List of historical cuisines 
 Lists of prepared foods 
 Related 
 Cookbook 
 Cooking 
 Culinary arts 
 Drink 
 Food 
 history 
 Diet 
 Meal preparation 
 
   Food portal 
   Drink portal 
   Category 
   Commons 
   Cookbook 
   WikiProject 
   Outline 
 
 Authority control   National libraries 
 France 
 BnF data 
 Israel 
 United States 
 Japan 
 Other 
 FAST 
 
  
NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw2284
Cached time: 20230311171450
Cache expiry: 1814400
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc, no‐toc‐conversion]
CPU time usage: 4.123 seconds
Real time usage: 4.494 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 30686/1000000
Post‐expand include size: 532391/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 38620/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 31/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 457239/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 2.519/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 25244586/52428800 bytes
Lua Profile:
    recursiveClone <mwInit.lua:41>                                   440 ms       16.7%
    ?                                                                400 ms       15.2%
    MediaWiki\Extension\Scribunto\Engines\LuaSandbox\LuaSandboxCallback::callParserFunction      280 ms       10.6%
    dataWrapper <mw.lua:672>                                         260 ms        9.8%
    MediaWiki\Extension\Scribunto\Engines\LuaSandbox\LuaSandboxCallback::match      160 ms        6.1%
    MediaWiki\Extension\Scribunto\Engines\LuaSandbox\LuaSandboxCallback::gsub      140 ms        5.3%
    (for generator)                                                  100 ms        3.8%
    type                                                             100 ms        3.8%
    MediaWiki\Extension\Scribunto\Engines\LuaSandbox\LuaSandboxCallback::getAllExpandedArguments       80 ms        3.0%
    MediaWiki\Extension\Scribunto\Engines\LuaSandbox\LuaSandboxCallback::plain       80 ms        3.0%
    [others]                                                         600 ms       22.7%
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/400
 
 
Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 3636.914      1 -total
 45.53% 1655.979      1 Template:Reflist
 19.29%  701.655    386 Template:Lang
 16.40%  596.587     59 Template:Cite_web
 11.14%  405.041     48 Template:Cite_news
  8.76%  318.712      3 Template:Navbox
  6.47%  235.221      1 Template:Asian_topic
  4.95%  180.018     20 Template:Cite_book
  4.92%  178.776     18 Template:Harvnb
  4.19%  152.335     52 Template:Iso2country
 
  Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:idhash:843843-0!canonical and timestamp 20230311171446 and revision id 1142482956. Rendering was triggered because: api-parse
  
 esi <esi:include src="/esitest-fa8a495983347898/content" />  
 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cambodian_cuisine&oldid=1142482956 " 
 Categories :  Cambodian cuisine Southeast Asian cuisine Hidden categories:  Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from November 2020 Articles containing Khmer-language text Articles containing Thai-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2020 CS1 maint: postscript Commons category link is on Wikidata Region topic template using suffix Articles with BNF identifiers Articles with J9U identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers Articles with NDL identifiers Articles with FAST identifiers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  This page was last edited on 2 March 2023, at 17:11  (UTC) . 
 Text is available under the  Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0 ;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the  Terms of Use  and  Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the  Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. 
 
 
 Privacy policy 
 About Wikipedia 
 Disclaimers 
 Contact Wikipedia 
 Mobile view 
 Developers 
 Statistics 
 Cookie statement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
