
 
 
 Jump to content 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle sidebar 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Create account Log in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Personal tools 
 
 
 
 
   Create account   Log in 
 
 
 
 
		Pages for logged out editors  learn more 
 
 
 Contributions Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Navigation 
 
 
 Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate 
 
 
 
 
 Contribute 
 
 
 Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file 
 
 
 
 
 Tools 
 
 
 What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item 
 
 
 
 
 Print/export 
 
 
 Download as PDF Printable version 
 
 
 
 
 In other projects 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons 
 
 
 
 
 Languages 
 
 On this Wikipedia the language links are at the top of the page across from the article title.  Go to top . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CentralNotice  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Contents 
 move to sidebar 
 hide 
 
 
 
 
 (Top) 
 
 
 
 
 
 1 History 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 Canadian Chinese restaurants 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 Culture 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4 See also 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5 References 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6 Further reading 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 7 External links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
						Toggle the table of contents
					 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle the table of contents 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Canadian Chinese cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 2 languages 
 
 
 
 Bahasa Indonesia Português 
 Edit links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Article Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 English 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 More 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
 
 
 Chinese cuisine developed by Canadian Chinese 
 This article has multiple issues.  Please help  improve it  or discuss these issues on the  talk page .  ( Learn how and when to remove these template messages ) 
 
 This article  needs additional citations for  verification .  Please help  improve this article  by  adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources:   "Canadian Chinese cuisine"  –  news   ·   newspapers   ·   books   ·   scholar   ·   JSTOR   ( July 2013 )  ( Learn how and when to remove this template message ) 
 This article  possibly contains  original research .  Please  improve it  by  verifying  the claims made and adding  inline citations . Statements consisting only of original research should be removed.   ( September 2010 )  ( Learn how and when to remove this template message ) 
 
  ( Learn how and when to remove this template message ) 
   Ginger beef , a well-known Canadian Chinese dish 
 Part of a series on Canadian cuisine 
 Regional cuisines 
 Pacific Northwest 
 Rocky Mountain 
 Toronto 
 Québec 
 Maritime 
 Indigenous 
 
 Beverages 
 Beer 
 Québec 
 spruce 
 Bog Labrador tea 
 Caesar 
 Caribou 
 Moose milk 
 Ice cider 
 Newfoundland Screech 
 Whisky 
 Yukon Jack 
 Wine 
 British Columbia 
 Ontario 
 Prince Edward County 
 Québec 
 Nova Scotia 
 London fog 
 
 Ingredients 
 Atlantic cod 
 Caribou 
 Cloudberry 
 cheese 
 Dulse 
 Fiddlehead fern 
 Harp seal 
 Maple syrup 
 McIntosh (apple) 
 Red Fife wheat 
 Red Gold potato 
 Saskatoon berry 
 Sockeye salmon 
 Spartan (apple) 
 Steak spice 
 Winnipeg goldeye 
 Yukon Gold potato 
 
 Styles and dishes 
 Bannock 
 B.C. roll 
 Bûche de Noël 
 Buffalo burger 
 Bumbleberry pie 
 Butter tart 
 Canadian cheddar 
 Date square 
 Donair 
 Figgy duff 
 Fish and brewis 
 Flapper pie 
 Fried dough 
 Fricot 
 Garlic fingers 
 Ginger beef 
 Hodge Podge 
 Hot chicken 
 Johnnycake 
 Lobster roll 
 Montreal
 bagel 
 smoked meat 
 Nanaimo bar 
 Oreilles de crisse 
 Pâté chinois 
 Peameal bacon 
 Pemmican 
 Pierogi 
 Pizza cake 
 Pizza-ghetti 
 Ploye 
 Pouding chômeur 
 Poutchine au sac 
 Poutine 
 Poutine râpée 
 Rappie pie 
 Rubaboo 
 Schmoo torte 
 St. Catherine's taffy 
 Steamies 
 Sushi pizza 
 Sxusem 
 Tourtière 
 Touton 
 White bread 
 
 Religious and ethnic 
 Acadian 
 Canadian-Chinese 
 Country food 
 Inuit 
 Tlingit 
 
 Rituals and festivals 
 Pancake breakfast 
 Jiggs dinner 
 Kitchener-Waterloo Oktoberfest 
 Réveillon 
 Summerlicious and Winterlicious 
 Taste of the Danforth 
 Thanksgiving 
 
   Canada portal 
   Food portal v t e 
 Part of a series on Chinese cuisine 
 Regional cuisines 
 Four Great Traditions 
 Chuan (Sichuan) 
 Lu (Shandong) 
 Yue (Guangdong) 
 Huaiyang (Jiangsu) 
 Eight Great Traditions (+all above) 
 Anhui 
 Fujian 
 Hunan 
 Zhejiang 
 Ten Great Traditions (+all above) 
 Beijing 
 Shanghai 
 Twelve Great Traditions (+all above) 
 Henan 
 Shaanxi 
 Fourteen Great Traditions (+all above) 
 Hubei 
 Liaoning 
 Sixteen Great Traditions (+all above) 
 Tianjin 
 Yunnan 
 New Eight Great Traditions 
 Gansu 
 Hangzhou 
 Jilin 
 Liaoning 
 Ningbo 
 Shaanxi 
 Shanghai 
 Shanxi 
 Beijing and the vicinity 
 Beijing 
 Imperial 
 Aristocrat 
 Tianjin 
 Other regional styles 
 Teochew 
 Guangxi 
 Guizhou 
 Hainan 
 Haipai 
 Hakka 
 Hong Kong 
 Jiangxi 
 Macanese 
 Manchu 
 Northeastern 
 Putian (Henghwa) 
 Qinghai 
 Taiwan 
 Tibetan 
 Xinjiang 
 
 Overseas cuisine 
 Australia 
 Britain 
 Burma 
 Canada 
 Caribbean 
 Philippines 
 India 
 Indonesia 
 Japan 
 Latin America 
 Perú 
 Puerto Rico 
 Korea 
 Malaysia 
 Pakistan 
 Singapore 
 United States 
 
 Religious cuisines 
 Buddhist 
 Islamic 
 Taoist 
 
 Ingredients and types of food 
 Main dishes 
 Desserts 
 Noodles 
 
 Preparation and cooking 
 Stir frying 
 Double steaming 
 Red cooking 
 
 See also 
 Customs and etiquette 
 List of Chinese desserts 
 List of Chinese dishes 
 List of Chinese restaurants 
 List of restaurants in China 
 
   Asia portal 
   China portal 
   Hong Kong portal 
   Taiwan portal v t e 
 Canadian Chinese cuisine  ( French :  Cuisine chinoise canadienne ) is a  cuisine  derived from  Chinese cuisine  that was developed by  Chinese Canadians . It was the first form of commercially available Chinese food in Canada. This cooking style was invented by early  Cantonese  immigrants who adapted traditional  Chinese recipes  to Western tastes and the available ingredients, and developed in a similar process to  American Chinese cuisine .
 
 
 History [ edit ] 
   Signage in  Toronto 's  First Chinatown  for  chop suey  in 1923 
 Canadian Chinese cuisine originated in the mid-19th century, primarily in  Western Canada  and the  Canadian Prairies , among Chinese immigrants who moved to Canada, and among Chinese labourers working on the  Canadian Pacific Railway  between  Vancouver ,  British Columbia  and  Montreal ,  Quebec . Many labourers who remained in Canada after the railway's completion opened small inexpensive " Chinese cafés " or worked as cooks in  mining  and  logging  camps,  canneries , and in the private homes of the upper classes in cities and towns. [1]  In British Columbia, a form of  buffet  known as the "Chinese  smörgåsbord " developed in pre-railway  Gastown  (the settlement that later became Vancouver) when  Scandinavian  loggers and millworkers encouraged their Chinese cooks to turn a  sideboard  into a  steam table , instead of bringing plates of single dishes to the dining table.
 Due to common  anti-Chinese sentiment  at the time, as well as the  Chinese Immigration Act, 1885  and  1923 , many Chinese immigrants were unable to work in businesses other than  restaurants  or  laundries . Many restaurants were opened, despite their owners having little prior cooking experience. These restaurants were often established in small towns and rural areas where residents (predominantly  European Canadians ) already did not have gathering places of their own, and where the cook/owner could very well be the only Chinese person in the community. Chinese restaurant owners often had to modify their menus to appeal to the Western tastes of Canadians; many Chinese-owned restaurants offered very limited selections of Chinese dishes, even omitting them altogether in favour of  Western dishes  that were more familiar to their customer bases. 
 Chinese restaurants also served as gathering places for the early Chinese Canadian community, especially among immigrants whose families could not emigrate with them due to the Chinese Immigration Acts. It was only after the Chinese Immigration Act was repealed in 1947 that Chinese dishes on restaurant menus became commonplace, and the general public became more interested in Chinese cuisine. [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] 
 Limitations and cost factors relating to the ingredients available to Chinese Canadians affected the development of Canadian Chinese cuisine, since traditional Chinese ingredients were unavailable or too difficult to grow. For example, the reason  carrots ,  celery , and  bean sprouts  are used more often in Canadian Chinese cuisine compared to Chinese cuisine is because of their ease in growing and availability, with bean sprouts in particular only requiring "a bucket and a water source". [1] 
 A number of iconic Chinese restaurants were opened in the mid-20th century, though a number of them are defunct as of 2023 [update] . Restaurateur Bill Wong (father of journalist  Jan Wong ) reportedly opened Montreal's first Chinese buffet restaurant, House of Wong, on Queen Mary Road in the heavily-Jewish  Snowdon  district in the 1950s. He later opened Bill Wong's on nearby Decarie Boulevard in 1962. [6] [7]  In 1975, Louise Tang and Lily Wong opened the Silver Inn in  Calgary , where chef George Wong invented  ginger beef  in an attempt to combine the appeal of crunchy  french fries , sweet-and-sour  ketchup , and Albertan beef. [2] [8] [9] 
 Further Cantonese immigration to Canada began anew in the 1960s, and was ignited in the 1980s and 1990s in anticipation of the  handover of Hong Kong to China . This resulted in many Hongkongers relocating to other countries, but their most preferred was Canada, the preference resulting from Canada's  immigration policy , high standard of living, established Chinese community, and membership in the  Commonwealth . In contrast, the United States tended to accept more mainland or Taiwanese Chinese, while imposing immigration quotas on Commonwealth territories such as Hong Kong.
 Today, Chinese Canadians are one of the largest visible minority groups in Canada, and  Chinatowns  are in  every major Canadian city  except  Quebec City , with those in  Toronto ,  Vancouver ,  Montreal , and  Calgary  being the largest.  Markham, Ontario , also has a significant Chinese Canadian population, with a large number of Chinese restaurants in and around the city. Increasing Chinese immigration, interest in Asian cuisine, and Canadian multiculturalism has created a demand for authentic Chinese cuisine, and many newer Chinese restaurants in Canada offer authentic  Cantonese ,  Hakka , and  Sichuan  cuisine, among others, with Canadian Chinese dishes typically also available.
 
 Canadian Chinese restaurants [ edit ] 
   China Garden is a Chinese restaurant in  Nipigon, Ontario , a township of 1,600 people 
 A vast majority of towns and cities in most of Canada have at least one Canadian Chinese restaurant. Many towns that cannot support a single  franchise  restaurant still have at least one thriving Chinese restaurant. Many independent restaurants in larger cities have found their business shrinking as delivery chains and buffets squeeze out traditional sit-down restaurants.
 Smaller and more rural settlements in northern regions of the provinces, as well as across the Prairies, tend to feature Chinese restaurants that also specialize in Western cuisine, often relics of when such menus were necessary for business. In  Glendon, Alberta , for example, next to a  roadside model  of the world's largest  pierogi  (a staple of  Ukrainian cuisine ) is the Perogy Café, a  Vietnamese Canadian -owned restaurant specializing in both Ukrainian pierogies and Chinese  jiaozi .
 Canadian Chinese chop suey houses are predominantly situated in non-immigrant neighbourhoods catering to non-Chinese customers. They are now most often mixed with those featuring the more traditional cuisines. Canadian Chinese restaurants are not limited to these areas and can often be found even at the farthest outskirts of the metropolitan areas. Because of the popularity of Canadian Chinese food, even some of the older authentic Chinese restaurants may offer Canadian Chinese dishes to cater to non-Chinese customers.
 
   A sign for businesses, including Canadian Chinese restaurants, in the  Golden Village . The Golden Village holds the largest concentration of Chinese restaurants in North America. [ citation needed ] 
 Restaurants in the newer Chinatowns, particularly in Vancouver and Toronto, tend to cater to recent Asian immigrants and offer more varied fare;  Sichuan ,  Hakka ,  Chiuchow ,  Taiwanese , and even  Buddhist cuisine  restaurants can be found there. One of the largest concentration of Chinese restaurants in North America is located in the  Golden Village  area in  Richmond , a suburb of Vancouver. The seafood served here is from the British Columbian coast.
 
   Roasted geese  on display in Toronto's  Old Chinatown 
 Toronto's  Old Chinatown  has seen most of the once-famed restaurants on  Dundas Street  and  Spadina Avenue  close since the late 1990s, especially the  siu mei  barbecue shops on Dundas Street that were located below grade. The 1990s also saw the closure of demise of Hsin Huang (or Hsin Kuang), a three-restaurant chain in the Greater Toronto Area. [10]  These restaurants, one at Chinese Centre at 888 Dundas Street East in Mississauga, another at Finch Avenue and Kennedy Road in Scarborough, and their four-storey flagship location at Spadina Avenue and St. Andrew Street (just north of Dundas Street) in old Toronto Chinatown, were decorated inside with the traditional red and yellow colours of the  Fenghuang  (a mythical bird) while the exterior was yellow and had a green Oriental roof.
 
   An Asian  food court  at  First Markham Place  in  Markham, Ontario 
 In the newer suburban areas of the Greater Toronto Area, such as  Highway 7  in  Richmond Hill  and  Markham , the Chinese restaurants range from small eateries,  siu mei  shops, and  bakeries  in Chinese  strip malls  and  food courts , to the all-you-can-eat buffets that often expand beyond Chinese Canadian to incorporate Asian fusion (including Japanese, Korean, and Thai), to the larger and more expensive places that often function as  banquet halls  with ten-course meals available. Among upscale restaurants, the older places will often have the traditional Chinese décor, which is red and yellow colours with the  Fenghuan g (Chinese dragon and phoenix) adorning the wall behind the  dais , while newer establishments tend to be decorated in a more Western contemporary style.
 Many Chinese fine dining restaurants and banquet halls offer discounted  dim sum  lunches on weekdays and early weekends or to seniors, though this is a low margin segment, and their main earnings come from hosting weddings or other functions. Observers have noted that dim sum "cart service is a dying breed in Toronto, as more and more restaurants have switched over to a list-based dining experience. There are a few notable places where you can still witness these magical culinary carts being rolled out in front of you; and where you order by using your pointer finger, not a pen and paper." [11] 
 Although most restaurants are independent businesses, there are some chains such as Hons Wonton House (metro Vancouver), Kirin Chinese Restaurant (metro Vancouver), Congee Queen (Toronto, Peel, and York regions), and  Mandarin Restaurant  (southern Ontario). The Regal Palace chain of four restaurants, owned by Yuk Yee Ellen Pun and Patsy Lai, went bankrupt and ceased operations in 2013 while owing 60 employees $676,000 in unpaid wages. [12] [13]  Imitation restaurants include Ding Tai Fung (intentionally similar to  Din Tai Fung ) in  First Markham Place  and Hutaoli Music Restaurant & Bar in  Bridlewood Mall . [14] 
 
 Culture [ edit ] 
   Dim sum  served at a Chinese restaurant in  Calgary ,  Alberta 
 Josephine Smart, a professor from the  University of Calgary , has written on the evolution of Canadian Chinese cuisine. Her papers have examined the dynamics of localization and "authenticization" of Chinese food in Canada, and its implications for ethnic relations and the culture of  consumption . [15] 
 Chinese restaurants generally use either one of the romanization systems for Cantonese or an ad hoc romanization rather than the  Pinyin  romanization of  Mandarin Chinese  with which non-Chinese people are now most familiar.
 Foam take-out containers  are commonly used by Canadian Chinese restaurants for  take-out , although some restaurants use special plastic containers. Aluminum pan pie dishes were previously used until the late 1990s, when they fell out of favour due to high costs and environmental concerns. Use of the  oyster pail  is significantly less common in Canadian Chinese restaurants compared to Chinese American restaurants.
 Although the Canadian version of westernized Chinese cuisine is very similar to that found in the United States, there are a few distinctive regional dishes:
 
 Ginger beef : Deep fried strips of beef coated in a dark sweet sauce featuring  ginger ,  garlic , and  hot peppers , commonly served with a small amount of  julienned   carrots  and  onions . [16]  Ginger beef is derived from the original  Geung Ngao Yuk  ( Chinese : 薑牛肉) dish. Though common across the country, it is ubiquitous in Calgary and the Prairies. [17]  The invention of ginger beef is generally traced back to the Silver Inn in Calgary in the mid-1970s. [5] [8] [9] [18] 
 Newfoundland chow mein : A regional variant made with thinly sliced  cabbage  instead of  egg noodles  due to historical difficulties in accessing authentic Chinese ingredients in  Atlantic Canada . [17] 
 Montreal peanut-butter dumplings : A dish consisting of  wonton  or  jiaozi  covered with peanut, honey, and soy-sauce based sauce, [19] [20]  most likely based-on the  Sichuan dish   hongyou chaosho  (紅油抄手, lit. "folded-dumplings in red-oil") and reinterpreted for the tastes of Montrealers. [21]  Also known as "Hunan dumplings", [20] [21]  the dish was likely created in the 1980s at a restaurant  "le Piment Rouge" and quickly became popular throughout Chinese and Thai restaurants in Montreal and later Québec. [21] 
 Thunder Bay bon bons : A salty, deep-fried rib dish that is said to go well with beer, invented in the 1940s by  Thunder Bay  Chinese restaurateur Lam Pang [22]  and now ubiquitous in Thunder Bay's Chinese restaurants. [17]  The ribs are chopped, marinated overnight in ingredients including salt, sugar, and  five-spice powder , dipped in eggs, and coated with bread [17]  or crushed crackers [22]  before frying. 
 Fried macaroni : Stir-fried  macaroni  with soy sauce, meat, and vegetables served in Quebec. [17] 
 Green onion cake : A flat breaded cake that is made with scallions. It is a popular dish in Edmonton that was introduced by Siu To, a restaurateur who brought Northern Chinese delicacies to the city. Also known as  cong you bing . [23] 
 For more expensive or formal occasions, Chinese Canadians may seek out more authentic Chinese cuisine. A Chinese  wedding reception  typically has nine or ten courses. Expensive luxury dishes such as  abalone ,  lobster , jumbo shrimp,  squab ,  sea bass , or  sea cucumber  are common on a wedding banquet menu. A whole cooked fish, chicken, or pig means luck and completeness in Chinese wedding culture.
 
 See also [ edit ] 
 Canadian cuisine 
 Chinese cuisine 
 Fusion cuisine 
 American Chinese cuisine 
 British Chinese cuisine 
 Australian Chinese cuisine 
 References [ edit ] 
 
 
 ^  a   b   c   MacDonald, Moira (21 September 2015).  "The unique culinary delight that is Chinese-Canadian food" .  ca.news.yahoo.com . Retrieved  19 February  2023 . 
 
 ^  a   b   Tran, Paula (22 October 2022).  "An ode to ginger beef: the hidden history of Chinese Canadian cuisine" .  Global News . Retrieved  19 February  2023 . 
 
 ^   Rogers, Shelagh (5 April 2019).  "Why Ann Hui documented the history of Chinese restaurant owners in small-town Canada" .  CBC Radio . Retrieved  19 February  2023 . 
 
 ^   "A Brief History of Chinese Food on the Prairies" .  MountainviewToday.ca . Retrieved  2023-02-19 . 
 
 ^  a   b   Wingrove, Josh (2013-04-30).  "The Chinese restaurant as a Prairie icon" .  The Globe and Mail . Retrieved  2018-11-28 . 
 
 ^   Boyer, Michel (2014-07-04).  "Bill Wong, Montreal restaurateur dies" .  CJAD . Archived from  the original  on 2016-03-03 . Retrieved  2016-06-15 . 
 
 ^   Delean, Paul (2014-07-04).  "Bill Wong: a private man who popularized buffets and Chinese fare" .  Montreal Gazette . 
 
 ^  a   b   "Chinese New Year: Silver Inn, Calgary" .  CBC News . February 15, 2007. Archived from  the original  on 2009-03-30. 
 
 ^  a   b   Beneteau, Greg (March 12, 2013).  "7 Iconic Calgary Foods: Chicago has deep-dish pizza. Boston has baked beans. What about Calgary?" .  Avenue Calgary . 
 
 ^   "History of the Dragon Centre : Dragon Centre Stories" .  dragoncentrestories.ca . Retrieved  2023-02-20 . 
 
 ^   Susilo, Darren "DKLo" (2015-06-20).  "Toronto dim sum restaurants that still do cart service" .  blogTO . 
 
 ^   "Ellen Pun Jailed For 3 Months After Not Paying Staff As Ordered" . Archived from  the original  on 2018-08-02. 
 
 ^   "Ontario Newsroom" . 
 
 ^   "Toronto has a problem with imitation Chinese restaurant chains" . 
 
 ^   Smart, Josephine (Fall–Winter 2003). "Ethnic Entrepreneurship, Transmigration, And Social Integration: An Ethnographic Study Of Chinese Restaurant Owners In Rural Western Canada".  Urban Anthropology and Studies of Cultural Systems and World Economic Development .  32  (3/4): 311–342.  JSTOR   40553618 . 
 
 ^   "Calgary Style Ginger Beef Recipe" .  ChowTown . October 21, 2009. 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   e   Tremonti, Anna Maria; Hui, Ann (January 31, 2019).  "These dishes from Chinese restaurants are uniquely Canadian. Is your favourite on the list?" .  The Current .  CBC Radio One . Retrieved  12 April  2019 . 
 
 ^   "Chop Suey on the Prairies" .  Royal Alberta Museum . Archived from  the original  on 2012-08-29. 
 
 ^   Ricardocuisine.  "Pork Dumplings with Peanut Sauce" .  Ricardo . Retrieved  2019-08-28 . 
 
 ^  a   b   "Hunan Dumplings" .  The Healthy Foodie . 2017-10-17 . Retrieved  2019-08-28 . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   Wei, Jessica (September 14, 2015).  "Only in Montreal: Peanut Butter Dumplings" .  Saveur . Retrieved  2019-08-28 . 
 
 ^  a   b   Latimer, Kim (February 2016).  "Birth of the Bon Bon — Thunder Bay's One and Only Bon Bon Spare Rib" .  The Walleye — Thunder Bay's Arts & Culture Magazine . Retrieved  12 April  2019 . 
 
 ^   Charnalia, Ameya (April 10, 2018).  "Siu To, 78, is believed to be the man who popularized green onion cakes in Edmonton" .  The Star (Edmonton edition) . Toronto Star Newspapers Ltd . Retrieved  2019-12-12 . 
 
 
 Further reading [ edit ] 
 Hui, Ann (2019).  Chop suey nation : the Legion Cafe and other stories from Canada's Chinese restaurants . Madeira Park, BC, Canada: Douglas & McIntyre.  ISBN   978-1-77162-222-6 .  – A journalist's exploration of her own and other's family histories operating Canadian-Chinese restaurants across the continent 
 External links [ edit ] 
 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons has media related to  Chinese style restaurants in Canada . 
 
 Imogene Lim Restaurant Menu Collection: Canadian menus . Vancouver Island University Library. 
 Chop Suey Nation, From Victoria to Fogo Island and in every province in between, Ann Hui drives across the country to uncover the immigrant history – and vibrant present – of small-town Chinese-Canadian food .  The Globe and Mail , July 4, 2016 
 v t e Chinese Canadian  topics Topics 
 Chinese Canadian 
 Hong Kong Canadians 
 Taiwanese Canadians 
 History of Chinese immigration to Canada 
 Chinese Immigration Act of 1885 
 Chinese Immigration Act, 1923 
 Chinese Canadians 
 Canadian Chinese cuisine 
 Chinese Canadian National Council 
 List of Chinese Canadians 
 Chinatowns  and Chinese communities 
 Chinatowns in Canada 
 
 Calgary 
 Edmonton 
 Lethbridge 
 Montreal 
 Ottawa 
 Toronto 
 Vancouver 
 Victoria 
 Windsor 
 Winnipeg 
 
 
 v t e Cuisines Continental 
 African 
 North 
 West 
 list 
 Americas 
 Caribbean 
 North 
 South 
 list 
 Asian 
 Caucasian 
 Central 
 Indian subcontinent 
 Levantine 
 list 
 European 
 Balkan 
 Central 
 Eastern 
 list 
 Oceanic 
 Intercontinental
 Global 
 Latin American 
 Mediterranean 
 Middle Eastern 
 National  and regional 
 Afghan 
 Albanian 
 Algerian 
 American 
 Californian 
 Floribbean 
 Hawaiian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Lowcountry (South Carolina) 
 New England 
 New Mexico 
 Pacific Northwest 
 Pennsylvania Dutch 
 Puerto Rican 
 Southern US 
 Southwest US 
 Texas 
 Angolan 
 Argentine 
 Armenian 
 Australian 
 Austrian 
 Azerbaijani 
 Bahraini 
 Bangladeshi 
 Barbadian 
 Belarusian 
 Belgian 
 Belizean 
 Beninese 
 Bhutanese 
 Bolivian 
 Bosnian-Herzegovinian 
 Botswana 
 Brazilian 
 British 
 Channel Islands 
 English 
 Gibraltarian 
 Northern Irish 
 Saint Helena 
 Scottish 
 Welsh 
 Bruneian 
 Bulgarian 
 Burkinabé 
 Burmese 
 Burundian 
 Cambodian 
 Cameroonian 
 Canadian 
 Acadian 
 Québécois 
 Central African Republic 
 Chadian 
 Chilean 
 Chinese 
 Cantonese 
 Hong Kong 
 Macanese 
 Tibetan 
 Xinjiang 
 Colombian 
 Congolese 
 Corsican 
 Croatian 
 Cuban 
 Cypriot 
 Czech 
 Danish 
 Faroese 
 Greenlandic 
 Djiboutian 
 Dominican 
 Dominican Republic 
 Dutch 
 East Timorese 
 Ecuadorian 
 Egyptian 
 Emirati 
 Equatorial Guinean 
 Eritrean 
 Estonian 
 Ethiopian 
 Fijian 
 Filipino 
 Finnish 
 French 
 Occitan 
 French Guianan 
 Gabonese 
 Gambian 
 Georgian 
 German 
 Ghanaian 
 Greek 
 Cretan 
 Epirotic 
 Greek Macedonian 
 Heptanesean 
 Guatemalan 
 Guinea-Bissauan 
 Guinean 
 Haitian 
 Honduran 
 Hungarian 
 Icelandic 
 Indian 
 Arunachalese 
 Assamese 
 Bengali 
 Bihari 
 Goan 
 Gujarati 
 Himachal Pradesh 
 Kashmiri 
 Jharkhandi 
 Karnataka 
 Kerala 
 Maharashtrian 
 Manipuri 
 Meghalayan 
 Mizo 
 Naga 
 Odia 
 Punjabi 
 Rajasthani 
 Sikkimese 
 Sindhi 
 Tamil 
 Telangana 
 Telugu 
 Indonesian 
 Acehnese 
 Balinese 
 Banjar 
 Batak 
 Betawi 
 Indo 
 Javanese 
 Madurese 
 Makassar 
 Minahasan 
 Minangkabau 
 Palembangese 
 Sundanese 
 Iranian 
 Iraqi 
 Irish 
 Israeli 
 Italian 
 Abruzzese 
 Ligurian 
 Lombard 
 Lucanian 
 Neapolitan 
 Roman 
 Sardinian 
 Sicilian 
 Venetian 
 Ivorian 
 Jamaican 
 Japanese 
 Okinawan 
 Jordanian 
 Kazakh 
 Kenyan 
 Korean 
 North Korean 
 South Korean 
 Kosovan 
 Kuwaiti 
 Kyrgyz 
 Lao 
 Latvian 
 Lebanese 
 Lesotho 
 Liberian 
 Libyan 
 Liechtensteiner 
 Lithuanian 
 Luxembourg 
 Macedonian 
 Malagasy 
 Malawian 
 Malaysian 
 Sabahan 
 Sarawakian 
 Maldivian 
 Malian 
 Maltese 
 Mauritanian 
 Mauritian 
 Mexican 
 Moldovan 
 Monégasque 
 Mongolian 
 Montenegrin 
 Moroccan 
 Mozambican 
 Namibian 
 Nauruan 
 Nepalese 
 New Zealand 
 Nicaraguan 
 Niger 
 Nigerian 
 Niuean 
 Norwegian 
 Omani 
 Pakistani 
 Palestinian 
 Panamanian 
 Peruvian 
 Polish 
 Portuguese 
 Qatari 
 Romanian  (incl.  Transylvanian Saxon ) 
 Russian 
 Bashkir 
 Chechen 
 Circassian 
 Komi 
 Mordovian 
 Sakha 
 Tatar 
 Udmurt 
 Yamal 
 Rwandan 
 Saint Lucian 
 Salvadoran 
 Sammarinese 
 São Tomé and Príncipe 
 Saudi Arabian 
 Senegalese 
 Serbian 
 Seychellois 
 Sierra Leonean 
 Singaporean 
 Slovak 
 Slovenian 
 Somali 
 South African 
 Spanish 
 Andalusian 
 Asturian 
 Balearic 
 Basque 
 Canarian 
 Cantabrian 
 Catalan 
 Extremaduran 
 Galician 
 Manchegan 
 Valencian 
 Sri Lankan 
 Sudanese 
 Swazi 
 Swedish 
 Swiss 
 Syrian 
 Taiwanese 
 Tajik 
 Tanzanian 
 Zanzibari 
 Thai 
 Togolese 
 Tunisian 
 Turkish 
 Turkmen 
 Trinidadian and Tobagonian 
 Ugandan 
 Ukrainian 
 Uruguayan 
 Uzbek 
 Venezuelan 
 Vietnamese 
 Western Saharan 
 Yemeni 
 Zambian 
 Zimbabwean 
 Ethnic 
 Ainu 
 Arab 
 Indonesian 
 Aromanian 
 Assyrian 
 Balochi 
 Berber 
 Cajun 
 Chinese 
 American 
 Canadian 
 Chifa 
 Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Crimean Tatar 
 Greek American 
 Hazaragi 
 Indian 
 Anglo-Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Indigenous American 
 Inuit 
 Italian American 
 Kurdish 
 Livonian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Malay 
 Ossetian 
 Parsi 
 Pashtun 
 Peranakan 
 Romani 
 Sámi 
 Soul food 
 Sylheti 
 Transylvanian Saxon 
 Yup'ik 
 Religious 
 Buddhist 
 Christian 
 Goan Catholic 
 Mangalorean Catholic 
 Mennonite 
 Hindu 
 Islamic 
 Chinese 
 Ital 
 Jain 
 Jewish 
 American 
 Ashkenazi 
 Bukharan 
 Ethiopian 
 Mizrahi 
 Sephardic 
 Syrian 
 Ritual slaughter 
 Sikh 
 Historical 
 Ancient Egyptian 
 Ancient Greek 
 Ancient Israelite 
 Ancient Roman 
 Antebellum America 
 Aztec 
 Byzantine 
 Early modern European 
 Historical Chinese 
 Historical Indian subcontinent 
 Historical North Indian and Pakistani 
 History of agriculture 
 History of alcoholic drinks 
 History of bread 
 History of seafood 
 History of vegetarianism 
 Historical Argentine 
 Historical Japanese 
 Inca 
 Mayan 
 Muisca 
 Mughal 
 Medieval 
 Ottoman 
 Peasant 
 Soviet 
 Thirteen Colonies 
 Styles 
 Classique 
 Fast food 
 Fusion 
 New American 
 Eurasian 
 Haute 
 Molecular gastronomy 
 Note by Note 
 Nouvelle 
 Lists 
 List of cuisines 
 List of historical cuisines 
 Lists of prepared foods 
 Related 
 Cookbook 
 Cooking 
 Culinary arts 
 Drink 
 Food 
 history 
 Diet 
 Meal preparation 
 
   Food portal 
   Drink portal 
   Category 
   Commons 
   Cookbook 
   WikiProject 
   Outline 
 
 Portals :   Canada   China   Food 
  
NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw2275
Cached time: 20230311124128
Cache expiry: 1814400
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc, no‐toc‐conversion]
CPU time usage: 0.839 seconds
Real time usage: 1.053 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2504/1000000
Post‐expand include size: 186217/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 10916/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 15/100
Expensive parser function count: 11/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 110113/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.496/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 18480114/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/400
 
 
Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  790.630      1 -total
 25.34%  200.381      1 Template:Reflist
 18.72%  148.005      3 Template:Ambox
 17.84%  141.030     17 Template:Cite_web
 15.21%  120.263      2 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 12.22%   96.599      1 Template:Multiple_issues
 12.08%   95.490      1 Template:Canadian_cuisine
 11.75%   92.921      1 Template:Lang-fr
  8.98%   70.995      3 Template:Navbox
  8.00%   63.261      1 Template:Short_description
 
  Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:idhash:2477935-0!canonical and timestamp 20230311124126 and revision id 1143914842. Rendering was triggered because: page-view
  
 esi <esi:include src="/esitest-fa8a495983347898/content" />  
 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Canadian_Chinese_cuisine&oldid=1143914842 " 
 Categories :  Canadian Chinese cuisine Canadian cuisine Chinese fusion cuisine Hidden categories:  Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from July 2013 All articles needing additional references Articles that may contain original research from September 2010 All articles that may contain original research Articles with multiple maintenance issues Articles containing French-language text Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2023 All articles containing potentially dated statements All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2023 Commons category link is on Wikidata 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  This page was last edited on 10 March 2023, at 17:37  (UTC) . 
 Text is available under the  Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0 ;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the  Terms of Use  and  Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the  Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. 
 
 
 Privacy policy 
 About Wikipedia 
 Disclaimers 
 Contact Wikipedia 
 Mobile view 
 Developers 
 Statistics 
 Cookie statement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
