
 
 
 Jump to content 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle sidebar 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Create account Log in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Personal tools 
 
 
 
 
   Create account   Log in 
 
 
 
 
		Pages for logged out editors  learn more 
 
 
 Contributions Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Navigation 
 
 
 Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate 
 
 
 
 
 Contribute 
 
 
 Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file 
 
 
 
 
 Tools 
 
 
 What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item 
 
 
 
 
 Print/export 
 
 
 Download as PDF Printable version 
 
 
 
 
 In other projects 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons 
 
 
 
 
 Languages 
 
 On this Wikipedia the language links are at the top of the page across from the article title.  Go to top . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CentralNotice  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Contents 
 move to sidebar 
 hide 
 
 
 
 
 (Top) 
 
 
 
 
 
 1 History 
 
 
				Toggle History subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 1.1 Immigration to Chile 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 Major crops and products 
 
 
				Toggle Major crops and products subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 2.1 American crops 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.2 Old-world crops 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.3 Fish and seafood 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.3.1 Fish 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.3.2 Seafood 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 Cuisine of the North 
 
 
				Toggle Cuisine of the North subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 3.1 Recipes from the northern regions of Chile 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4 Cuisine of the Central Valley and Coast 
 
 
				Toggle Cuisine of the Central Valley and Coast subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 4.1 Dishes from the central regions of Chile 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5 Cuisine from southern Chile 
 
 
				Toggle Cuisine from southern Chile subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 5.1 Dishes from southern Chile 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6 Other typical Chilean dishes 
 
 
				Toggle Other typical Chilean dishes subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 6.1 Easter Island or Rapa Nui cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6.2 Alcoholic and non-alcoholic beverages 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6.3 Sandwiches and Chilean fast food 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6.4 Starters and salads 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6.5 Cereals and legumes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6.6 Pasta 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6.7 Tortillas 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6.8 Empanadas 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6.9 Breads 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6.10 Salsas (sauces) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6.11 Meat dishes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6.12 Lamb and goat dishes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6.13 Intestinos (offal) dishes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6.14 Various stews 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6.15 Fish and shellfish 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 7 Sweets, cakes, and desserts 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8 See also 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 9 References 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 10 External links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
						Toggle the table of contents
					 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle the table of contents 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Chilean cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 32 languages 
 
 
 
 Afrikaans العربية Беларуская Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Italiano Jawa ქართული Kurdî ລາວ Lietuvių Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Português Română Русский Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 
 Edit links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Article Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 English 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 More 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
 
 
 Culinary traditions of Chile 
 
 
 Part of  a series  on the Culture of Chile 
 History 
 People 
 Languages 
 Traditions 
 Cuisine 
 
 Cuisine 
 Religion 
 Art 
 Art 
 
 Literature 
 Literature 
 
 Music  and Performing arts 
 Music of Chile 
 
 Media 
 Television 
 Cinema 
 
 Sport 
 Monuments 
 World Heritage Sites 
 
 Symbols 
 Flag 
 Coat of arms 
 National anthem 
 
   Chile portal v t e 
   Dulce de leche , known in Chile as manjar 
   Mote con huesillo 
 Chilean cuisine [1]  stems mainly from the combination of traditional  Spanish cuisine ,  Chilean   Mapuche culture  and local ingredients, with later important influences from other  European  cuisines, particularly from  Germany , the  United Kingdom  and  France .
The food tradition and recipes in Chile are notable for the variety of flavours and ingredients, with the country's diverse geography and climate hosting a wide range of agricultural produce, fruits and vegetables. The long coastline and the peoples' relationship with the  Pacific Ocean  add an immense array of  seafood  to Chilean cuisine, with the country's waters home to unique species of  fish ,  molluscs ,  crustaceans  and  algae , thanks to the oxygen-rich water carried in by the  Humboldt Current . Chile is also one of the world's largest producers of  wine  and many Chilean recipes are enhanced and accompanied by local wines. The confection  dulce de leche  was invented in Chile and is one of the country's most notable contributions to world cuisine. [2] 
 Chilean cuisine shares some similarities with  Mediterranean cuisine , as the  Matorral region , stretching from 32° to 37° south, is one of the world's five  Mediterranean climate  zones.
 
 
 History [ edit ] 
 Main article:  History of Chile 
 With the arrival of the Spanish conquerors led by  Pedro de Valdivia  in 1540 came some of the products that would become staples of Chilean cuisine— wheat ,  pigs ,  sheep ,  cattle ,  chickens  and  wine —while the native peoples contributed  potatoes ,  maize ,  beans , and  seafood . Various combinations of these basic ingredients form the basis of most characteristic Chilean dishes.
After the establishment of the colony, products and dishes like chuchoca (coarsely ground dry corn),  humitas ,  locro , and seaweeds like  cochayuyo  and  luche  served with boiled eggs became popular. Meals in colonial times tended to be heavy and rich. Lunch was always bigger than dinner, starting with a dish called  de residencia  of fish, meat, or poultry, followed by a  guiso   stew  with  choclo  (fresh sweet corn) and potatoes.
There were three kinds of bread accompanying the meals:  tortilla de rescoldo , Spanish bread (made of fatty dough), and Chilean bread (flat and crunchy). Lunch and dinner ended with herbal  infusions , generally  paico  to help digestion, and finally fruit for dessert, mainly  strawberries  and  lucumas .
 In the seventeenth century, pastry was popularized by the nuns who baked it in convents. A popular Chilean saying, “tiene mano de monja” (“s/he has the hands of a nun”), comes from this period and refers to someone who is skilled at baking or cooking in general. The nuns’ pastry recipes quickly become popular among the rest of the Chilean population. During the same period,  geese  and  turkeys  arrived in Chile from  Mexico  and  melons  and  watermelons  came from  Jamaica .
During the eighteenth century, Chilean cuisine started to become more sophisticated, particularly among the aristocracy.  Tea  and  coffee  began to replace  mate ,  Chilean wine  became popular and people started to drink  chicha , a sweet, undistilled wine made from fermented grapes or apples.
 During the early years of Chilean independence, the so-called  Patria Vieja , Chileans celebrated with  empanadas ,  chicha  and  red wine , which is still traditional today at the annual celebrations of independence.
 
 Immigration to Chile [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Immigration to Chile 
 During the nineteenth century, Chile began to form its own identity and food became a part of this. Immigration, which had been limited and incidental at the beginning of the young republic, was now actively encouraged by the Chilean government between late nineteenth century and early 20th century. The variety of produce increased with the arrival of  German  immigrants in the south of the country, who had a strong influence on Chilean cuisine, even until today. They brought with them  pork  dishes,  sausages  and pastries. Today,  Berliners  and  kuchens  are common in bakeries throughout Chile.  Italian  immigrants contributed pasta and meat products, and in towns like  Capitán Pastene  in the south of Chile, they still prepare  prosciutto  in the same way as the first Italian immigrants. [3] 
 In the twentieth century, French culture had a strong influence on Chile, including its cuisine. French gastronomy and techniques influenced the preparation of the food, and even replaced some dishes, for example the  Spanish tortilla , which was replaced by the  omelette . Along with the Italians, Germans, and French came  Croatians ,  Greeks ,  Palestinians ,  Belgians  and  Basques .
In the 21st century, Chile is a modern and prosperous country with strong economic growth bringing greater disposable income and the consequent development of a rich gastronomic industry. [4] 
 To some extent food consumption is related to  blanqueamiento  or whitening. For example, in  Osorno , a Chilean city with a strong  German heritage , consumption of desserts, marmalades and  kuchens  whitens the inhabitants of the city. [5]  While indigenous and raw dishes such a  ñachi  are associated with masculinity, European cuisine and specially desserts are considered feminine. [5] 
 
 
 
 
 
 Asado  Chileno
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Paila marina , a shellfish soup containing different kinds of cooked fish and seasoned with herbs.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Almejas a la Parmesana 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Caldillo de congrio  (“Caldillo” is a clear thin soup)
 
 
 
 
 Major crops and products [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Agriculture in Chile 
 Agriculture  in  Chile  encompasses a wide range of different activities and products, due to the unique  geography ,  climate  and  geology . Historically, agriculture was one of the bases of Chile's  economy ; now, however, agriculture and related sectors like  forestry ,  logging  and  fishing  accounts for only about 4.9% of the  GDP . Major agricultural products of Chile include  grapes ,  apples ,  pears ,  onions ,  wheat ,  maize ,  oats ,  peaches ,  garlic ,  asparagus ,  beans ,  beef ,  poultry ,  wool ,  fish  and  timber . [6] 
 
 American crops [ edit ] 
 Cherimoya  or chirimoya: this fruit native to the  subtropical  regions of the Peruvian  Andes mountains  is widely consumed and produced. 
 Maize : Known in Chile and Peru as  choclo , and in some English-speaking countries as corn, maize was the staple diet that prospered in the empires of the  Maya ,  Aztecs , and  Incas . It was also cultivated using varying techniques by the  Atacameño  people of northern Chile. Through trade and travel, maize was brought to and eventually embraced by the  Mapuche , who began using it in their own preparations. Chilean  choclo  is a different variety of maize than that known elsewhere.  It originated in Peru and is distinguishable by its very large kernels, which are tougher than North American corn, and its savoury, somewhat nutty flavour. 
 Lúcuma : A subtropical fruit of Peruvian Andes origin, native to Peru, lúcuma is grown in southern Ecuador and the northern coast of Chile. The fruit is very nutritious, having high levels of  carotene  and  vitamin B 3 . Lúcuma is exported all over the world and is a popular flavour for desserts and ice cream. 
 Murta  or  Murtilla : an endemic shrub native to southern Chile. The  Mapuche  name is  uñi , and Spanish names include Murta and Murtilla (“little myrtle”); it is also sometimes known as “Chilean guava”. It was used by the Mapuche before the arrival of the Spaniards.  It is used in the preparation of  jams  and  liquor . 
 Potato : Featured heavily in dishes such as  cazuela , the potato has two centres of origin, namely the South of Peruvian Andes (Solanum indigenous) and the  Chiloé Archipelago  (Solanum tuberosum). [7] [ verification needed ]  It is a fundamental product in a wide array of dishes. 
 Quinoa : grown as a crop primarily for its edible seeds, quinoa originated in the Peruvian Andean region of South America, where it has been an important food for 6,000 years. Varieties of quinoa are grown in  Concepción  and  Temuco . 
 Nalca  or  pangue : The Chilean  rhubarb  is a plant species native to southern Chile. Its leaves are used in the preparation of  curanto  and the stems in salad, as fruit or in preserves. 
 Avocado :  Palta , as it is called in Chile, has been consumed since pre-Hispanic times. Avocado originated in Mexico and Peru. The Chilean variety is called  Negra de la Cruz  (“La Cruz Black”) after the town of  La Cruz  in the  Valparaíso Region , the main producer; it is also called  Prada  or  Vicencio . 
 Aji verde  (green chili): One of the most common varieties in Chile; called green chile because it is consumed before its maturation. 
 
 
 
 
 Choclo 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Chirimoya 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cochayuyo  salad
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bundles of  Cochayuyo 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Avocado 
 
 
 
 
 Old-world crops [ edit ] 
 Artichoke 
 Garlic 
 Lemon 
 Lettuce 
 Olives : Although originating in Europe, olives from  Azapa  in  Arica  are considered a variety of their own, typical of the dry northern region, and are widely recognized in Chile. 
 Onion 
 Quince 
 Wheat 
 Fish and seafood [ edit ] 
 A characteristic of Chilean cuisine is the variety and quality of fish and seafood, due to the geographic location and extensive coastline. The  Humboldt current  brings a supply of seafood that gathers along the Pacific coast perpendicular to Chilean waters. These include:
 
 Fish [ edit ] 
 
 Soleidae  (Solecane *use) 
 Albacore 
 Codfish  (Bacalao) 
 Hake  (Merluza) 
 Sciaenidae  (Corvina) 
 Salmon 
 Tuna 
 Jurel 
 Reineta  (southern ray's bream,  Brama australis ) 
 Congrio 
 Patagonian toothfish  (Lubina) 
 Swordfish  (albacora) 
 Seafood [ edit ] 
 
 Abalone 
 Macha similar to  Ensis macha  is a kind of razor clams. 
 Prawn 
 Choros  or mussels, (mejillones in other Spanish speakers countries) 
 Clam 
 Centolla Chilena  or Southern King Crab 
 crab  (Jaiba) 
 Shrimp 
 Oyster 
 Lobster 
 Langosta de Juan Fernández  (Juan Fernández Island lobsters) 
 Locos 
 Picorocos 
 Pyura chilensis  (Piure) 
 Squid  (Jibia) 
 Sea urchin  (Erizo) 
 
 
 
 
 Pyura chilensis  (Piure) on machas
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Chorito  (Chilean Mejillon)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Picorocos 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 A  Pacific razor clam  similar to Chilean Machas
 
 
 
 
 Cuisine of the North [ edit ] 
 Northern cuisine is strongly influenced by the Andean   Aymara ,  Diaguita  and  Atacameño  cultures, and also by the coastal  Chango people . The northern diet is traditionally high in protein.
The use of  tubers  like the  apilla or oca  and the  ulluco  is common, though these are practically unknown in central and southern Chilean cuisine.
Traditional northern Chilean cuisine also includes the use of camelid meats like  llama  and  alpaca . Dishes like  chairo  have been prepared for centuries by the  Andean cultures , although they are not as common nowadays among the northern Chilean population and are almost unknown in the rest of Chile.
 
 Recipes from the northern regions of Chile [ edit ] 
 
 Asado : Meat roasted on the barbecue. In the north it is possible to find asados prepared with  alpaca  meat. 
 Chicharrón de papa: Pieces of meat and fat from  llama  and  lamb , boiled and then fried. Served with potatoes, salad, or consumed as a snack by farmers and peasants. 
 Guatitas : A stew of cow stomach (guatita means “tummy”). 
 Chairo : An altiplanic llama stew, one of the least known in the rest of Chile. 
 Charqui : Dried and salted meat, originally llama. 
 Carapulcra : Spicy soup, with potatoes, corn and different kinds of meat. 
 Tortilla de mariscos: A kind of omelette of beaten eggs fried with seafood and chorizo, similar to prawn tortilla from Spain. 
 Machas a la parmesana : A type of shellfish similar to the razor clam that is cooked in the oven with bits of Parmesan cheese and other condiments. Is often eaten as an appetizer. 
 Conchas de camarones:  Prawns, leeks, and  cheese, milk and other ingredients form a mix that is served in oyster shells. 
 Erizos  con salsa verde: Sea urchin is very abundant in the Chilean seas, but its extraction is limited by the government to only certain times of the year. It is often eaten raw with a little lemon, coriander or parsley, and onion, as an appetizer. 
 Caldillo de congrio : A fish stew with conger eel and vegetables, commonly found throughout the country. 
 Picante de conejo, cow stomach or chicken: Spicy dish of vegetables fried and stewed with meat of rabbit, chicken, or cow stomach. Hand crushed potatoes are added at the end. 
 Plateada con quinoa: Literally “silver-plated”. A cut of beef known in English as “rib cap” is cooked with quinoa, onions, garlic and white wine. 
 Cazuela marina : A stew of different types of seafood, such as razor clams, oysters and shrimp, similar to paila marina but with more vegetables. 
 Estofado de cordero: Lamb Stew. 
 Ensalada chilena nortina: Onions and tomatoes prepared a la  julienne . It is similar to the basic  ensalada chilena  with the addition of goat cheese and olives. 
 Ensalada de  Quinoa : Quinoa salad comprising quinoa and other vegetables. 
 Timbal de quinoa: A mix of quinoa, avocado and other ingredients; served shaped like a  timbal  drum. 
 Risotto  de quinoa y pimientos amarillos: Quinoa risotto with yellow peppers. 
 Sango: A kind of bread made from wheat flour cooked with oil and salt; served with  chicharrones 
 
 Cuisine of the Central Valley and Coast [ edit ] 
 The cuisine of the central valley and coast has been influenced by the traditions of the native people and European immigrants, particularly those who arrived during the second half of the nineteenth century, with farm life and agriculture the most important influence. In the past, agriculture was a very important aspect of the economy and the Fundo (ranch, farm) was the centre of everyday life. Country traditions still survive and food is a good example of this.
 
 Dishes from the central regions of Chile [ edit ] 
 
 Sopa de mariscos: A soup of mixed seafood. 
 Locos con mayonesa (“ Locos  with mayonnaise”), accompanied usually with lettuce and potato salad. 
 Palta reina: Avocado stuffed with chicken salad, tuna, prawns, or other fillings. 
 Tomates rellenos: Stuffed tomatoes, generally filled with sweetcorn, mayonnaise, and other ingredients. 
 Pastel de choclo : a layered pie, usually made in a deep dish or a clay  paila  with chopped beef at the bottom prepared “al pino” (a thick stew of minced or chopped beef, chopped onions and seasoning), chicken, olives and a hard-boiled egg, topped with a mixture of ground fresh corn and basil, and baked in the oven. 
 Humitas : similar to Mexican  tamales , the humita is a mixture of fresh and ground corn baked inside corn husks. 
 Porotos granados : a stew of fresh white beans, ground  choclo  and other vegetables. 
 Albóndigas al jugo (meatballs in sauce) 
 Cazuela  de ave: like normal cazuela but with chicken instead of beef 
 Empanadas  fritas de queso: empanadas stuffed with cheese and then deep fried. 
 Pantrucas : a type of dumpling or pasta made without eggs, cut in irregular pieces and later mixed with vegetable soup or beef stock. 
 Charquican : a stew of charqui (dried beef) or regular beef, with potatoes, corn and other vegetables 
 Jaibas rellenas: stuffed crabs 
 Pastel de jaiba: crab pie 
 Tomaticán: a thick vegetable stew, similar to  Charquican  but with tomatoes. 
 Pastel de papa: a pie made in layers, with minced beef in the bottom and mashed potatoes on top, similar to the English  cottage pie . 
 Brochetas: a variety of  anticucho  or  kebab 
 Pan de Pascua : similar to a sweet sponge cake flavoured with ginger, cinnamon, liquor and honey. It usually contains candied fruits, raisins, walnuts and almonds. 
 Pan amasado: a traditional type of bread, which has animal fat in it. It is kneaded for a long time to achieve a very dense type of bread. 
 Leche asada : A baked milk dessert with caramel, similar to the original  panna cotta  made with eggs instead of gelatine, as it is made in most places today. 
 
 Cuisine from southern Chile [ edit ] 
 Southern Chilean cuisine has been greatly influenced by  Mapuche  cuisine and  Chilote   cuisine . There are two products that have attracted particular attention: the  Merkén  condiment and the “Kollongka”,  Araucana  or Mapuche chicken, known by their unusual blue-green eggs.
Another great influence on southern Chilean cuisine was immigration from Europe, particularly the German migration of the nineteenth century. Traditional German cakes and desserts have been adopted in much of Chile.
As in the rest of Chile, seafood has a very important place in the diet, but due to the thousands of islands that make up the southern region, the ocean has a particular relevance here.
 
 
 
 
 
 Curanto a la olla or Pulmay 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Milcao  for the  curanto 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bottle of  Licor de oro 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kuchen , one of the Chilean traditional cakes introduced by German migrants
 
 
 
 
 Dishes from southern Chile [ edit ] 
 
 Merkén : a traditional  Mapuche  condiment, made with dried and smoked red chillis and coriander, ground to a fine powder. It is used to season all kinds of dishes. 
 Araucana , Kollongka or Mapuche Chicken: Endemic to southern Chile, known by their light blue/green eggs. 
 Caldillo de almejas: Clam soup [8]  (“caldillo” is a clear thin soup). 
 Chupe  de  locos :  A rich stew made with the loco or Chilean abalone, served with bread and baked in clay pots or “Paila de greda” 
 Sopa de ostras: Oyster soup 
 Pastel de pescado: Fish pie 
 Arrollado de chancho  and  Arrollado de huaso : Pork roll and chilli roll. 
 Asado  de cordero: Lamb barbecue. 
 Asado al palo : A form of roasting or barbecuing meat in which the whole animal (usually a lamb) is put on a stick next to a big wood fire and cooked for several hours until tender. 
 Cancato : A baked stew of fish, cheese, onions and pepper, seasoned with lemon and wine. 
 Cazuela  chilota: The  Chiloé  version of cazuela differs from traditional cazuela because the stock is made either of dried  cholgas  (ribbed mussels) and cabbage or of  luche  (a brown leafy alga) and lamb instead of beef or chicken, giving it a very distinct flavour. 
 Sopa chilota de pescado seco: Dried fish soup. 
 Curanto : A traditional preparation where seafood and meat is cooked in a big hole in the ground using heated stones. 
 Pulmay : A kind of  curanto , cooked in a big casserole dish instead of a hole. 
 Chapalele : A Chilean dumpling made from boiled potatoes and wheat flour. 
 Crudos : Crudos (Spanish for “raw”) is a typical German-Chilean dish similar to a  steak tartare . 
 Empanadas : a stuffed baked pastry, filled with meat, onions and other condiments. They can also be fried or have different fillings. 
 Milcao : The dish is a type of potato pancake prepared with raw grated potatoes and cooked mashed potatoes mixed with other ingredients. 
 Chochoca : Also known as chochoyeco, trotroyeco or trutru, this is a traditional  Chilote  dish prepared with raw squeezed potatoes and boiled mashed potatoes or flour, stuck to a pole and roasted in a fireplace. 
 Valdiviano : One of the oldest dishes in Chilean cuisine and named after the conquistador  Pedro de Valdivia , this soup made of  jerky , onions and potatoes was one of the dishes eaten by the conquering Spanish troops. 
 
 Baked goods, desserts and breads 
 
 Brazo de Reina : a classic Swiss Roll, usually filled with strawberry jam, raspberry jam or manjar (Chilean  dulce de leche ), and topped with chocolate swirls or icing sugar. 
 Empanadas de manzana: a baked pastry filled with baked apples and  cinnamon . 
 Kuchen : the traditional German cake filled with seasonal fruits such as strawberries, blackberries, apricots, plums, peaches, rhubarb, etc. 
 Murta con membrillo 
 Tortilla de rescoldo 
 Mazamorra  de manzana 
 Sopaipillas : A deep fried dough. There are two versions: one plain, which is made with white flour, animal fat and water, and another in which pureed pumpkin is mixed to the dough. In each version, the dough is formed as disks and then deep fried. It can be eaten sweet, with icing sugar or a sweet caramel sauce, or as a salty snack, topped with a chili sauce or mustard. 
 Alcoholic and non-alcoholic beverages 
 
 Chicha  de manzana:  A fermented  apple cider . 
 Chicha de calafate: chicha made with  calafate , a berry that only grows in Chilean and Argentinian  Patagonia 
 Licor de oro 
 Muday: an alcoholic beverage made of corn, wheat or piñón, the seed of the  Araucaria araucana  tree. 
 Murtado : Made by preserving Ugni molinae ( Murta ) inside a bottle with  aguardiente  for some weeks and then mixing it with syrup. 
 Other typical Chilean dishes [ edit ] 
 Easter Island or Rapa Nui cuisine [ edit ] 
 Easter Island  cuisine includes dishes of both Chilean and  Polynesian  extraction. It includes a much wider array of fish than the mainland cuisine, and some fruits and tubers that are not possible to find in continental Chile. [9] 
 
 Ceviche : Can be made with soy or coconut milk, in contrast to the traditional continental version, and with  tuna , mata huira, toremo or kana-kana. 
 Po`e:  Banana  or  cassava  cake. 
 Umu Rapa Nui: The Easter Island version of  curanto . 
 Alcoholic and non-alcoholic beverages [ edit ] 
 Main articles:  Chilean wine  and  Beer in Chile 
 Chile's unique combination of geography and climate make it ideal for wine growing. This tradition goes back to the sixteenth century and the arrival Spanish conquistadors, and has grown as an industry in recent decades, making Chile one of the world's biggest wine producers. Wine is not the only traditionally produced and consumed beverage, however: the northern regions produce aguardiente a distill of grape, the favourite liquor of many Chileans, and the southern regions are known for their high quality beers.
 
 
 Borgoña (drink) : Cold red wine with chopped strawberries and sugar. 
 Chicha  - Sweet fermented wine, usually made from grapes but sometimes from apples too. This is typically drunk around the 18 September independence day celebrations. 
 Chilean  Aguardiente : Similar to Italian  grappa , made by distilling grape residues. 
 Licor de oro  (golden liquor): A liquor distilled from a mixture of  aguardiente  and fermented milk. 
 Cola de mono  (literally, monkey's tail): Made and consumed throughout Chile, this is a traditional Chilean drink served around Christmas time, very much like the tradition of serving  eggnog  during Christmas in North America. Its texture and taste are somewhat similar to a  White Russian . 
 Murtado : Liquor based on  Aguardiente  and  Ugni molinae . 
 Fanschop : A glass of half beer, and half orange  Fanta . 
 Jote : Red wine with cola, popular among students. 
 Melon con Vino :  Honeydew melon , called Melon Tuna in Chile, with the top cut off and filled with ice and wine. 
 Navegado : Warm red wine with slices of orange and sugar, similar to  mulled wine . 
 Pipeño or  Vino pipeño : A type of sweet fermented wine. 
 Piscola :  Pisco  with cola and ice. 
 Ponche a la Romana : Champagne with pineapple ice cream. Typically served on New Year's Eve. [10] 
 Terremoto  (Earthquake):  Vino pipeño  with pineapple ice cream served in a one-liter glass. The next round usually contains the same drink though only in a glass that holds half a liter. This is called a Replica (aftershock). 
 Mango sour : a mixture of aguardiente and mango juice, similar to the Peruvian  pisco sour 
 Papaya sour : a mixture of aguardiente and papaya juice. 
 Pajarete : originally from Spain, a sweet viscous wine produced in the  Atacama Region  and  Coquimbo Region . 
 Té frío: A curiosity rather than a unique beverage. In the market of  Angelmo ,  Puerto Montt , at a time when it was forbidden to serve alcohol, the white wine was served in a cup of tea instead of a glass to disguise the forbidden content. 
 Vaina Chilena  [ es ] : A cocktail containing cognac, aged wine, egg yolk, cinnamon and sometimes cocoa liquor. 
 
 
 
 
 
 Borgoña
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Chicha 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Chilean  Pisco Sour 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mote con huesillo 
 
 
 
 
 Non-alcoholic beverages 
 
 Ulpo : Toasted flour and water or milk. 
 Leche con Plátano:  Fresh milk blended with banana and ice. 
 Leche con Lucuma: Fresh milk blended with  lucuma  and ice 
 Mote con huesillo : Cooked dried peaches and fresh cooked husked wheat served as a drink. It can also be classified as a dessert. 
 
 Sandwiches and Chilean fast food [ edit ] 
 Beside the big fast food chains present in almost every country in the world, Chile has its own traditional “fast food”. The traditional empanada can be eaten at September independence day celebrations or as a quick lunch. The Chilean version of the hot dog is more complex than standard North American hotdogs: as well as mustard and ketchup, it can be topped with mashed avocado, chopped tomatoes, sauerkraut and home-made mayonnaise. During the cold winter,  Sopaipillas  are also a popular snack served on the streets.
 
 
 Barros Jarpa : Grilled cheese and ham on white bun. Named after Chilean minister Ernesto Barros Jarpa. 
 Barros Luco : Grilled cheese and meat on white bread. Named after the Chilean President Ramón Barros Luco (President from 1910–1915). 
 Churrasco  Italiano (Italian): Named after the colours of the Italian flag (red tomatoes, white mayonnaise and green mashed avocados), it is a beef sandwich topped with tomato, avocado and mayonnaise. 
 Chacarero : like the normal churrasco, but with green beans and tomatoes. 
 Choripán :  chorizo  or  longaniza  in bun, which in Chile is usually a piece of  marraqueta . 
 Completo : Hot dog with tomato, avocado,  salsa americana  (a mashed mixture of gherkins, pickled carrots and onion) and sauerkraut (chucrut). 
 Italiano : Hot dog with tomato, avocado and mayonnaise. 
 Lomito Alemán (German): Pork sandwich topped with tomatoes, mayonnaise and sauerkraut, may contain sliced pickles sometimes. 
 Sopaipilla 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sopaipillas , in background with  chancaca 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Completo italiano  (Chilean hotdog)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Empanadas 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Chacarero , one of the most popular sandwiches
 
 
 
 
 Starters and salads [ edit ] 
 
 Ensalada Chilena 
 Ensalada Chilena Nortina 
 Ensalada de pencas 
 Ensalada de apio: Celery salad, with the celery peeled chopped and seasoned with lemon, salt and olive oil. It can also contain boiled eggs. 
 Panqueques  verdes: Layered pancakes filled with vegetables. 
 Zapallitos rellenos: Stuffed zucchini. 
 Palta reina: Stuffed avocado. 
 Tomates rellenos: Stuffed tomatoes. 
 Tortilla de porotos verdes: Green bean tortilla. 
 
 Cereals and legumes [ edit ] 
 Legumes have been important in Chilean cuisine since pre-colonial times, with beans, lentils and chickpeas as part of a traditional diet and generally cooked with rice, fresh sweet corn or even pasta ( Porotos con rienda )
 
 
 Garbanzos con arroz : Chickpeas with rice cooked in a stew. 
 Porotos con riendas  (literally, “beans with reins”): A stew of beans and spaghetti. 
 Porotos Granados  con mazamorra: fresh beans and ground fresh corn. 
 Porotos Granados  con pilco: Pilco is a mix of corn, tomato, onion, garlic, cumin, basil, green chilli, paprika and pumpkin. 
 Lentejas con arroz: Stew of lentils and rice, usually accompanied by longaniza or chorizo. 
 Arroz graneado : Rice is one of the most popular side dishes, in Chile is generally fried with a clove of garlic and carrot ( Brunoise ). It can also contain red peppers and onions. 
 Arroz con huevo :  Arroz graneado  and fried eggs 
 Choritos con arroz:  Arroz graneado  topped with mussels before the rise of fully cooked. 
 
 Pasta [ edit ] 
 Pasta is very common in everyday Chilean meals, but is not prepared very differently from in other countries, except for some changes in the name and forms of the pasta itself.  Bolognese , white sauce (béchamel), and cream-based sauces are the most common.
 
 Tortillas [ edit ] 
 
 Croquetas de pescado: Fish cakes, generally made of tuna and called “croquetas de atun”. 
 Fritos de coliflor: Cauliflower cakes 
 Panqueques: Crepes, are usually eaten with  Dulce de leche  or Manjar, but they can also be a main course, layered with vegetables, or layered into a sweet cake. 
 Tortilla : The basic flour and egg tortilla can be mixed with potatoes, cauliflower, peas, green beans, carrots, seafood and many other ingredients. 
 Sopaipillas : can be also described as tortillas. 
 Chapalele 
 Milcao 
 
 Empanadas [ edit ] 
 Empanadas  are common in many cultures with different names. In Chile, empanadas can have distinctive fillings and can also be cooked in unusual ways to give them a very distinctive flavour and shape. For this reason, empanada sellers in Chile (whether a restaurant, street stand, market, etc.) always specify if their empanadas are fried or baked.
 
 
 Empanadas : Can either be “de horno”, baked, or “fritas”, fried. 
 The most popular fillings are 
 
 Pino (beef and onions) 
 Cheese , and, more recently, ham and cheese. 
 Seafood  (mix of mussels, clams, and other molluscs). 
 Onions , called Empanadas Pequenes. 
 Prawns 
 Cheese ,  basil  and  tomatoes . 
 
 Breads [ edit ] 
 Chileans are one of the biggest bread eaters in the world; second after the Germans, in fact. [11] [12] [13] [14]  Chileans eat bread at breakfast, lunch (as a side or appetiser),  Las onces  or dinner. Bread for “onces” should be as fresh as possible, ideally bought still hot from the local bakery.
 
   Chilean breads  Hallulla  and  Marraqueta 
 
 Marraqueta , also called Pan Batido or Pan Frances: a staple in any home, marraqueta is a simple kind of bread which is characteristic for having a crispy crust and a soft, airy interior. Marraqueta and mashed avocado are the most common element in “las onces”. 
 Hallulla 
 Pan amasado 
 Pan de huevo 
 Coliza This bread is rectangular or diamond shaped with a flat top. The bread is made of layers and layers of dough and is easily pulled apart. It also looks like the bread is folded over and over. [15] 
 Dobladas, also called dobladitas:  similar to colizas, made of fatty and heavy dough folded in triangles. 
 Pan con  chicharrones 
 Tortilla de rescoldo 
 
 Salsas (sauces) [ edit ] 
 Pebre 
 Chancho en piedra 
 Salsa verde : Parsley, onion, lemon juice and white vinegar, finely chopped or blended 
 Salsa americana : Puréed gherkins, pickled onions, and pickled carrots 
 Meat dishes [ edit ] 
 Meat is very important in Chilean cuisine and for many Chileans it is essential ingredient in every dinner or lunch. According to studies, Chilean per capita meat consumption (including poultry, beef and pork) has doubled in the last two decades [16]  while seafood consumption has decreased.
 
 Cazuela : This soup/stew can contain poultry, beef, pork lamb or goat. 
 Asado : Barbecues can also contain poultry, beef, pork lamb or goat. 
 Carne al disco or asado al disco: meat prepared in a disc over a bonfire. [17] 
 Poultry dishes 
 Chicken is the most common of the poultry meats and is an ingredient in traditional dishes like  Asado ,  Pastel de choclo  and  Cazuela . Although in recent years  turkey  has become popular, it is not quite a tradition. Duck is rarely consumed in the centre and northern regions, but can be popular in southern countryside.
 
 Pollo arvejado: Chicken and pea casserole. 
 Pollo al Cognac: Chicken stew slowly cooked with plenty of cognac and white wine. 
 Beef dishes 
 Although imported beef is available from other Latin American countries, Chileans prefer locally produced beef. Chilean cattle is fed with mineral-rich prairie grass and produced generally in small herds in small farms instead of being mass-produced and fattened on corn, as in some other countries. This produces leaner beef, but since it is the fat within the muscle tissue that makes beef tender, it also makes it tougher beef. [18] 
Along with the previously mentioned asado, cazuela and empanadas, other Chilean beef dishes include:
 
 
 Niños envueltos (literally, “wrapped children”): This peculiarly-named dish contains vegetables and other ingredients wrapped in thin sliced beef. 
 Crudos 
 Lomo a lo pobre/Bistec a lo pobre : Beef (steak or loin respectively) with fries, fried onions and fried eggs. 
 Tapapecho a la cacerola :  Tapapecho casserole, similar to spare ribs; also known as Pescetto. 
 Chorrillana 
 Carne mechada 
 Arrollado de Malaya 
 
 Pork dishes 
 
 Costillar de chancho: A whole rack of pork ribs, roasted in the oven or barbecue. 
 Arrollado de chancho  and Arrollado Huaso 
 Queso de cabeza  (literally, “head cheese”):A kind of pudding with a jelly consistency made from the soft parts of a pig's head. 
 Longaniza 
 Chorizo 
 Chicharron  Fried pieces of meat and fat. 
 Prietas  con Papas Cocidas: a blood sausage with boiled potatoes. 
 Estofado de chancho: Pork stew. 
 Patas de chancho  Rebozadas: Pork feet boiled with herbs, accompanied by  pebre  and bread. 
 Pernil  con papas cocidas: Roasted pork leg with boiled potatoes, and usually accompanied by sauerkraut. 
 
 Lamb and goat dishes [ edit ] 
 This rich meat is not commonly eaten in much of Chile but it is very popular in  Patagonia  among both local people and tourists.
 
 Cordero al palo : Another characteristic dish of the southern regions - a lamb roasted on a stake over a bonfire. In the northern regions, similar dishes are prepared but with young goats, called cabritos. 
 Rabbit dishes 
 Conejo escabechado is probably the most popular rabbit dish. The rabbit is cooked in a casserole with oil, vinegar, onions and garlic. 
 Rabbit can also be prepared as:
 
 Conejo al horno: Roasted 
 Estofado de conejo: Stewed 
 Intestinos (offal) dishes [ edit ] 
 
 Criadillas: Bull testicles 
 Guatitas: Beef stomach 
 Lengua con salsa tártara: Beef tongue 
 Panitas: Liver 
 Bistec de Panitas: Liver steak 
 Riñones al Jerez (wine): Kidney and sherry 
 Ubres asadas: Udders quickly roasted 
 Queso de cabeza ( head cheese ): A kind of pudding with a jelly consistency made from the soft parts of a pig's head. 
 
 Various stews [ edit ] 
 
 Ajiaco 
 Carbonada 
 Guiso de acelga: Chard stew 
 Charquicán 
 Charquicán de  cochayuyo 
 
 Fish and shellfish [ edit ] 
 Chileans enjoy all kinds of seafood, sometimes prepared raw with lemon, coriander and onions, or just simply in the shell with lemon juice and a glass of white wine. Seafood markets are commonly found in fishing villages.
 
 Fish 
 Reineta a la plancha: Grilled  reineta 
 Caldillo de congrio 
 Caldillo de pescado : like caldillo de congrio, but made with any other fish. 
 Pescado frito : Deep-fried buttered fish; can be  congrio ,  merluza  or others. 
 Ceviche 
 Corvina al horno : A whole  corvina  stuffed with  cheese ,  tomatoes  and  longaniza , baked. 
 Smoked salmon 
 Jurel : Eaten in salad or as a cheaper substitute for tuna. 
 Shellfish 
 
 Almejas al matico 
 Camarón  de mar 
 Camarón de río (Caridea) 
 Cangrejo or  Jaiba : can be prepared in a pie made of the crab carcass, as pie filling, steamed, or even roasted in a barbecue. 
 Centolla 
 Choritos (mussels) en  Salsa verde 
 Choros zapato (mussels): “Shoe mussels” are like normal mussels but bigger (shoe size). 
 Langostas de Juan Fernández (lobsters from  Juan Fernández Islands ) 
 Oysters 
 Scallops 
 Piures 
 Picorocos 
 Empanada  de mariscos: Seafood empanadas 
 Machas  a la parmesana: Baked with Parmesan cheese and white wine. 
 Choritos al vapor: Steamed mussels 
 Chupe  de mariscos 
 Consomé de locos 
 Locos  Chilean abalone 
 Mariscal 
 Pastel de jaibas : Crab pie 
 Cholgas al Alicate : Stuffed mussel shells wired closed. 
 Chupe  de Locos: Crab or any other seafood can be used in this recipe. 
 
 
 
 
 
 Chorrillana 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Marraqueta , one of the favourite breads among Chileans.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pebre  and bread is served on the table before the meal at most restaurants in Chile.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pantrucas  and beef soup
 
 
 
 
 Sweets, cakes, and desserts [ edit ] 
   Two  cuchuflíes . There are many different kinds of cakes in Chile and home baking is a popular alternative to the bakery. These are the most common varieties:
 In Chile, most desserts and sweets include dulce de leche, which is referred to as  manjar 
 
 
 Alfajor : A kind of cookie filled with manjar. 
 Tortas: Sponge cakes in layers, filled with whipped cream, creme patissiere,  Dulce de leche  and fruit. The sponge should be very light and moist, and can be covered with more whipped cream or meringue. This is the most common type of cake for birthdays. 
 Queques: A heavier and drier cake, with no layers and usually covered in icing sugar. 
 Pasteles: Like a torta but smaller in size, usually square. 
 Tartaletas: Like a pie covered in fruit. 
 Torta tres leches 
 Pan de huevo 
 Cuchuflí : A spongy pastry tube, filled with manjar. 
 Barquillo : The cone from an ice cream cone. 
 Berlines 
 Kuchen 
 Pie de Limon: Lemon pie 
 
 See also [ edit ] 
 List of Chilean ingredients 
 Portals :   Chile   Food 
 References [ edit ] 
 
 
 ^   Gastronomy, Chile’s top traditional foods: a visitor’s guide   Archived  11 November 2013 at the  Wayback Machine  29 July 2009 retrieved 6 August 2013 
 
 ^   "Origen mítico del dulce de leche"  [Mythical origin of dulce de leche].  Clarín  (in Spanish). 6 April 2003.  Archived  from the original on 1 July 2010 . Retrieved  2 June  2014 . 
 
 ^   El prosciutto de Capitan Pastene (Spanish)  www.atlasvivodechile.com 11 June 2012 
 
 ^   "Diversidad de colores y sabores - Icarito" . 12 August 2010. 
 
 ^  a   b   Montecino, Sonia (2009).  "Conjunciones y disyunciones del gusto en el sur de Chile"   (PDF) .  Historia, Antropología y Fuentes Orales  (in Spanish): 169–176 . Retrieved  2 November  2015 . 
 
 ^   The World Factbook -CIA , 27 February 2008 
 
 ^   Nikolai Ivanovich Vavilov ForMemRS was a prominent Russian and Soviet botanist and geneticist best known for having identified the centres of origin of cultivated plants 
 
 ^   Philpott, D. (2016).  The World of Wine and Food: A Guide to Varieties, Tastes, History, and Pairings . Rowman & Littlefield Publishers. p. 420.  ISBN   978-1-4422-6804-3 . Retrieved  19 March  2017 . 
 
 ^   GASTRONOMÍA RAPA NUI   Archived  21 August 2013 at the  Wayback Machine  Pauline Pérez Pinto, www.chile.com Retrieved 27 July 2013 
 
 ^   "La receta de la semana: Ponche a la romana" . Concierto 88.5. Archived from  the original  on 4 January 2013 . Retrieved  12 January  2013 . 
 
 ^   "Bread, which is loved, by our neighbors" .  grazione.ru . 6 July 2012. Archived from  the original  on 2 May 2013. 
 
 ^   "El Tamiz: Bread, cheesecake and a bit of variety" .  foodychile.com . 14 February 2012. Archived from  the original  on 6 July 2012 . Retrieved  19 December  2012 . 
 
 ^   "Bread Makes the World Go Round" .  sixservings.org . 15 October 2010. Archived from  the original  on 20 October 2010. 
 
 ^   "Chilean Bread" .  fundi2.com . 6 July 2011. Archived from  the original  on 28 August 2015 . Retrieved  19 August  2013 . 
 
 ^   Chilean Bread   Archived  13 December 2019 at the  Wayback Machine  fundi2.com 6 July 2011 retrieved 24 July 2013 
 
 ^   hilean per capita meat consumption has doubled crudosain the last two decades www.en.mercopress.com January 10, 2012, retrieved July 23, 2013 
 
 ^   Romey, Jared (2010).  Speaking Chileno: a Guide to Chilean Slang . RIL Editores. p. 68.  ISBN   978-956-284-730-8 . 
 
 ^   Eating Chilean Beef  28 December 2009, retrieved 24 July 2013 
 
 
 External links [ edit ] 
 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons has media related to  Cuisine of Chile . 
 
 Asociación Chilena de Gastronomía  Association for Chilean Gastronomy (in Spanish) 
 v t e Cuisine of Chile Meat 
 Asado 
 Cecina 
 Charqui 
 Charquicán 
 Chicharrón 
 Choripán 
 Guatitas 
 Churrasco 
 Longaniza 
 Milanesa 
 Osobuco 
 Fish and seafood 
 Caldillo de congrio 
 Curanto 
 Ceviche 
 Machas a la parmesana 
 Paila marina 
 Sandwiches 
 Barros Jarpa 
 Barros Luco 
 Choripán 
 Chacarero 
 Churrasco 
 Completo 
 Crudo alemán 
 Breads and bakery 
 Alfajor 
 Berlín 
 Churro 
 Conejito 
 Empanada 
 Hallulla 
 Kuchen 
 Marraqueta 
 Pan de Pascua 
 Sopaipilla 
 Tortilla de rescoldo 
 Cheeses 
 Chanco 
 Panquehue 
 Quesillo 
 Other dishes 
 Cazuela 
 Chupe 
 Ensalada chilena 
 Ñachi 
 Pastel de choclo 
 Pichanga 
 Porotos con rienda 
 Porotos granados 
 Valdiviano 
 Desserts 
 Mote con huesillo 
 Murta con membrillo 
 Picarones 
 Drinks 
 Aguardiente  ( Cola de mono ,  Licor de oro ,  Murtado ) 
 Mate  ( Mate con malicia ) 
 Chilean beer 
 Café con leche 
 Pisco  ( Pisco sour ,  Piscola ,  Serena libre ) 
 Vaina 
 Chilean wine  ( Jote ,  Navegado ) 
 Condiments 
 Ají chileno 
 Chancaca 
 Dulce de membrillo 
 Manjar 
 Manjar blanco 
 Merkén 
 Pebre 
 Salsa Americana 
 Sauerkraut 
 Other 
 Asado 
 Chupe 
 Chupilca del diablo 
 Las once 
 Ingredients 
 Paila 
 Merken 
   Category: Chilean cuisine 
 v t e Chile   articles History Timeline Periods 
 Prehispanic   ( ACN –1536  AD ) 
 Spanish Discovery   (1536–1540) 
 Spanish Conquest   (1540–1600) 
 Colonial   (1600–1810) 
 Independence   (1810–1826) 
 Republic Organization   (1823–1831) 
 Conservative Republic   (1831–1861) 
 Liberal Republic   (1861–1891) 
 Parliamentary Era   (1891–1925) 
 Presidential Republic   (1925–1973) 
 Pinochet Regime   (1973–1990) 
 Democracy Transition   (1990–Present) 
 By topic 
 Agriculture 
 Banditry 
 Economic 
 Expansionism 
 Mining 
 Maritime 
 Wars 
 Geography 
 Cities 
 Climate 
 Earthquakes 
 Environment 
 Extreme points 
 Fjords, channels, sounds and straits 
 Geology 
 Islands 
 National parks 
 Natural regions 
 Provinces 
 Regions 
 Rivers 
 Lakes 
 Volcanoes 
 Lighthouses 
 World Heritage Sites 
 Politics 
 National Congress 
 Elections 
 Foreign relations 
 Government 
 Political parties 
 President 
 Ministries 
 Law 
 Civil Code 
 Constitution 
 Human rights 
 LGBT 
 Intersex 
 Law enforcement 
 Supreme Court 
 Constitutional Court 
 Comptroller General of Chile 
 Public safety 
 Carabineros 
 Gendarmerie 
 Investigations Police 
 Military 
 Air Force 
 Army 
 Navy 
 Ministry of Defence 
 Economy 
 Agriculture 
 Central Bank 
 Companies 
 Peso  (currency) 
 Stock Exchange 
 Telecommunications 
 Tourism 
 Transport 
 Society 
 Crime 
 Demographics 
 Education 
 Healthcare 
 Immigration 
 Languages 
 People 
 Indigenous 
 Religion 
 Squatting 
 Water supply and sanitation 
 Women 
 Culture 
 Arts 
 Beauty pageants 
 Cinema 
 Cuisine 
 Literature 
 Music 
 Mythology 
 Newspapers 
 Public holidays 
 Sports 
 Television 
 Outline Index 
 Category 
 Portal 
 v t e Cuisines Continental 
 African 
 North 
 West 
 list 
 Americas 
 Caribbean 
 North 
 South 
 list 
 Asian 
 Caucasian 
 Central 
 Indian subcontinent 
 Levantine 
 list 
 European 
 Balkan 
 Central 
 Eastern 
 list 
 Oceanic 
 Intercontinental
 Global 
 Latin American 
 Mediterranean 
 Middle Eastern 
 National  and regional 
 Afghan 
 Albanian 
 Algerian 
 American 
 Californian 
 Floribbean 
 Hawaiian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Lowcountry (South Carolina) 
 New England 
 New Mexico 
 Pacific Northwest 
 Pennsylvania Dutch 
 Puerto Rican 
 Southern US 
 Southwest US 
 Texas 
 Angolan 
 Argentine 
 Armenian 
 Australian 
 Austrian 
 Azerbaijani 
 Bahraini 
 Bangladeshi 
 Barbadian 
 Belarusian 
 Belgian 
 Belizean 
 Beninese 
 Bhutanese 
 Bolivian 
 Bosnian-Herzegovinian 
 Botswana 
 Brazilian 
 British 
 Channel Islands 
 English 
 Gibraltarian 
 Northern Irish 
 Saint Helena 
 Scottish 
 Welsh 
 Bruneian 
 Bulgarian 
 Burkinabé 
 Burmese 
 Burundian 
 Cambodian 
 Cameroonian 
 Canadian 
 Acadian 
 Québécois 
 Central African Republic 
 Chadian 
 Chilean 
 Chinese 
 Cantonese 
 Hong Kong 
 Macanese 
 Tibetan 
 Xinjiang 
 Colombian 
 Congolese 
 Corsican 
 Croatian 
 Cuban 
 Cypriot 
 Czech 
 Danish 
 Faroese 
 Greenlandic 
 Djiboutian 
 Dominican 
 Dominican Republic 
 Dutch 
 East Timorese 
 Ecuadorian 
 Egyptian 
 Emirati 
 Equatorial Guinean 
 Eritrean 
 Estonian 
 Ethiopian 
 Fijian 
 Filipino 
 Finnish 
 French 
 Occitan 
 French Guianan 
 Gabonese 
 Gambian 
 Georgian 
 German 
 Ghanaian 
 Greek 
 Cretan 
 Epirotic 
 Greek Macedonian 
 Heptanesean 
 Guatemalan 
 Guinea-Bissauan 
 Guinean 
 Haitian 
 Honduran 
 Hungarian 
 Icelandic 
 Indian 
 Arunachalese 
 Assamese 
 Bengali 
 Bihari 
 Goan 
 Gujarati 
 Himachal Pradesh 
 Kashmiri 
 Jharkhandi 
 Karnataka 
 Kerala 
 Maharashtrian 
 Manipuri 
 Meghalayan 
 Mizo 
 Naga 
 Odia 
 Punjabi 
 Rajasthani 
 Sikkimese 
 Sindhi 
 Tamil 
 Telangana 
 Telugu 
 Indonesian 
 Acehnese 
 Balinese 
 Banjar 
 Batak 
 Betawi 
 Indo 
 Javanese 
 Madurese 
 Makassar 
 Minahasan 
 Minangkabau 
 Palembangese 
 Sundanese 
 Iranian 
 Iraqi 
 Irish 
 Israeli 
 Italian 
 Abruzzese 
 Ligurian 
 Lombard 
 Lucanian 
 Neapolitan 
 Roman 
 Sardinian 
 Sicilian 
 Venetian 
 Ivorian 
 Jamaican 
 Japanese 
 Okinawan 
 Jordanian 
 Kazakh 
 Kenyan 
 Korean 
 North Korean 
 South Korean 
 Kosovan 
 Kuwaiti 
 Kyrgyz 
 Lao 
 Latvian 
 Lebanese 
 Lesotho 
 Liberian 
 Libyan 
 Liechtensteiner 
 Lithuanian 
 Luxembourg 
 Macedonian 
 Malagasy 
 Malawian 
 Malaysian 
 Sabahan 
 Sarawakian 
 Maldivian 
 Malian 
 Maltese 
 Mauritanian 
 Mauritian 
 Mexican 
 Moldovan 
 Monégasque 
 Mongolian 
 Montenegrin 
 Moroccan 
 Mozambican 
 Namibian 
 Nauruan 
 Nepalese 
 New Zealand 
 Nicaraguan 
 Niger 
 Nigerian 
 Niuean 
 Norwegian 
 Omani 
 Pakistani 
 Palestinian 
 Panamanian 
 Peruvian 
 Polish 
 Portuguese 
 Qatari 
 Romanian  (incl.  Transylvanian Saxon ) 
 Russian 
 Bashkir 
 Chechen 
 Circassian 
 Komi 
 Mordovian 
 Sakha 
 Tatar 
 Udmurt 
 Yamal 
 Rwandan 
 Saint Lucian 
 Salvadoran 
 Sammarinese 
 São Tomé and Príncipe 
 Saudi Arabian 
 Senegalese 
 Serbian 
 Seychellois 
 Sierra Leonean 
 Singaporean 
 Slovak 
 Slovenian 
 Somali 
 South African 
 Spanish 
 Andalusian 
 Asturian 
 Balearic 
 Basque 
 Canarian 
 Cantabrian 
 Catalan 
 Extremaduran 
 Galician 
 Manchegan 
 Valencian 
 Sri Lankan 
 Sudanese 
 Swazi 
 Swedish 
 Swiss 
 Syrian 
 Taiwanese 
 Tajik 
 Tanzanian 
 Zanzibari 
 Thai 
 Togolese 
 Tunisian 
 Turkish 
 Turkmen 
 Trinidadian and Tobagonian 
 Ugandan 
 Ukrainian 
 Uruguayan 
 Uzbek 
 Venezuelan 
 Vietnamese 
 Western Saharan 
 Yemeni 
 Zambian 
 Zimbabwean 
 Ethnic 
 Ainu 
 Arab 
 Indonesian 
 Aromanian 
 Assyrian 
 Balochi 
 Berber 
 Cajun 
 Chinese 
 American 
 Canadian 
 Chifa 
 Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Crimean Tatar 
 Greek American 
 Hazaragi 
 Indian 
 Anglo-Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Indigenous American 
 Inuit 
 Italian American 
 Kurdish 
 Livonian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Malay 
 Ossetian 
 Parsi 
 Pashtun 
 Peranakan 
 Romani 
 Sámi 
 Soul food 
 Sylheti 
 Transylvanian Saxon 
 Yup'ik 
 Religious 
 Buddhist 
 Christian 
 Goan Catholic 
 Mangalorean Catholic 
 Mennonite 
 Hindu 
 Islamic 
 Chinese 
 Ital 
 Jain 
 Jewish 
 American 
 Ashkenazi 
 Bukharan 
 Ethiopian 
 Mizrahi 
 Sephardic 
 Syrian 
 Ritual slaughter 
 Sikh 
 Historical 
 Ancient Egyptian 
 Ancient Greek 
 Ancient Israelite 
 Ancient Roman 
 Antebellum America 
 Aztec 
 Byzantine 
 Early modern European 
 Historical Chinese 
 Historical Indian subcontinent 
 Historical North Indian and Pakistani 
 History of agriculture 
 History of alcoholic drinks 
 History of bread 
 History of seafood 
 History of vegetarianism 
 Historical Argentine 
 Historical Japanese 
 Inca 
 Mayan 
 Muisca 
 Mughal 
 Medieval 
 Ottoman 
 Peasant 
 Soviet 
 Thirteen Colonies 
 Styles 
 Classique 
 Fast food 
 Fusion 
 New American 
 Eurasian 
 Haute 
 Molecular gastronomy 
 Note by Note 
 Nouvelle 
 Lists 
 List of cuisines 
 List of historical cuisines 
 Lists of prepared foods 
 Related 
 Cookbook 
 Cooking 
 Culinary arts 
 Drink 
 Food 
 history 
 Diet 
 Meal preparation 
 
   Food portal 
   Drink portal 
   Category 
   Commons 
   Cookbook 
   WikiProject 
   Outline 
 
 v t e South American cuisine Sovereign states 
 Argentina 
 Bolivia 
 Brazil 
 Chile 
 Colombia 
 Ecuador 
 Guyana 
 Paraguay 
 Peru 
 Suriname 
 Uruguay 
 Venezuela 
 Dependencies  and other territories 
 Falkland Islands 
 French Guiana 
 South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands 
 
 Authority control : National libraries  
 Israel 
 United States 
 
  
NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw2383
Cached time: 20230311174403
Cache expiry: 1814400
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc, no‐toc‐conversion]
CPU time usage: 0.853 seconds
Real time usage: 1.117 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 7899/1000000
Post‐expand include size: 193499/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 19508/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 57/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 126820/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.396/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 10063646/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/400
 
 
Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  791.837      1 -total
 16.73%  132.463      1 Template:Reflist
 16.04%  127.002      6 Template:Navbox
 14.48%  114.659      1 Template:Culture_of_region
 14.14%  111.958      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 11.22%   88.865      7 Template:Gallery
 10.78%   85.330      1 Template:Chile_topics
 10.69%   84.635      7 Template:Cite_web
 10.55%   83.558      1 Template:Country_topics
  8.17%   64.710      1 Template:South_American_topic
 
  Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:idhash:12995992-0!canonical and timestamp 20230311174401 and revision id 1144072937. Rendering was triggered because: page-view
  
 esi <esi:include src="/esitest-fa8a495983347898/content" />  
 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Chilean_cuisine&oldid=1144072937 " 
 Categories :  Chilean cuisine Chilean culture South American cuisine Latin American cuisine Hidden categories:  Webarchive template wayback links CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from April 2021 All pages needing factual verification Wikipedia articles needing factual verification from November 2019 Commons category link is on Wikidata Region topic template using suffix Articles with J9U identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  This page was last edited on 11 March 2023, at 17:43  (UTC) . 
 Text is available under the  Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0 ;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the  Terms of Use  and  Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the  Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. 
 
 
 Privacy policy 
 About Wikipedia 
 Disclaimers 
 Contact Wikipedia 
 Mobile view 
 Developers 
 Statistics 
 Cookie statement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
