
 
 
 Jump to content 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle sidebar 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Create account Log in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Personal tools 
 
 
 
 
   Create account   Log in 
 
 
 
 
		Pages for logged out editors  learn more 
 
 
 Contributions Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Navigation 
 
 
 Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate 
 
 
 
 
 Contribute 
 
 
 Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file 
 
 
 
 
 Tools 
 
 
 What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item 
 
 
 
 
 Print/export 
 
 
 Download as PDF Printable version 
 
 
 
 
 In other projects 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons 
 
 
 
 
 Languages 
 
 On this Wikipedia the language links are at the top of the page across from the article title.  Go to top . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CentralNotice  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Contents 
 move to sidebar 
 hide 
 
 
 
 
 (Top) 
 
 
 
 
 
 1 History of Colombian food 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 Regional cuisines 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 Dishes and foods 
 
 
				Toggle Dishes and foods subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 3.1 Appetizers and side dishes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.2 Pastries and baked goods 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.2.1 Varieties of arepa 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.3 Fruit 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.3.1 Native fruit 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.4 Main courses 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.5 Soups 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.6 Desserts and sweets 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4 Beverages 
 
 
				Toggle Beverages subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 4.1 Alcoholic beverages 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5 See also 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6 References 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
						Toggle the table of contents
					 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle the table of contents 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Colombian cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 17 languages 
 
 
 
 العربية Català Čeština Deutsch Español فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Italiano Jawa ქართული 日本語 Русский Српски / srpski Svenska Українська 
 Edit links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Article Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 English 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 More 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
 
 
 Culinary traditions of Colombia 
 This article  needs additional citations for  verification .  Please help  improve this article  by  adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources:   "Colombian cuisine"  –  news   ·   newspapers   ·   books   ·   scholar   ·   JSTOR   ( December 2014 )  ( Learn how and when to remove this template message ) 
   Cutlet " Valluna " 
 Part of  a series  on the Culture of Colombia 
Society 
 Colombians 
 Folklore 
 History 
 Immigration 
 Languages 
 Holidays 
 Religion 
 
Topics 
 Art 
 Architecture 
 Cinema 
 Cuisine 
 Dance 
 Festivals 
 Handicrafts 
 Literature 
 Media 
 Cinema 
 Newspapers 
 Radio 
 Television 
 Monuments 
 Music 
 Painting 
 Sports 
 Theater 
 Video gaming 
 
Symbols 
 Flag 
 Coat of arms 
 Anthem 
 Miss Colombia 
 World Heritage Sites 
 
   Colombia portal v t e 
 Colombian cuisine  is a compound of the culinary traditions of the six main regions within  Colombia  (Pacific, Amazonian, Andean, Orinoco, Caribbean, and Insular). Colombian cuisine varies regionally and is particularly influenced by  Indigenous Colombian ,  Spanish , [1]  and  African  cuisines, [2]  with slight  Arab  influence in some regions. [3]  Furthermore, being one of the most biodiverse countries in the world, Colombia has one of the widest variety of available ingredients depending on the region.
 
 
 History of Colombian food [ edit ] 
 Colombian food is a unique blend of indigenous and European traditions with a strong Afro-Caribbean influence. The two largest indigenous groups prior to European conquest were the  Tairona , who lived along the Caribbean coast, and the  Muisca , who lived in the highlands to the South. [4]  Arepas, made from ground corn, are one of the oldest cooked dishes in Colombian cuisine. It is believed that the name derives from the word for corn in the  Chibcha  languages. [4]  Arepas are a popular modern Colombian dish.
 
 Regional cuisines [ edit ] 
   Ternera a la llanera  ( mamona ) 
 Colombia's varied cuisine is influenced by its diverse  fauna  and  flora  as well as the cultural traditions of several ethnic groups. Colombian dishes and ingredients vary widely by region. Some of the most common ingredients are cereals such as rice and  maize ; tubers such as potato and  cassava ; assorted  legumes ; meats, including beef, chicken, pork and goat; and fish and other seafood. Colombian cuisine also features a variety of tropical fruits such as  cape gooseberry ,  feijoa ,  arazá ,  dragon fruit ,  mangostino ,  granadilla ,  papaya ,  guava ,  blackberry ,  lulo ,  soursop  and  passionfruit . [5] [6] 
 
   Bandeja paisa from Peñol de Guatapé in  Antioquia ,  Colombia . 
 Among the most representative appetizers and soups are  patacones  (fried green plantains),  sancocho  de gallina (chicken soup with root vegetables),  ajiaco  (potato and corn soup), and  buñuelos  (Christmas season deep fried dough balls).
 Representative snacks and breads are  pandebono ,  arepas  (corn cakes),  aborrajados  (fried sweet plantains with cheese),  torta  de  choclo ,  empanadas  and  almojábanas .
 Representative main courses are  bandeja paisa ,  lechona tolimense ,  tamales , and fish dishes such as  arroz de lisa , especially in coastal regions where  suero ,  costeño cheese ,  kibbeh  and  carimañolas  are also eaten.
 Representative side dishes are papas criollas al horno (roasted Andean potatoes), papas chorreadas (potatoes with messy cheese), and  arroz con coco  (coconut rice).  Organic food  is a current trend in big cities, although in general the country's fruits and vegetables are very natural and fresh. [7] 
 Representative desserts are   natillas ,  torta Maria Luisa ,  bocadillo  made of guayaba (guava jelly),  cocadas  (coconut balls), casquitos de guayaba (candied guava peels),  torta de natas ,  obleas ,  flan  de  arequipe ,  roscón ,  milhoja , and the  tres leches cake  ( sponge cake  soaked in 3 types of milk). 
 Typical sauces are  hogao , a tomato onion sauce, and  ají , a spicy raw cilantro-based sauce used as a condiment for many dishes and sides.
 Some representative beverages are coffee ( Tinto ),  champús ,  cholado ,  lulada ,  avena colombiana ,  sugarcane  juice,  aguapanela ,  hot chocolate , and fresh fruit juices (often made with sugar and water or milk). [8] 
 There are a large variety of dishes that take into account the differences in regional climates. For example:
 
 In the city of  Medellín , the typical dish is the  bandeja paisa . It includes  beans ,  rice ,  ground meat  or  carne asada ,  chorizo ,  fried egg ,  arepa , and  chicharrón . It is usually accompanied by  avocado ,  tomato , and special sauces. 
 In the city of  Cali , the most traditional dish is " sancocho de gallina ", a soup composed mostly of  chicken ,  plantain ,  corn ,  coriander , yuca root, and other seasonings. Sancocho is usually served with a portion of rice, tostadas (fried plantains), a chicken leg covered in hogao (a tomato and onion sauce), and a slice of  avocado . The city is also known for its empanadas (a fried corn dough filled with potatoes and meat),  marranitas  /  puerquitas  (a fried ball of plantain filled with chicharron, also known as pork rinds), pandebono (a delicious cheese bread made with yucca dough), and aborrajados (sweet ripe fried plantains filled with cheese and served with guava paste). 
 In Bogotá and the Andean region,  ajiaco  is the traditional dish. It is also a type of soup made with chicken and  potatoes , and flavoured with a locally grown herb called "guasca". 
 On the Caribbean coast, spicy dishes including  fish  and  lobster  can be found.  Coconut rice  is a common dish along the coastal cities. The cuisine of the Caribbean is also influenced by Arab traditions, with dishes such as  Kibbeh . 
 In the Llanos,  barbecued  meats, such as the "ternera llanera", and river fishes like the "amarillo", are commonly eaten. 
 In the Amazonas, the cuisine is influenced by Brazilian and Peruvian traditions. 
 Inland, the dishes reflect the mix of  Amerindian  and  European cuisine , and use the products of local agriculture, cattle farming, and river fishing. Such is the case with the  sancocho  soup in  Valledupar , and  arepas , a corn based bread-like patty. Local species of animals like the  guaratinaja  are part of the  Wayuu  culture. 
 In the Andean region of  Nariño , a traditional dish is broiled  guinea pig  ( cuy asado ), due to influence of  Inca cuisine . 
 In the  Tolima  region, the  Tamales Tolimenses  are a delicacy. These tamales are made of a corn dough and feature  peas ,  carrots , potatoes, rice, chicken,  pork , and various  spices . They are wrapped in plantain leaves and boiled for three to four hours. Pandebono is eaten for breakfast with hot chocolate. 
 On the Islands of San Andres, Providencia, and Santa Catalina, the main dish is  rondon , a  seafood  dish made of  coconut milk , fish, conch,  cassava root  (yuca),  sweet potato , white yams, and  pumpkin , seasoned with  chili peppers  and  herbs . They also have a crab soup which is considered a delicacy. It is made with the same ingredients as  rondon , without the fish. 
 Piqueteaderos  are rustic eateries that serve a variety of fried foods and specialties in platters to share. Offerings can even include huesos cerdos (pig bones) and  tarta de seso  (brain pie), as well as fried dishes, morcilla, corn on the cob, and other foods common to Colombia.
 
 Dishes and foods [ edit ] 
 Appetizers and side dishes [ edit ] 
   Patacones  and  hogao 
 Arepas  ground maize dough divided into balls and pan fried or grilled corn cakes 
 Aborrajado  deep fried plantains stuffed with cheese 
 Arroz con coco , rice with coconut and raisins 
 Hormigas culonas ,  large roasted ants, a  santandereanas  food from Colombia's  Santander Department 
 Butifarras soledeñas , sausage from  Soledad, Atlántico 
 Carimañola ,  yuca  fritter stuffed with ground meat, onion and seasonings 
 Chunchullo , pig, lamb, cow small intestine 
 Hogao  Criollo sauce 
 Queso blanco  white cheese also referred to as queso fresco 
 Suero , a topping similar to  sour cream 
 Patacones  Green plantain fried or deep fried squished and fried 
 Empanadas , small fritters, made with a mixture of shredded meat, of pork, beef, or chicken'. 
 Chicharron  deep fried pork rind. 
 Lentejas (lentil soup) is a standard meal in many Colombian kitchens . The basic method is to soak the lentils for a few hours before adding chopped onion, garlic, and sometimes diced or grated carrots. It is then served with avocado, rice, tomato, and sweet plantain.  [9] 
 Pastries and baked goods [ edit ] 
   Almojábana 
   Carimañola 
 Almojábana , small  cheese buns  made with corn flour and  cuajada 
 Bollos  (tubes of ground maize -similar to Italian polenta- or from scratched mandioc/cassava, served with coastal cheese and sometimes  whey  or butter) 
 Buñuelos  deep fried dough balls made on Christmas season 
 Achira  biscuits 
 Carimañolas  (like empanadas but made up of  manioc ) 
 Garullas (corn  bread roll ) 
 Pan de sagú ( sago  bread) 
 Pandebono  made with cheese made with cassava flour and Costeño cheese 
 Pan de Maíz similar to cornbread 
 Pan de yuca  (baked cheese bread made with cassava flour) 
 Roscón  (a soft and sweet bagel filled with either  Arequipe  or  guava  jam) 
 Varieties of arepa [ edit ] 
   Arepas  and  chorizo  on the grill 
   Arepa de huevo 
 Arepa  Boyacense 
 Arepa de arroz 
 Arepa de huevo 
 Arepa de maiz 
 Arepa de queso 
 Arepa de yuca 
 Arepa ocañera 
 Arepa Paisa/Antioqueña 
 Arepa Santandereana 
 Arepa Valluna 
 Arepas de choclo (sweet corn) 
 Brown rice and sesame seed arepa 
 'Oreja de perro', rice arepas 
 Fruit [ edit ] 
   Spanish lime  ( Melicoccus bijugatus ) 
 Fruit and juice stands are found across Colombia, particularly on the Caribbean coast. Being a tropical country, Colombia produces a large variety of fruits, such as:
 
 
 Aiphanes horrida  ( corozo ) 
 Bactris gasipaes , peach-palm ( chontaduro ) 
 Banana passionfruit  ( curuba ) 
 Banana  ( banano ) 
 Borojoa patinoi  ( borojó ) 
 Carambola , starfruit ( carambolo ) 
 Cherimoya  ( chirimoya ) 
 Feijoa , Pineapple guava 
 Guayabamanzana, Guava-apple hybrid 
 Inga edulis , ice-cream-bean ( guama ) 
 Manilkara huberi  ( níspero ) 
 Lulo  ( Naranjilla ) 
 Mamey sapote  ( mamey ) 
 Mamoncillo , Spanish lime 
 Mandarin orange  ( mandarina ) 
 Mango 
 Murrapos, mini-bananas 
 Orange  ( naranja ) 
 Passiflora edulis , passion fruit ( maracuyá ) 
 Physalis peruviana , Cape gooseberry ( uchuva ) 
 Piñuela 
 Pitaya , Dragon fruit ( pitahaya ) 
 Quararibea cordata  ( zapote ) 
 Rubus glaucus , similar to  blackberry  ( mora ) 
 Soursop  ( guanábana ) 
 Strawberry guava  ( arazá ) 
 Strawberry  ( fresa ) 
 Sugar-apple  ( anón ) 
 Sweet granadilla  ( granadilla ) 
 Syzygium jambos , Malabar plum ( pomarrosa ) 
 Tree tomato ,  tamarillo ( tomate de árbol ) 
 
 Native fruit [ edit ] 
   Lulo 
 Colombia is home to numerous tropical fruits that are rarely found elsewhere. Several varieties of banana include a very small, sweet version. Other Colombian fruits include  zapote  ( Quararibea cordata ),  nispero  ( Manilkara zapota )  lulo  ( Solanum quitoense ),  uchuva  ( Physalis peruviana ),  papayuela  ( Vasconcellea pubescens ),  passion fruit ,  borojó  ( Borojoa patinoi ),  curuba  ( Passiflora tarminiana ),  mamoncillo  ( Melicoccus bijugatus ),  guanábana  ( Annona muricata ),  guava  ( Psidium guajava ), tomate de arbol ( tamarillo ), noni ( Morinda citrifolia ). More widespread fruit varieties grown in Colombia include  mango ,  apple ,  pear ,  blackberry , and  strawberry .
 
 Main courses [ edit ] 
 Arroz con Pollo , consists of seasoned rice, chicken, and a variety of vegetables. 
 Bandeja Paisa , a traditional dish from Antioquia and the  "Eje Cafetero"  which consists of white rice, red beans, ground beef, plantain,  chorizo ,  morcilla ,  chicharron ,  arepa ,  avocado  and a fried egg. Along with  Ajiaco , the bandeja paisa is considered to be one of the national dishes. 
 Cuchuco , a thick soup made of wheat,  fava beans , potatoes, ribs, peas, from  Boyacá . 
 Cuy asado , broiled guinea pig accompanied by potatoes and popcorn. It is the traditional dish in  Nariño . 
 Lechona , traditional dish from the Tolima department, a mixture of yellow pea purée and pork meat, with a side of rice  arepa 'oreja de perro'  and corn  'insulzo' 
 Picada  Colombiana, chopped specialties served as a combo platter. 
 Tamales  are corn or corn/rice "cakes" wrapped in plantain tree leaves and steamed. They can be filled with everything from chicken, potatoes, peas, carrots, to rice. The tamales vary in shape and fillings in each region, and almost every region has its own variation. Some well known variations are from  Tolima ,  Santander ,  Cúcuta ,  Bogotá  and  Valle del Cauca ; just to name a few. 
 Fritanga is another popular Colombian dish made of meats, fried plantains,  chicharrones , and yellow potatoes with  aji  sauce eaten throughout Colombia. Milanesa is another common meat dish throughout the country. 
 Frijolada, is a robust dish made with a  base of pinto or red beans.  Frijoles are normally cooked with diced pork or pork hocks, carrots, corn, platano, and sometimes bacon as well. Generally, this dish is also served with rice and avocado. It’s often used as a side dish, and always included within the Bandeja Paisa meal.  [9] 
 Soups [ edit ] 
 Changua  (milk soup with eggs) is a typical breakfast  soup  of the central  Andes  region of  Colombia , in particular in the  Boyacá  and  Cundinamarca  area, including the capital,  Bogotá . The dish has  Chibcha  origins. 
 Caldo de costilla , (Spanish for rib broth) is a dish typical of Colombian cuisine, from the  Andean  region. It is made mainly from beef ribs boiled in water with slices of  potato , some  garlic ,  onion  and  cilantro  leaves. 
 Locro , is a typical dish in  Nariño  region. It is a corn, beans,  zapallo  and potato stew. 
 Mondongo , is a very filling traditional Colombian soup containing a bit of almost everything. The  base is made of diced tripe , to which is added several vegetables such as peas, carrots, onions, potatoes, tomatoes, along with garlic, cilantro, and chicken, beef, and/or pork.  [9] 
 Sancocho , is a popular soup originating from the  Valle del Cauca  region. It combines vegetables and poultry or fish with recipes differing from one region to the other, but usually contains  yuca ,  maize , and is frequently eaten with  banana  slices. 
 Ajiaco , is a traditional Andean soup that originated from Bogotá. It is a chicken, corn, and potato stew with a hint of  guasca  ( Gallant Soldiers ), a local herb. 
 Desserts and sweets [ edit ] 
   Milhoja 
   Tres leches cake 
 Arequipe  (Colombia's version of the  Dulce de Leche , a milk caramel.) 
 Arroz con leche  (Sweetened rice with milk). 
 Brevas  en dulce - candied figs in syrup or  arequipe . 
 Cocadas  - baked  coconut  confection, similar to  macaroons . 
 Enyucado  cake that has grounded cassava 
 Flan  type of custard dessert 
 Bocadillo  guava paste 
 Leche asada , similar to  flan  but less sweet, made with condensed milk. 
 Manjar blanco  a boiled, creamy, milk-based spread, thicker than  arequipe  and sometimes used as a pastry filling. 
 Mazamorra  white maize drink 
 Claro, is a very refreshing cool drink created especially for those not wishing to eat the maize that’s included within Mazamorra. The  maize is simply removed from the Mazamorra , a touch of ground Panela is added, and just like that, Claro is ready to be served.  [9] 
 Melado, a thick syrup derived from  panela . 
 Merenguitos , little hardened meringue "cookies" 
 Milhoja  similar to Mille-feuille or Napoleon (literally means thousand layers) 
 Natilla, a Colombian derivation of the Spanish custard  natillas , made with milk and cornstarch and spices but without eggs. 
 Pastel de Gloria   is a puff pastry containing guava jelly or guava paste and sometimes cheese inside, sprinkled with granulated sugar 
 Postre De Natas , Milk based Colombian pudding literary means milk skin dessert 
 Torta Maria Luisa  Orange cake and between layers any berries jam Decorated with icing sugar,  there are various variations around South America 
 Tres leches cake , 3 milk cake there are various variations around South America 
 
 Colombian cuisine 
 
 
 
 Ajiaco  soup is typically served with table cream,  capers  and  avocado , mixed in just before eating. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fried  Red Snapper , fried plantain, rice and tomato. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 rice  atollao 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 A caldo de costilla served hot and with  cilantro  leaves 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Patacones  are twice-fried plantain patties, often served as a side, appetizer, or snack. Here they are being fried for the second time. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 A traditional breakfast of  Bogotá :  hot chocolate  with cheese,  almojábanas  and  pan de queso 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cocadas 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bollo de yuca 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 empanada  barranquillera 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Manjar blanco 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bocadillo  with leaf packaging. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Arroz de lisa 
 
 
 
 
 Beverages [ edit ] 
   Lulada [10] 
 On a per capita basis, Colombia is one of the world's largest consumers of  fruit   juices , consuming on average more than three quarters of a serving each day. [11] 
 
 Aguapanela  is made by dissolving  panela  (a kind of  sugarloaf ) in water. Lime juice may be added for flavor. It can be served cold or hot. When served hot it is common for Colombians to put cheese in their aguapanela for it to melt. 
 Champús  is a thick drink made from corn, pineapple, lulo, and other ingredients. 
 Hot chocolate , Colombian hot chocolate is made with milk, water, and bars of semi-sweet chocolate. A special metal pitcher (called a  chocolatera ) is used for heating and pouring, and a utensil called a  molinillo  – essentially a stick with paddles at the end – is used for stirring and frothing. Colombian hot chocolate often includes cinnamon, cloves and vanilla. 
 Coca tea , an  herbal tea  made from an  infusion  of the leaves of the  coca  plant, considered a mild stimulant and remedy for  altitude sickness 
 Colombian coffee  is known for its quality and distinct flavor. Though much of the world's quality coffee beans come from Colombia, many Colombians commonly drink instant coffee rather than brewed.  It is popularly consumed as a "tinto", meaning black with sugar or  panela  on the side, or as  café con leche , which is à preparation of half coffee and half heated milk. In 2011  UNESCO  declared the  Coffee Cultural Landscape of Colombia  a World Heritage site. [12] 
 Colombiana, a kola champagne soda with particular and different taste. ( genericized trademark ) 
 Guandiolo is an Afrocolombian drink made with  Borojo  fruit that has alleged  aphrodisiac  properties. 
 Lulada  is a drink originating from Cali. It is prepared from  lulo  and has the texture and consistency of a smoothie. 
 Malta : Carbonated malt non-alcoholic beverage ( genericized trademark ). 
 Postobón , a variety of soda flavors from the maker of Colombiana, the most popular flavor being apple ("Manzana"). ( genericized trademark ) 
 Salpicón  (which literally means large splash) made from diced fruit and soda, usually  Colombiana  or any  Kola  flavored soda. It can also be a fruit cocktail beverage (often made with watermelon or mandarin juice). [13] 
 
 Colombian beverages 
 
 
 
 Chicha morada  served with  pipeño 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cholado 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Colombian coffee  is known for its quality and distinct flavor.
 
 
 
 
 Alcoholic beverages [ edit ] 
 Aguardiente  is an alcoholic drink derived from sugarcane and flavored with anise. It is widely consumed at Colombian parties, and ranges in potency from 20% to 40%. It is a variation of the Spanish alcoholic drink. 
 Canelazo  is an alcoholic version of  aguapanela  mixed with cinnamon and aguardiente. Sugar is rubbed on the edges of the glass when served.
 Hervido is a local variety of  canelazo , traditional in  Nariño . [ citation needed ] 
 Chapil  is a traditional beverage in  Nariño . 
 Chicha  is a formerly forbidden strong alcoholic beverage originally made by the indigenous peoples of the Andes. It can be prepared from virtually everything, but is typically made from corn. The corn is cooked and grounded with  panela  which is later wrapped in green plantain leaves and left alone for three days until fermented. [14]  It is later mixed with water and any chosen flavors such as orange leaves or spearmint. 
 Guarapo is made from various fruits kept in a large ceramic jar and left to ferment for about 2 months. Within that time, panela is added into the liquid to make the alcohol stronger. Grapes and pineapple are typically used. Guarapo is very similar to Chicha. [ citation needed ] 
 Chirrinche, distillated guarapo. [ citation needed ] 
 Masato, It is prepared with rice, sugar, water, cinnamon and whole clove (spice); It is strained and the water is preserved and let aside to have a smooth fermentation. [15] 
 Refajo  is a type of  shandy  beverage made by mixing  Kola Hipinto  (in santanderian region),  Colombiana  (in cities like Bogota) or  Kola Roman  (in the Caribbean region), with beer or rum. This mixture of soda and beer is very popular and seen a lot when it comes to accompany foods that are higher in animal fat, generally at barbecues. The combination of the sweetness of the kola and the sourness of the beer and the additional effect of the carbonated soda helps tolerate the fat of some of the typical dishes without hiding their original flavor. [16] 
 Sabajón, a sweet and creamy alcoholic drink from the  Cordillera Oriental . It is made from eggs and milk with added flavors and juice of fruits and liqueur on half or less concentration. [ citation needed ] 
 Viche  (or Biche) is a traditional home-brewed Afro-Caribbean alcoholic drink made from  sugar cane  popular on  Colombia ’s Pacific Coast. [17] 
 
 Colombian alcoholic beverages 
 
 
 
 Aguardiente
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Canelazo
 
 
 
 
 See also [ edit ] 
 
 
 Food portal Colombia portal 
 
 Muisca cuisine 
 Caribbean cuisine 
 Native American cuisine 
 South American cuisine 
 References [ edit ] 
 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons has media related to  Cuisine of Colombia . 
 
 
 
 ^   "Colombia" . EveryCulture.com . Retrieved  2018-07-01 . 
 
 ^   "The lasting influence of Colombia's African heritage" . Colombia.co . Retrieved  2018-07-01 . 
 
 ^   "A Cheat Sheet to Colombian Food" .  Eater . Retrieved  2018-11-30 . 
 
 ^  a   b   Foss, Richard (2011). "Colombia".  In Albala, Ken (ed.).  Food cultures of the world encyclopedia . Santa Barbara, California: Greenwood. pp.  75 .  ISBN   9781785394126 .  OCLC   915350255 . 
 
 ^   "Typical Colombian Food" . Retrieved  30 October  2013 . 
 
 ^   "Colombian Food: Variety, Tradition and Nature Fruits" . going2colombia.com . Retrieved  30 October  2013 . 
 
 ^   "Colombian Food; A List of Traditional and Modern Colombian Recipes" . southamericanfood.about.com . Retrieved  30 October  2013 . 
 
 ^   "10 Colombian Drinks You Must Try Before You Leave" . Retrieved  30 October  2013 . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   "15 Traditional Coffee Zone Dishes | BnB Colombia Tours" . 2021-05-27 . Retrieved  2022-04-23 . 
 
 ^   Colombia Travel.  "Jugos naturales"  (in Spanish). Archived from  the original  on 3 January 2015 . Retrieved  11 July  2013 . 
 
 ^   Singh, Gitanjali M., et al. "Global, regional, and national consumption of sugar-sweetened beverages, fruit juices, and milk: a systematic assessment of beverage intake in 187 countries." PLoS ONE 10.8 (2015): e0124845. 
 
 ^   Coffee Cultural Landscape of Colombia , UNESCO, unesco.org 
 
 ^   Erica Dinho (2009-02-17).  "Fruit Cocktail (Salpicón De Frutas)" . My Colombian Recipes . Retrieved  2013-07-11 . 
 
 ^   "Chicha" .  Colombia.com . Retrieved  2016-10-23 . 
 
 ^   "Masato" .  Colombia.com . Retrieved  2016-10-23 . 
 
 ^   "El refajo" .  www.semana.com . Retrieved  2016-10-23 . 
 
 ^   "Colombian Drinks: Traditional, Popular, Unique, Tasty, and Crazy" .  The Unconventional Route . 2018-07-24.  Archived  from the original on 2018-08-25 . Retrieved  2022-01-03 . 
 
 
 v t e Colombia   articles History 
 Timeline 
 Indigenous peoples 
 Muisca Confederation 
 Spanish conquest 
 Kingdom of New Granada 
 Viceroyalty of New Granada 
 Foolish Fatherland 
 United Provinces of New Granada 
 Military career of Simón Bolívar 
 Wars of independence 
 Gran Colombia  ( reunification ) 
 Republic of New Granada 
 Granadine Confederation 
 United States of Colombia 
 Republic of Colombia 
 Colombian Civil War of 1895 
 Thousand Days' War 
 Separation of Panama 
 Colombia–Peru War (Leticia Incident) 
 World War II 
 La Violencia 
 National Front 
 Current internal armed conflict 
 Colombian peace process 
 Geography 
 Biodiversity 
 Fauna 
 Flora 
 Climate 
 Geology 
 Mountains 
 Islands 
 Rivers 
 National parks  (Protected Areas) 
 Cities and towns 
 Natural hazards 
 Environmental issues 
 Invasive species 
 World Heritage Sites 
 Natural regions 
 Amazon 
 Andean 
 Caribbean 
 Insular 
 Orinoquía 
 Pacific/Chocó 
 Subdivisions 
 Departments 
 Municipalities 
 Metropolitan areas 
 Capital District 
 Corregimientos 
 Indigenous territories 
 Politics 
 Political parties 
 Elections 
 Ideologies
 Liberalism 
 Conservatism 
 Communism 
 Governance 
 Constitution 
 Control
 Auditor General 
 Comptroller General 
 Inspector General 
 Ombudsman 
 Executive 
 Council of Ministers 
 Government agencies 
 President 
 Vice President 
 Foreign relations 
 Judiciary 
 Congress 
 Police 
 Military 
 Air Force 
 Army 
 Navy 
 Economy 
 Banking 
 Central bank 
 Companies 
 Economic history 
 Agriculture 
 Industry 
 Mineral industry 
 Peso  (currency) 
 Stock exchange 
 Science and technology 
 Telecommunications 
 Taxation 
 Trade unions 
 Tourism 
 Transportation 
 Society 
 Colombians 
 list 
 Demographics 
 Education 
 Languages 
 Religion 
 Race and ethnicity 
 Health care 
 Water supply and sanitation 
 Culture 
 Archaeological sites 
 Architecture 
 Art 
 Cinema 
 Video gaming 
 Cuisine 
 World Heritage Sites 
 Carnivals 
 Festivals 
 Folklore 
 Handicrafts 
 Literature 
 Media 
 Muisca mythology 
 Muisca religion 
 Music 
 Theater 
 National symbols 
 Coat of arms 
 Flag 
 Public holidays 
 Freedom of religion in Colombia 
 Miss Colombia 
 Sport 
 Issues 
 Human rights 
 Intersex 
 LGBT 
 Immigration 
 Emigration 
 Poverty 
 Smoking 
 Crime 
 Drug trafficking 
 Corruption 
 Terrorism 
 Guerrilla movements 
 Right-wing paramilitarism 
 Colombia in popular culture 
 Outline Index 
 Category 
 Portal 
 v t e South American cuisine Sovereign states 
 Argentina 
 Bolivia 
 Brazil 
 Chile 
 Colombia 
 Ecuador 
 Guyana 
 Paraguay 
 Peru 
 Suriname 
 Uruguay 
 Venezuela 
 Dependencies  and other territories 
 Falkland Islands 
 French Guiana 
 South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands 
 
 v t e Cuisines Continental 
 African 
 North 
 West 
 list 
 Americas 
 Caribbean 
 North 
 South 
 list 
 Asian 
 Caucasian 
 Central 
 Indian subcontinent 
 Levantine 
 list 
 European 
 Balkan 
 Central 
 Eastern 
 list 
 Oceanic 
 Intercontinental
 Global 
 Latin American 
 Mediterranean 
 Middle Eastern 
 National  and regional 
 Afghan 
 Albanian 
 Algerian 
 American 
 Californian 
 Floribbean 
 Hawaiian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Lowcountry (South Carolina) 
 New England 
 New Mexico 
 Pacific Northwest 
 Pennsylvania Dutch 
 Puerto Rican 
 Southern US 
 Southwest US 
 Texas 
 Angolan 
 Argentine 
 Armenian 
 Australian 
 Austrian 
 Azerbaijani 
 Bahraini 
 Bangladeshi 
 Barbadian 
 Belarusian 
 Belgian 
 Belizean 
 Beninese 
 Bhutanese 
 Bolivian 
 Bosnian-Herzegovinian 
 Botswana 
 Brazilian 
 British 
 Channel Islands 
 English 
 Gibraltarian 
 Northern Irish 
 Saint Helena 
 Scottish 
 Welsh 
 Bruneian 
 Bulgarian 
 Burkinabé 
 Burmese 
 Burundian 
 Cambodian 
 Cameroonian 
 Canadian 
 Acadian 
 Québécois 
 Central African Republic 
 Chadian 
 Chilean 
 Chinese 
 Cantonese 
 Hong Kong 
 Macanese 
 Tibetan 
 Xinjiang 
 Colombian 
 Congolese 
 Corsican 
 Croatian 
 Cuban 
 Cypriot 
 Czech 
 Danish 
 Faroese 
 Greenlandic 
 Djiboutian 
 Dominican 
 Dominican Republic 
 Dutch 
 East Timorese 
 Ecuadorian 
 Egyptian 
 Emirati 
 Equatorial Guinean 
 Eritrean 
 Estonian 
 Ethiopian 
 Fijian 
 Filipino 
 Finnish 
 French 
 Occitan 
 French Guianan 
 Gabonese 
 Gambian 
 Georgian 
 German 
 Ghanaian 
 Greek 
 Cretan 
 Epirotic 
 Greek Macedonian 
 Heptanesean 
 Guatemalan 
 Guinea-Bissauan 
 Guinean 
 Haitian 
 Honduran 
 Hungarian 
 Icelandic 
 Indian 
 Arunachalese 
 Assamese 
 Bengali 
 Bihari 
 Goan 
 Gujarati 
 Himachal Pradesh 
 Kashmiri 
 Jharkhandi 
 Karnataka 
 Kerala 
 Maharashtrian 
 Manipuri 
 Meghalayan 
 Mizo 
 Naga 
 Odia 
 Punjabi 
 Rajasthani 
 Sikkimese 
 Sindhi 
 Tamil 
 Telangana 
 Telugu 
 Indonesian 
 Acehnese 
 Balinese 
 Banjar 
 Batak 
 Betawi 
 Indo 
 Javanese 
 Madurese 
 Makassar 
 Minahasan 
 Minangkabau 
 Palembangese 
 Sundanese 
 Iranian 
 Iraqi 
 Irish 
 Israeli 
 Italian 
 Abruzzese 
 Ligurian 
 Lombard 
 Lucanian 
 Neapolitan 
 Roman 
 Sardinian 
 Sicilian 
 Venetian 
 Ivorian 
 Jamaican 
 Japanese 
 Okinawan 
 Jordanian 
 Kazakh 
 Kenyan 
 Korean 
 North Korean 
 South Korean 
 Kosovan 
 Kuwaiti 
 Kyrgyz 
 Lao 
 Latvian 
 Lebanese 
 Lesotho 
 Liberian 
 Libyan 
 Liechtensteiner 
 Lithuanian 
 Luxembourg 
 Macedonian 
 Malagasy 
 Malawian 
 Malaysian 
 Sabahan 
 Sarawakian 
 Maldivian 
 Malian 
 Maltese 
 Mauritanian 
 Mauritian 
 Mexican 
 Moldovan 
 Monégasque 
 Mongolian 
 Montenegrin 
 Moroccan 
 Mozambican 
 Namibian 
 Nauruan 
 Nepalese 
 New Zealand 
 Nicaraguan 
 Niger 
 Nigerian 
 Niuean 
 Norwegian 
 Omani 
 Pakistani 
 Palestinian 
 Panamanian 
 Peruvian 
 Polish 
 Portuguese 
 Qatari 
 Romanian  (incl.  Transylvanian Saxon ) 
 Russian 
 Bashkir 
 Chechen 
 Circassian 
 Komi 
 Mordovian 
 Sakha 
 Tatar 
 Udmurt 
 Yamal 
 Rwandan 
 Saint Lucian 
 Salvadoran 
 Sammarinese 
 São Tomé and Príncipe 
 Saudi Arabian 
 Senegalese 
 Serbian 
 Seychellois 
 Sierra Leonean 
 Singaporean 
 Slovak 
 Slovenian 
 Somali 
 South African 
 Spanish 
 Andalusian 
 Asturian 
 Balearic 
 Basque 
 Canarian 
 Cantabrian 
 Catalan 
 Extremaduran 
 Galician 
 Manchegan 
 Valencian 
 Sri Lankan 
 Sudanese 
 Swazi 
 Swedish 
 Swiss 
 Syrian 
 Taiwanese 
 Tajik 
 Tanzanian 
 Zanzibari 
 Thai 
 Togolese 
 Tunisian 
 Turkish 
 Turkmen 
 Trinidadian and Tobagonian 
 Ugandan 
 Ukrainian 
 Uruguayan 
 Uzbek 
 Venezuelan 
 Vietnamese 
 Western Saharan 
 Yemeni 
 Zambian 
 Zimbabwean 
 Ethnic 
 Ainu 
 Arab 
 Indonesian 
 Aromanian 
 Assyrian 
 Balochi 
 Berber 
 Cajun 
 Chinese 
 American 
 Canadian 
 Chifa 
 Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Crimean Tatar 
 Greek American 
 Hazaragi 
 Indian 
 Anglo-Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Indigenous American 
 Inuit 
 Italian American 
 Kurdish 
 Livonian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Malay 
 Ossetian 
 Parsi 
 Pashtun 
 Peranakan 
 Romani 
 Sámi 
 Soul food 
 Sylheti 
 Transylvanian Saxon 
 Yup'ik 
 Religious 
 Buddhist 
 Christian 
 Goan Catholic 
 Mangalorean Catholic 
 Mennonite 
 Hindu 
 Islamic 
 Chinese 
 Ital 
 Jain 
 Jewish 
 American 
 Ashkenazi 
 Bukharan 
 Ethiopian 
 Mizrahi 
 Sephardic 
 Syrian 
 Ritual slaughter 
 Sikh 
 Historical 
 Ancient Egyptian 
 Ancient Greek 
 Ancient Israelite 
 Ancient Roman 
 Antebellum America 
 Aztec 
 Byzantine 
 Early modern European 
 Historical Chinese 
 Historical Indian subcontinent 
 Historical North Indian and Pakistani 
 History of agriculture 
 History of alcoholic drinks 
 History of bread 
 History of seafood 
 History of vegetarianism 
 Historical Argentine 
 Historical Japanese 
 Inca 
 Mayan 
 Muisca 
 Mughal 
 Medieval 
 Ottoman 
 Peasant 
 Soviet 
 Thirteen Colonies 
 Styles 
 Classique 
 Fast food 
 Fusion 
 New American 
 Eurasian 
 Haute 
 Molecular gastronomy 
 Note by Note 
 Nouvelle 
 Lists 
 List of cuisines 
 List of historical cuisines 
 Lists of prepared foods 
 Related 
 Cookbook 
 Cooking 
 Culinary arts 
 Drink 
 Food 
 history 
 Diet 
 Meal preparation 
 
   Food portal 
   Drink portal 
   Category 
   Commons 
   Cookbook 
   WikiProject 
   Outline 
 
 Authority control : National libraries  
 Israel 
 United States 
 
  
NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw2299
Cached time: 20230310194806
Cache expiry: 1814400
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc, no‐toc‐conversion]
CPU time usage: 0.771 seconds
Real time usage: 1.015 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 6705/1000000
Post‐expand include size: 187427/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 24435/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 25/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 98461/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.415/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 27171076/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/400
 
 
Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  764.083      1 -total
 17.00%  129.908      1 Template:Reflist
 13.74%  104.953      1 Template:Colombia_topics
 13.52%  103.333      4 Template:Lang
 13.51%  103.259      1 Template:Country_topics
 12.37%   94.486     11 Template:Cite_web
 10.16%   77.659      1 Template:Colombian_culture
  9.78%   74.691      1 Template:Sidebar
  9.65%   73.700      4 Template:Navbox
  7.38%   56.368      1 Template:More_citations_needed
 
  Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:idhash:3971816-0!canonical and timestamp 20230310194805 and revision id 1129569011. Rendering was triggered because: api-parse
  
 esi <esi:include src="/esitest-fa8a495983347898/content" />  
 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Colombian_cuisine&oldid=1129569011 " 
 Category :  Colombian cuisine Hidden categories:  CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from December 2014 All articles needing additional references Articles containing Spanish-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2022 Commons category link is on Wikidata Region topic template using suffix Articles with J9U identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  This page was last edited on 26 December 2022, at 03:20  (UTC) . 
 Text is available under the  Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0 ;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the  Terms of Use  and  Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the  Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. 
 
 
 Privacy policy 
 About Wikipedia 
 Disclaimers 
 Contact Wikipedia 
 Mobile view 
 Developers 
 Statistics 
 Cookie statement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
