
 
 
 Jump to content 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle sidebar 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Create account Log in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Personal tools 
 
 
 
 
   Create account   Log in 
 
 
 
 
		Pages for logged out editors  learn more 
 
 
 Contributions Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Navigation 
 
 
 Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate 
 
 
 
 
 Contribute 
 
 
 Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file 
 
 
 
 
 Tools 
 
 
 What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item 
 
 
 
 
 Print/export 
 
 
 Download as PDF Printable version 
 
 
 
 
 In other projects 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons Wikibooks 
 
 
 
 
 Languages 
 
 On this Wikipedia the language links are at the top of the page across from the article title.  Go to top . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CentralNotice  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Contents 
 move to sidebar 
 hide 
 
 
 
 
 (Top) 
 
 
 
 
 
 1 History 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 Side dishes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 Breads and pastries 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4 Soups 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5 Meat dishes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6 Other dishes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 7 Snacks 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8 Sweets 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 9 Beverages 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 10 See also 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 11 References 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 12 External links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
						Toggle the table of contents
					 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle the table of contents 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Czech cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 26 languages 
 
 
 
 Azərbaycanca Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Čeština Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Hrvatski Italiano עברית Jawa ქართული Nederlands 日本語 Polski Русский Slovenčina Suomi Svenska Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 
 Edit links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Article Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 English 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 More 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
 
 
 Culinary traditions of the Czech Republic 
 
 
 This article includes a list of general  references , but  it lacks sufficient corresponding  inline citations .  Please help to  improve  this article by  introducing  more precise citations.   ( February 2014 )  ( Learn how and when to remove this template message ) 
   Svíčková na smetaně  served with  dumplings ,  whipped cream  and  cranberries 
   Vepřo-knedlo-zelo  (Roast  pork  with  dumplings  and  sauerkraut ) 
   Obložené chlebíčky , a type of snack or appetizer 
 Part of a series on the Culture of the Czech Republic 
 Architecture 
 Art 
 Cinema 
 Cuisine 
 Folklore 
 Literature 
 Music 
 Mythology 
 Philosophy 
 Sports 
 Theatre 
 
 Czech Republic portal v t e 
 Czech cuisine  ( Czech :  česká kuchyně ) has both influenced and been influenced by the cuisines of surrounding countries and nations. Many of the cakes and pastries that are popular in  Central Europe  originated within the  Czech lands . Contemporary Czech cuisine is more meat-based than in previous periods; the current abundance of farmable meat has enriched its presence in regional cuisine. Traditionally, meat has been reserved for once-weekly consumption, typically on weekends.
 The body of Czech meals typically consists of two or more courses; the first course is traditionally soup, the second course is the main dish, and the third course can include supplementary courses, such as dessert or  compote  ( kompot ). In the Czech cuisine, thick soups and many kinds of sauces, both based on stewed or cooked vegetables and meats, often with cream, as well as baked meats with natural sauces ( gravies ), are popular dishes usually accompanied with beer, especially  Pilsner , that Czechs consume the most in the world. Czech cuisine is also very strong in sweet main courses and desserts, a unique feature in European cuisines.
 
 
 History [ edit ] 
 The 19th-century Czech language cookbook  Pražská kuchařka  by Karolína Vávrová shows influences of  French cuisine  in the order of multi-course meals common throughout the  Habsburg monarchy , beginning with soup, followed by fish entrees, meat and sweets. Vávrová deviates from this standard order for the sweets of  Mehlspeisen  type. These flour-based sweets, including baked  puddings ,  strudels ,  doughnuts  and  souffles  could be served either before or after the roast meats, but stewed fruits, creamy desserts, cakes, ice cream, and cookies were to always be served after the roast and for multiple dessert courses would follow this stated order. [1] 
 
 Side dishes [ edit ] 
 Dumplings ( knedlíky ) (steamed and sliced like bread) are one of the mainstays of Czech cuisine and are typically served with meals. They can be either wheat or potato-based and are sometimes made from a combination of wheat flour and dices made of  stale  bread or rolls. Puffed rice can be found in store-prepared mixtures. Smaller Czech dumplings are usually potato-based. When served as leftovers, sliced dumplings are sometimes pan-fried with eggs. Czech potato dumplings are often filled with smoked meat and served with  spinach  or  sauerkraut . Fried onion and braised cabbage can be included as a side dish.
 There are many other side dishes, including noodles and boiled rice. Potatoes are served boiled with salt, often with caraway seed and butter. Peeled and boiled potatoes are mixed into  mashed potatoes . New potatoes are sometimes boiled in their skins, not peeled, from harvest time to new year. Because of the influence of foreign countries, potatoes are also fried, so  French fries  and croquettes are common in restaurants.
 Buckwheat, pearl barley and millet grains are rarely served in restaurants. These are more commonly a home-cooked, healthier alternative. Pasta is common, either baked, boiled, cooked with other ingredients, or served as a salad. Pasta is available in different shapes and flavors. This is an influence of Italian and Asian cuisine. Rice and  buckwheat  noodles are not common but are becoming more popular.  Gluten -free pasta is also available, made from corn flour, corn starch, or potatoes.
 
 Breads and pastries [ edit ] 
 Bread ( chléb  or  chleba ) is traditionally sourdough baked from rye and wheat, and is flavoured with salt, caraway seeds, onion,  garlic , seeds, or pork crackling. It is eaten as an accompaniment to soups and dishes. It is also the material for Czech croutons and for  topinky —slices of bread fried in a pan on both sides and rubbed with garlic. Rolls ( rohlík ), buns ( žemle ), and braided buns ( houska ) are the most common forms of bread eaten for breakfast; these are often topped with poppy seeds and salt or other seeds. A bun or a roll baked from bread dough is called a  dalamánek . A sweet roll or  loupák  is a crescent-shaped roll made from sweetened dough containing milk. It is smeared with egg and sprinkled with poppy seeds before baking, giving it a golden-brown colour.
 
 Soups [ edit ] 
   Zelňačka 
 Soup ( polévka , colloquially  polívka ) plays an important role in Czech cuisine. Soups commonly found in Czech restaurants are beef, chicken or vegetable broth with noodles—optionally served with liver or nutmeg dumplings; garlic soup ( česnečka ) with croutons—optionally served with minced sausage, raw egg, or cheese; and  cabbage soup  ( zelňačka ) made from  sauerkraut —sometimes served with minced sausage.  Kyselica  is a Wallachian variety and contains sour cream, bacon, potatoes, eggs and sausage.
 Pea ( hrachovka ), bean and lentil soups are commonly cooked at home. Goulash soup ( gulášovka ) and  dršťková  are made from beef or pork tripe cut into small pieces and cooked with other ingredients; the meat can be substituted with oyster mushrooms. Potato soup ( bramboračka ) is made from potato, onion, carrot, root parsley and celeriac, spiced with caraway seed, garlic and marjoram. Fish soup ( rybí polévka ) made with carp is a traditional Christmas dish.
 Other common Czech soups are  champignon  or other mushroom soup, tomato soup, vegetable soup, onion soup ( cibulačka ) and bread soup (served in a hollowed-out loaf of bread).  Kulajda  is a traditional  South Bohemian  soup containing water, cream, spices, mushrooms, egg (often a quail's egg), dill and potatoes. [2]  It is typical in its thickness, white color and characteristic taste. The main ingredient is mushrooms, which gives it the dish's scent.  Kyselo  is a regional specialty soup made from rye sourdough, mushrooms, caraway and fried onion.
 
 Meat dishes [ edit ] 
   Svíčková na smetaně  (Marinated sirloin), served here with dumplings and cream 
   A "traditional Bohemian platter" at a restaurant in central  Prague , consisting of roast duck, roast pork,  beer sausage , smoked meat, red and white cabbage, bread, bacon and potato dumplings. 
   Prague-style beef goulash 
 Traditional Czech dishes are made from animals, birds or fish bred in the surrounding areas.
 Pork is the most common meat, making up over half of all meat consumption. [3]  Beef, veal and chicken are also popular. Pigs are often a source of meat in the countryside, since pork has a relatively short production time, compared to beef.
 Jitrnice  is the meat and offal of pork cut into tiny pieces, filled in a casing and closed with sticks. Meat from the neck, sides, lungs, spleen, and liver are cooked with white pastry, broth, salt, spices, garlic and sometimes onions.  Klobása , known as  Kielbasa  in the United States, is a smoked meat sausage-like product made from minced meat. It is spicy and durable.  Jelito  is a pork meat sausage-like product containing pork blood and pearl barley or pastry pieces.  Tlačenka  is a meat or poultry product consisting of little pieces of meat in jelly/aspic from connective tissue boiled into mush, served with onion, vinegar and bread.  Ovar  is a simple dish made from rather fatty pork meat (head or knuckle). These pieces of lower quality meat are boiled in salted water. Pork cracklings ( škvarky ) and bacon ( slanina ) are also eaten.
 In restaurants one can find:
 
 Guláš  is a stew usually made from beef, pork or game with onions and spices. It is usually accompanied with  knedlík  or sometimes bread. It is also traditionally served at home as a pot of  guláš  will last for several days. Czech  guláš  is not to be confused with Hungarian " gulyás ", which is a soup more similar to Czech  gulášovka  (a soup).  Pörkölt  is the Hungarian equivalent of Czech  guláš . 
 Roast pork with dumplings and cabbage ( pečené vepřové s knedlíky a se zelím , colloquially  vepřo-knedlo-zelo ) is often considered the most typical Czech dish. [4]  It consists of cabbage and is either cooked or served pickled. There are different varieties, from sour to sweet. 
 Marinated sirloin ( svíčková na smetaně  or simply  svíčková ;  svíčková  is the name for both the sauce and the meat (pork side or beef side) used for this dish;  na smetaně  means  in cream , and it means that the  svíčková  sauce is with cream. Braised beef, usually larded, with a  svíčková  sauce—a thick sauce of carrot,  parsley root , celeriac and sometimes cream. This dish is often served with  knedlíky ,  chantilly cream —sweet, whipped cream—cranberry compote ( kompot ) and a slice of lemon. 
 Baked mincemeat ( sekaná pečeně )—later only mincemeat ( sekaná ), is a dish made from minced pork meat (beef is also possible). 
 Ham ( šunka ) is made from pork or beef, braised, dried or smoked. 
 Schnitzel  ( řízek ) is a Czech meat dish. The word means "sliced/cut (out) piece". These are usually small slices of veal, pork or chicken covered with Czech  trojobal  'triplecoat', made from putting and pressing a piece pounded and sliced into smooth flour on both sides, then covered in whisked egg and breadcrumbs and fried on both sides.  Řízek  is served with potato side-dishes. The Czech triplecoat is used in some households at Christmas to cover carp or trout decorated with lemon slices. 
 Karbanátek  is a burger usually made from pork, beef, minced fish or other meat. It is often mixed with egg and commonly crumbled with Czech triplecoat. It can be vegetable-based with pastry pieces or flour and in both versions fried on both sides or baked. 
 Smoked meat ( uzené ) with potato dumplings, fried onion and cooked spinach. 
 Beef with tomato sauce ( rajská omáčka  or  rajská ) is served with dumplings. Dill sauce ( koprová omáčka  or  koprovka ) is often on menus too. 
 Rabbit is commonly bred in the countryside. Hare with wild game is also served. Mutton, lamb, kid, boar, horse or deer are not as common. 
 Commonly-found poultry dishes are:
 
 Goose, duck, turkey and chicken. Pheasant, partridge,  guineafowl , pigeon and other game birds are not as common. 
 Roast duck ( pečená kachna ) is served with bread or potato dumplings and braised red cabbage. 
 Chicken in  paprika  sauce ( kuře na paprice ) or hen in paprika sauce ( slepice na paprice ) is chicken or hen stewed with onion, paprika and cream. 
 Roast turkey with bacon ( krocan pečený na slanině ) is turkey larded with, or wrapped in bacon, roasted with bacon and butter; it is not very common. 
 Fish—mostly  trout  and  carp —is commonly eaten at Christmas. Otherwise many fish are imported, including sardines, fillet, salmon, tuna, and anchovy. Other types of fish are slowly becoming popular too. Crayfish used to be very common in rivers, but are nowadays rarer and are protected. Prawns or lobsters are imported instead. 
 Other dishes [ edit ] 
   Fried cheese, served with tartar sauce and side salad 
 Mushrooms are often used in Czech cuisine as different types grow in the forests. Czechs make an average of 20 visits to the forest annually, picking up to 20,000 tonnes of mushrooms. [5]  Bolete, parasol and other kinds of mushroom are often found. In the shops, you can buy  common mushrooms  ( žampiony ),  oyster mushrooms  ( hlívy ),  shiitake ,  wood ear  and dried forest mushrooms.  smaženice  are shallow-fried mushrooms with onion and spices. Mushroom Jacob ( Houbový Kuba ) is a dish prepared from cooked hulled grain (barley), then strained, mixed with cooked mushrooms, fried onion, garlic, fat and black pepper, and baked in the oven. It is served at Christmas. Mushrooms are often triple-coated and fried. Cauliflower can be fried in the Czech triplecoat. 
 Smažený sýr  (colloquially  smažák ) is a fried cheese battered in Czech triplecoat — usually  Edam  (also  Hermelín ), about 1 cm thick coated in flour, egg and bread crumbs like  Wiener schnitzel , fried and served with  tartar sauce  and potatoes or french fries. 
 Homemade noodles with ground poppy seeds are called  nudle s mákem ; these are served with powdered sugar and melted butter. A similar dish is potato buns with poppy seeds ( bramborové šišky s mákem ), and are called cones ( šišky ), because they resemble the cones of coniferous trees. 
 Omelettes  ( omeleta ) are often served with peas. 
 Pancakes ( palačinky ) of plate size or palm size are common. 
 The most traditional vegetables are  carrots , celery,  parsley ,  turnip , cauliflower, lettuce, onion, leek, garlic, cabbage, kale and  chives . In gardens, one can also find tomatoes, bell peppers,  courgettes ,  pumpkins ,  melons , sunflowers, poppies, potatoes and beet. 
 Peas and lentils are, together with bean pods, the most common. They are served as soup or as cooked mash with pickled cucumber and fried onion, occasionally with sausage or smoked meat.  Šoulet  (shoulet) is a mix of boiled peas with barley, fat and other ingredients. 
 Žemlovka  is a baked dish made with layers of sliced rolls or buns called  žemle , sliced apples and milk or eggs. It is served with cinnamon and raisins. 
 Štrúdl  or  závin  ( Strudel ) can be sweet with  apples ,  raisins ,  walnuts , grated  coconut  or cherry—or savoury with cabbage, spinach, cheese or meat. 
 Semolina porridge ( krupicová kaše ) is served with sugar,  honey ,  cinnamon  or cocoa with butter on the top. Optionally, sliced apples or  apricots  are added as toppings. Healthier versions substitute semolina for oatmeal or rice. 
 Stuffed  bell peppers  ( plněné papriky ) are stuffed with meat or rice with vegetables. 
 Lečo  or  lecsó  is a stew made from peppers, onions, tomatoes and spices. 
 Spaghetti ( špagety ) is coming in as an Italian influence. 
 Eggs are often used in Czech cuisine because many families outside of cities breed hens. Scrambled eggs ( míchaná vajíčka ) are common.  Fried eggs  ( volské oko , literally "ox eye") are often served with bread or potatoes and spinach. Boiled eggs are also popular.  Stuffed eggs  are made from halved, shelled, hard-boiled eggs. The yolk is carefully removed into a separate bowl, mixed with salt,  mustard  and spices and stuffed back. It can be decorated. 
 Dairy products have their place in Czech cuisine too.  Edam  ( eidam ) is a Dutch-based type of cheese and  Niva  is a Czech blue cheese. A common pub food,  nakládaný hermelín , or pickled cheese, is a cheese similar to Camembert that is aged in olive oil and spices. Typically served with bread and an assortment of fresh vegetables.  Sour cream  is commonly used as part of various cream-based sauces. 
 Snacks [ edit ] 
 See also:  List of hors d'oeuvre 
   Fried  bramboráky  ( potato pancakes ) 
   Nakládaný  hermelín  (marinated cheese) 
 Bramboráky  (regionally called  cmunda  or  vošouch  in Pilsen and  strik  or  striky  in  Czech Silesia ) are fried pancakes similar to  rösti  made of grated raw potato, flour, carrots or  sour cabbage , and rarely sausage. They are spiced with marjoram, salt, pepper, and garlic, and usually sized to fit the cooking dish. Smaller variants are often eaten as a side dish. 
 Utopenci , singular  utopenec  (literally "drowned men"), are piquantly pickled  bratwursts  ( špekáčky ) in sweet-sour vinegar marinaded with black pepper, bay leaf, onion and chili peppers. They are often available in Czech pubs, but are uncommon in better restaurants. 
 Nakládaný  hermelín  is a soft cheese, from the same family as  brie  and  camembert , marinated with peppers and onions in oil. It is a pub-food. 
 Beer cheese ( pivní sýr ) is a soft cheese, usually mixed with raw onions and mustard, which is spread onto toasted bread. It is also a pub-food. 
 Open sandwiches, known as  obložené chlebíčky  ("garnished breads") or  chlebíčky , are not made from normal Czech bread, but from roll-like, bigger pastry called  veka , sliced and garnished. [6]  They may be served with mayonnaise, ham, egg, fish, salads or spreads on the top. [6]  They are usually decorated with fresh sliced or pickled cucumber, tomato, red or yellow bell pepper, sliced radish, or parsley.  Jednohubky  are similar to  obložené chlebíčky , but smaller and in many varieties. All are served in a small amount—one mouthful impaled on a stick. [6] 
 Olomoucké tvarůžky  or " syrečky " is an aged cheese with a strong odour. It is made in and sold from  Loštice , a small town in Moravia. The tradition of making this cheese dates back to the 15th century.  Tvarůžky  can be prepared in a number of ways—it can be fried, marinated, or added to  bramboráky . 
 Dried  apple chips  ( křížaly ) and dried  banana chips . 
 Potato, beet and celery chips (crisps) are common snacks. 
 Roasted  peanuts  are common. 
 The "Czech hot dog" ( párek v rohlíku , also called  pikador  in South Bohemia) is a street food consisting of boiled or steamed sausage dipped in mustard or ketchup served in a roll with a hole made inside, not in a sliced bun like the common  hot dog . It is influenced by  German cuisine . 
 Langoše  (fried bread) are influenced by  Hungarian cuisine . They are usually served with garlic, Edam cheese and ketchup, or some combination of the three. 
 Sweets [ edit ] 
   Apple  strudel  with raisins 
 Czech coffeehouses are known for their strong coffee, sweet  pastries  and famous patrons who have included  Franz Kafka ,  Antonín Dvořák ,  Václav Havel  and  Albert Einstein . Served warm or cold,  strudel  (optionally topped with ice cream, whipped cream or powdered sugar), is served at almost every coffee shop, apple being the most common variety. [7] 
 Sweets filled with fruit, poppy seed and quark are prevalent and come in diverse forms including cakes,  koláče  (pies), tarts,  fritters , and dumplings ( ovocné knedlíky ). The tradition of making pies has been preserved in American Czech communities who have settled in the  Midwestern United States  and  Texas . They are laborious to make and usually prepared for special celebrations, births, funerals and they also have a role in Czech wedding traditions where they are distributed to friends and family in place of wedding invitations. The most common fillings are poppy seed, apricots ( meruňkové knedlíky ) and prunes. [7] 
 Dough prepared for dumplings may include potatoes, and while the combination of fruits, jams and cheeses varies among households, plums ( švestkové knedlíky ), apricots or strawberries ( jahodové knedlíky ) are common. The finished dumplings are boiled and often garnished with butter, poppy seeds or grated cheese, and a sweetener (traditionally dried and powdered pears, but sugar is used in modern adaptations). Also filled with fruit or jam (and sometimes garnished with poppy seeds) are the Czech  crepes  called  palačinky . [7]  Traditional Czech sponge cake ( bublanina ), served most often for breakfast, is made with cream, eggs and sugar and seasonal fruits, especially whole  cherries . 
 
 Buchty  is a yeast pastry similar to  koláče ; the same filling is wrapped in pieces of dough and baked, but is not visible in the final product. 
 Sweet dumplings with custard sauce ( buchtičky se šodó ) are small pieces of yeast pastry poured with cream made from egg yolks and wine (nowadays is šodó usually replaced with vanilla pidding). The recipe comes from Czech roots, however, the bordering countries—mainly Slovakia, Poland, and Hungary—consider  buchtičky se šodó  as food that came from their country. 
 Pudding is a flavoured custard combined in layers.  Pudding  is served in a glass topped with fruit or shaped in a mould. 
   Christmas cookies ( vánoční cukroví ) 
 Braided bread ( vánočka ) and buns ( mazanec ) are prepared for Christmas, along with many kinds of biscuits and Christmas sweets ( vánoční cukroví ).  Vánočka  and  mazanec  are the same type of pastry as Jewish  Challah . 
 Easter Lamb ( Velikonoční beránek ) is prepared for Easter. The dough is from eggs, sugar and flour. Lemons can be added. It is baked in a mould in the shape of a lamb. It can be decorated. 
 Bábovka  is from dough similar to that used for Easter Lamb, often with cocoa dough in the middle. It is round, 10–15 cm high, made in a mould and is often served with coffee. [8] 
 Lívance  are smaller types of pancakes prepared with yeast in the batter. They are eaten with jam or warm forest fruits. 
 Vdolky  and  koblihy —see  List of doughnut varieties . 
 Perník  is made in two ways:
 Like  gingerbread , but without ginger and with added honey. Gingerbread cookies are decorated with shapes; popular themes are heart shapes, three-dimensional cottages and even whole decorated villages are made—especially in the  Pardubice Region  where the tradition was established in the 16th century. [9] 
   Frgál , a type of  koláč  baked in  Moravian Wallachia 
 Like a cake with cinnamon and honey. 
 Roláda  is a sponge cake roulade filled with jam. 
 Litá  (poured)  bublanina  is a pancake-like batter poured onto a baking sheet. Pieces of fruit—apples, pears or cherries—measuring 1x2 cm are spread on it and it is then sprinkled with sugar. 
 Makovec  is a sponge cake with ground poppy seeds. 
 Mrkvanec  is a sponge cake with grated carrots and mrkvánky are small turovers filled with plum or pear jam and with grated carrot added to the dough 
 With the exception of  koláče ,  vánoční cukroví  and  velikonoční beránek ,  sweets  are consumed with tea or coffee in the late afternoon break, rather than immediately after a main meal. 
 Míša  is a treat made out of frozen curd; it is popular with children and has been produced since 1961. 
 Beverages [ edit ] 
   Pilsner Urquell  in a branded mug 
 The Czech Republic has the highest per-capita consumption of beer in the world. The most common style, which originated here, is  Pilsner . Aside from  beer , Czechs also produce  wine  mostly in the region of  Moravia  and a unique liquors—  Becherovka . Czech  Slivovitz  and other  pálenka  (fruit brandies) is traditionally distilled in the country and are considered national drink. More recently new drinks became popular, among them  Tuzemák , traditionally marketed as "Czech  rum ", is made from potatoes or sugar beets. A mixed drink consisting of  Becherovka  and  tonic water  is known under the  portmanteau  of  Beton  ("concrete"). Another popular mixed drink is  Fernet Stock  mixed with tonic, called " Bavorák " or " Bavorské pivo " (literally " Bavarian  beer").  Kofola  is a non-alcoholic Czech  soft drink  somewhat similar in look and taste to  Coca-Cola , but not as sweet. Kofola was invented in Communist Czechoslovakia as a substitute to the Coca-Cola that they would not import, but it became so popular that production has continued well past the end of Communism in the country. [10] 
 
 See also [ edit ] 
 
 Food portal Czech portal 
 Beer in the Czech Republic 
 Moravian cuisine 
 Slovak cuisine 
 Polish cuisine 
 Austrian cuisine 
 German cuisine 
 Zelný trh 
 
 References [ edit ] 
 
 
 ^   Krondl, Michael.  Sweet Invention: A History of Dessert . Chicago Review Press. p. 265. 
 
 ^   "Czech Foodie Map - Everything You Need to Know About Czech Cuisine" .  Eating Europe . Archived from  the original  on 14 February 2019 . Retrieved  12 April  2016 . 
 
 ^   "ČSÚ: Czechs eat less meat, drink more alcohol" .  Czech News Agency . The Prague Post. 5 December 2013. Archived from  the original  on 3 January 2014 . Retrieved  3 January  2014 . 
 
 ^   Vokurková, Iva (15 March 2009).  "Czech eating habits take a turn for the better" .  Radio Prague . Retrieved  1 January  2014 . 
 
 ^   Velinger, Jan (24 July 2009).  "Czechs pick billions worth of forest mushrooms, berries annually" .  Radio Prague . Retrieved  2 January  2014 . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   Horáková, Pavla (10 September 2005).  "Snacks and party food" .  Radio Prague . Retrieved  2 January  2014 . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   Roufs, Timothy G.; Roufs, Kathleen Smyth.  Sweet Treats Around the World . p. 44. 
 
 ^   Horálková, Elena (27 July 2005).  " "Bábovka" - un dulce con larga tradición" .  Radio Prague  (in Spanish) . Retrieved  2 January  2014 . 
 
 ^   O'Connor, Coilin (12 December 2007).  "Pardubice – the "best place to live in the Czech Republic" " .  Radio Prague . Retrieved  1 January  2014 . 
 
 ^   "Czech Foodie Map - Everything You Need to Know About Czech Cuisine" .  Eating Europe . Retrieved  12 April  2016 . 
 
 
 External links [ edit ] 
 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons has media related to  Cuisine of the Czech Republic . 
 
 Cooking Czech - Czech Recipes for North American Kitchens 
 Czech cuisine, Typical Czech specialties 
 The Communist Cookbook That Defined Prague’s Cuisine 
 Czech Gastronomy 
 Czech cuisine 
 Czech traditional food 
 v t e Czech Republic  articles History 
 Unetice culture 
 Boii 
 Marcomanni 
 Samo 
 Great Moravia 
 Přemyslid dynasty 
 Lands of the Bohemian Crown 
 Czech lands 
 1526–1648 
 1648–1867 
 1867–1918 
 Czechoslovakia 
 Czech Republic 
 Geography 
 Cities and towns 
 Czech lands 
 Geomorphology 
 Protected areas 
 Rivers 
 Urban planning 
 Politics 
 Administrative divisions 
 Districts 
 Municipalities 
 Regions 
 Constitution 
 Elections 
 Foreign relations 
 Government 
 Judiciary 
 Law enforcement 
 Legal system 
 Military 
 Parliament 
 Political parties 
 Economy 
 Energy 
 Electricity 
 Koruna  (currency) 
 Oil and gas deposits 
 Stock Exchange 
 Tourism 
 Transport 
 Society 
 Crime 
 Demographics 
 Education 
 Healthcare 
 Religion 
 Culture 
 Art 
 Architecture 
 Coat of arms 
 Cuisine 
 Language 
 Flag 
 Literature 
 Music 
 Nationalism 
 Panelák   (architectural style) 
 Philosophy 
 Public holidays 
 Sport 
 Television 
 World Heritage Sites 
 Outline Index 
 Category 
 Portal 
 v t e European cuisine Sovereign states European Union 
 Austria 
 Belgium 
 Bulgaria 
 Croatia 
 Cyprus 
 Czech Republic 
 Denmark 
 Estonia 
 Finland 
 France 
 Germany 
 Greece 
 Hungary 
 Republic of Ireland 
 Italy 
 Latvia 
 Lithuania 
 Luxembourg 
 Malta 
 Netherlands 
 Poland 
 Portugal 
 Romania 
 Slovakia 
 Slovenia 
 Spain 
 Sweden 
 Other 
 Albania 
 Andorra 
 Armenia 
 Azerbaijan 
 Belarus 
 Bosnia and Herzegovina 
 Georgia 
 Iceland 
 Kazakhstan 
 Liechtenstein 
 Moldova 
 Monaco 
 Montenegro 
 North Macedonia 
 Norway 
 Russia 
 San Marino 
 Serbia 
 Switzerland 
 Turkey 
 Ukraine 
 United Kingdom 
 Vatican City 
 States with limited recognition 
 Abkhazia 
 Kosovo 
 Nagorno-Karabakh 
 Northern Cyprus 
 South Ossetia 
 Transnistria 
 Dependencies  and other territories 
 Faroe Islands 
 Gibraltar 
 Guernsey 
 Isle of Man 
 Jersey 
 
 v t e Cuisines Continental 
 African 
 North 
 West 
 list 
 Americas 
 Caribbean 
 North 
 South 
 list 
 Asian 
 Caucasian 
 Central 
 Indian subcontinent 
 Levantine 
 list 
 European 
 Balkan 
 Central 
 Eastern 
 list 
 Oceanic 
 Intercontinental
 Global 
 Latin American 
 Mediterranean 
 Middle Eastern 
 National  and regional 
 Afghan 
 Albanian 
 Algerian 
 American 
 Californian 
 Floribbean 
 Hawaiian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Lowcountry (South Carolina) 
 New England 
 New Mexico 
 Pacific Northwest 
 Pennsylvania Dutch 
 Puerto Rican 
 Southern US 
 Southwest US 
 Texas 
 Angolan 
 Argentine 
 Armenian 
 Australian 
 Austrian 
 Azerbaijani 
 Bahraini 
 Bangladeshi 
 Barbadian 
 Belarusian 
 Belgian 
 Belizean 
 Beninese 
 Bhutanese 
 Bolivian 
 Bosnian-Herzegovinian 
 Botswana 
 Brazilian 
 British 
 Channel Islands 
 English 
 Gibraltarian 
 Northern Irish 
 Saint Helena 
 Scottish 
 Welsh 
 Bruneian 
 Bulgarian 
 Burkinabé 
 Burmese 
 Burundian 
 Cambodian 
 Cameroonian 
 Canadian 
 Acadian 
 Québécois 
 Central African Republic 
 Chadian 
 Chilean 
 Chinese 
 Cantonese 
 Hong Kong 
 Macanese 
 Tibetan 
 Xinjiang 
 Colombian 
 Congolese 
 Corsican 
 Croatian 
 Cuban 
 Cypriot 
 Czech 
 Danish 
 Faroese 
 Greenlandic 
 Djiboutian 
 Dominican 
 Dominican Republic 
 Dutch 
 East Timorese 
 Ecuadorian 
 Egyptian 
 Emirati 
 Equatorial Guinean 
 Eritrean 
 Estonian 
 Ethiopian 
 Fijian 
 Filipino 
 Finnish 
 French 
 Occitan 
 French Guianan 
 Gabonese 
 Gambian 
 Georgian 
 German 
 Ghanaian 
 Greek 
 Cretan 
 Epirotic 
 Greek Macedonian 
 Heptanesean 
 Guatemalan 
 Guinea-Bissauan 
 Guinean 
 Haitian 
 Honduran 
 Hungarian 
 Icelandic 
 Indian 
 Arunachalese 
 Assamese 
 Bengali 
 Bihari 
 Goan 
 Gujarati 
 Himachal Pradesh 
 Kashmiri 
 Jharkhandi 
 Karnataka 
 Kerala 
 Maharashtrian 
 Manipuri 
 Meghalayan 
 Mizo 
 Naga 
 Odia 
 Punjabi 
 Rajasthani 
 Sikkimese 
 Sindhi 
 Tamil 
 Telangana 
 Telugu 
 Indonesian 
 Acehnese 
 Balinese 
 Banjar 
 Batak 
 Betawi 
 Indo 
 Javanese 
 Madurese 
 Makassar 
 Minahasan 
 Minangkabau 
 Palembangese 
 Sundanese 
 Iranian 
 Iraqi 
 Irish 
 Israeli 
 Italian 
 Abruzzese 
 Ligurian 
 Lombard 
 Lucanian 
 Neapolitan 
 Roman 
 Sardinian 
 Sicilian 
 Venetian 
 Ivorian 
 Jamaican 
 Japanese 
 Okinawan 
 Jordanian 
 Kazakh 
 Kenyan 
 Korean 
 North Korean 
 South Korean 
 Kosovan 
 Kuwaiti 
 Kyrgyz 
 Lao 
 Latvian 
 Lebanese 
 Lesotho 
 Liberian 
 Libyan 
 Liechtensteiner 
 Lithuanian 
 Luxembourg 
 Macedonian 
 Malagasy 
 Malawian 
 Malaysian 
 Sabahan 
 Sarawakian 
 Maldivian 
 Malian 
 Maltese 
 Mauritanian 
 Mauritian 
 Mexican 
 Moldovan 
 Monégasque 
 Mongolian 
 Montenegrin 
 Moroccan 
 Mozambican 
 Namibian 
 Nauruan 
 Nepalese 
 New Zealand 
 Nicaraguan 
 Niger 
 Nigerian 
 Niuean 
 Norwegian 
 Omani 
 Pakistani 
 Palestinian 
 Panamanian 
 Peruvian 
 Polish 
 Portuguese 
 Qatari 
 Romanian  (incl.  Transylvanian Saxon ) 
 Russian 
 Bashkir 
 Chechen 
 Circassian 
 Komi 
 Mordovian 
 Sakha 
 Tatar 
 Udmurt 
 Yamal 
 Rwandan 
 Saint Lucian 
 Salvadoran 
 Sammarinese 
 São Tomé and Príncipe 
 Saudi Arabian 
 Senegalese 
 Serbian 
 Seychellois 
 Sierra Leonean 
 Singaporean 
 Slovak 
 Slovenian 
 Somali 
 South African 
 Spanish 
 Andalusian 
 Asturian 
 Balearic 
 Basque 
 Canarian 
 Cantabrian 
 Catalan 
 Extremaduran 
 Galician 
 Manchegan 
 Valencian 
 Sri Lankan 
 Sudanese 
 Swazi 
 Swedish 
 Swiss 
 Syrian 
 Taiwanese 
 Tajik 
 Tanzanian 
 Zanzibari 
 Thai 
 Togolese 
 Tunisian 
 Turkish 
 Turkmen 
 Trinidadian and Tobagonian 
 Ugandan 
 Ukrainian 
 Uruguayan 
 Uzbek 
 Venezuelan 
 Vietnamese 
 Western Saharan 
 Yemeni 
 Zambian 
 Zimbabwean 
 Ethnic 
 Ainu 
 Arab 
 Indonesian 
 Aromanian 
 Assyrian 
 Balochi 
 Berber 
 Cajun 
 Chinese 
 American 
 Canadian 
 Chifa 
 Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Crimean Tatar 
 Greek American 
 Hazaragi 
 Indian 
 Anglo-Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Indigenous American 
 Inuit 
 Italian American 
 Kurdish 
 Livonian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Malay 
 Ossetian 
 Parsi 
 Pashtun 
 Peranakan 
 Romani 
 Sámi 
 Soul food 
 Sylheti 
 Transylvanian Saxon 
 Yup'ik 
 Religious 
 Buddhist 
 Christian 
 Goan Catholic 
 Mangalorean Catholic 
 Mennonite 
 Hindu 
 Islamic 
 Chinese 
 Ital 
 Jain 
 Jewish 
 American 
 Ashkenazi 
 Bukharan 
 Ethiopian 
 Mizrahi 
 Sephardic 
 Syrian 
 Ritual slaughter 
 Sikh 
 Historical 
 Ancient Egyptian 
 Ancient Greek 
 Ancient Israelite 
 Ancient Roman 
 Antebellum America 
 Aztec 
 Byzantine 
 Early modern European 
 Historical Chinese 
 Historical Indian subcontinent 
 Historical North Indian and Pakistani 
 History of agriculture 
 History of alcoholic drinks 
 History of bread 
 History of seafood 
 History of vegetarianism 
 Historical Argentine 
 Historical Japanese 
 Inca 
 Mayan 
 Muisca 
 Mughal 
 Medieval 
 Ottoman 
 Peasant 
 Soviet 
 Thirteen Colonies 
 Styles 
 Classique 
 Fast food 
 Fusion 
 New American 
 Eurasian 
 Haute 
 Molecular gastronomy 
 Note by Note 
 Nouvelle 
 Lists 
 List of cuisines 
 List of historical cuisines 
 Lists of prepared foods 
 Related 
 Cookbook 
 Cooking 
 Culinary arts 
 Drink 
 Food 
 history 
 Diet 
 Meal preparation 
 
   Food portal 
   Drink portal 
   Category 
   Commons 
   Cookbook 
   WikiProject 
   Outline 
 
 Authority control   National libraries 
 France 
 BnF data 
 Israel 
 United States 
 Latvia 
 Other 
 IdRef 
 
  
NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw2409
Cached time: 20230310194341
Cache expiry: 1814400
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc, no‐toc‐conversion]
CPU time usage: 1.058 seconds
Real time usage: 1.280 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 19483/1000000
Post‐expand include size: 192293/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 13349/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 16/100
Expensive parser function count: 36/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 68962/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.605/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 18127987/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/400
 
 
Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1046.319      1 -total
 25.78%  269.787      3 Template:Navbox
 15.98%  167.151    144 Template:Lang
 13.19%  138.033      1 Template:European_topic
 11.55%  120.842      1 Template:Lang-cs
 11.28%  118.053      1 Template:Reflist
  9.98%  104.438      1 Template:Czech_Republic_topics
  9.80%  102.521      1 Template:Country_topics
  8.91%   93.256      1 Template:Czech_culture
  8.70%   91.064      1 Template:Sidebar
 
  Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:idhash:2807557-0!canonical and timestamp 20230310194340 and revision id 1142528988. Rendering was triggered because: page-view
  
 esi <esi:include src="/esitest-fa8a495983347898/content" />  
 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Czech_cuisine&oldid=1142528988 " 
 Category :  Czech cuisine Hidden categories:  CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use British English from February 2014 Use dmy dates from May 2014 Articles lacking in-text citations from February 2014 All articles lacking in-text citations Articles containing Czech-language text Articles containing German-language text Articles containing Hungarian-language text Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with BNF identifiers Articles with J9U identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers Articles with LNB identifiers Articles with SUDOC identifiers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  This page was last edited on 2 March 2023, at 22:42  (UTC) . 
 Text is available under the  Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0 ;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the  Terms of Use  and  Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the  Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. 
 
 
 Privacy policy 
 About Wikipedia 
 Disclaimers 
 Contact Wikipedia 
 Mobile view 
 Developers 
 Statistics 
 Cookie statement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
