
 
 
 Jump to content 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle sidebar 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Create account Log in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Personal tools 
 
 
 
 
   Create account   Log in 
 
 
 
 
		Pages for logged out editors  learn more 
 
 
 Contributions Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Navigation 
 
 
 Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate 
 
 
 
 
 Contribute 
 
 
 Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file 
 
 
 
 
 Tools 
 
 
 What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item 
 
 
 
 
 Print/export 
 
 
 Download as PDF Printable version 
 
 
 
 
 In other projects 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons Wikibooks 
 
 
 
 
 Languages 
 
 On this Wikipedia the language links are at the top of the page across from the article title.  Go to top . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CentralNotice  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Contents 
 move to sidebar 
 hide 
 
 
 
 
 (Top) 
 
 
 
 
 
 1 History 
 
 
				Toggle History subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 1.1 New Danish cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 Main meals 
 
 
				Toggle Main meals subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 2.1 Breakfast 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.2 Lunch 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.3 Dinner 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 Open sandwiches 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4 Cold buffet 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5 Options for dinner 
 
 
				Toggle Options for dinner subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 5.1 Appetizer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5.2 Soups 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5.3 Main dishes 
 
 
 
 
 
 5.3.1 Traditional main course dishes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5.4 Desserts 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5.5 Cakes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6 Traditional feasts 
 
 
				Toggle Traditional feasts subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 6.1 Christmas 
 
 
 
 
 
 6.1.1 Christmas lunch 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6.1.2 Christmas dinner at home 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6.2 Easter 
 
 
 
 
 
 6.2.1 Holy Saturday lunch 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6.2.2 Easter Sunday lunch 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 7 Restaurants and dining venues 
 
 
				Toggle Restaurants and dining venues subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 7.1 Restaurants 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 7.2 Cafés 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 7.3 Street food 
 
 
 
 
 
 7.3.1 Hot dog vans 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 7.3.2 Social dining 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8 Other popular foods 
 
 
				Toggle Other popular foods subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 8.1 Potatoes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8.2 Vegetables and salads 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8.3 Sauces and condiments 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8.4 Cheese 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8.5 Seasonings and herbs 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8.6 Fruit 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8.7 Baked goods 
 
 
 
 
 
 8.7.1 Cakes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8.8 Sweets 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 9 Drinks 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 10 Criticism 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 11 Frøken Jensens Kogebog 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 12 See also 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 13 Literature 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 14 References 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 15 Bibliography 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 16 External links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
						Toggle the table of contents
					 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle the table of contents 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Danish cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 26 languages 
 
 
 
 العربية Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Jawa ქართული 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 
 Edit links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Article Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 English 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 More 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
 
 
 Culinary traditions of Denmark 
   Frikadeller  (meat balls) with  rugbrød  (rye bread) and   gherkins 
 Part of  a series  on the Culture of Denmark 
 History 
 People 
 Languages 
 Mythology  and  Folklore 
 Cuisine 
 Festivals 
 Religion 
 Bahá'í 
 Buddhism 
 Christianity 
 Catholicism 
 Judaism 
 Islam 
 Ahmadiyya 
 
 Art 
 Literature 
 Music  and  Performing arts 
 Media 
 Television 
 Cinema 
 
 Sport 
 Monuments 
 World Heritage Sites 
 
 Symbols 
 Flag 
 Coat of arms 
 National anthem 
 
   Denmark portal v t e 
 Danish cuisine  ( Danish :  det danske køkken ) originated from the peasant population's own local produce and was enhanced by cooking techniques developed in the late 19th century and the wider availability of goods during and after the  Industrial Revolution . Open sandwiches, known as  smørrebrød , which in their basic form are the usual fare for lunch, can be considered a national speciality when prepared and decorated with a variety of fine ingredients. Hot meals are typically prepared with meat or fish. Substantial meat and fish dishes includes  flæskesteg  (roast pork with crackling) and  kogt torsk  (poached cod) with mustard sauce and trimmings.  Ground meats  (pork, veal or beef) became widespread during the industrial revolution and traditional dishes that are still popular include  frikadeller  (meat balls),  karbonader  (breaded pork patties) and  medisterpølse  (fried sausage). Denmark is known for its  Carlsberg  and  Tuborg  beers and for its  akvavit  and  bitters , but amongst the Danes themselves imported wine has gained steadily in popularity since the 1960s. [1] [2] 
 Cooking in Denmark has always been inspired by foreign and continental practises and the use of imported tropical spices like cinnamon, cardamom, nutmeg and black pepper can be traced to the Danish cuisine of the  Middle Ages  and some even to the  Vikings . [3] [4] 
 Since the early 2000s, some Danish chefs have developed the  new Danish cuisine , an innovative way of cooking based on high-quality local produce. This new philosophy and cuisine has attracted the attention of, and been celebrated by, the international gourmet community. It has contributed with a considerable number of highly acclaimed restaurants in Copenhagen and the province, with some of them awarded  Michelin stars .
 
 
 History [ edit ] 
   A loaf of Danish  rye bread  ( rugbrød ) 
 Danish  cooking is rooted in the peasant dishes served across the country before the  Industrial Revolution  in 1860. It was based on the need to make use of natural products available on or near the family farm. As a result, a variety of  brassicas , bread, fish, pork, and later potatoes, were eaten everywhere. Families had their own storage of long-lasting dry products, rye for making bread, barley for beer, dried peas for soup, and smoked or salted pork. [5]  industrialization brought an increase in the consumption of fresh meat and vegetables, but rye bread and potatoes continued to be staples. [6]  With the arrival of dairy  cooperatives  in the second half of the 19th century, milk also gained favor, although all kinds of dairy products have been consumed in lesser quantities for millennia. The introduction of  wood-burning stoves  and  meat grinders  contributed to a range of new dishes including  frikadeller  (meat balls),  medisterpølse  (fried ground meat sausage),  hakkebøf  (meat patties of beef),  karbonader [7]  (breaded pork meat patties), meat loafs, roast pork, poached cod, and  stegt rødspætte  (breaded flatfish). Desserts of stewed fruits or berries such as  rødgrød  date from the same period, as do a large variety of cakes and cookies. [5] 
 Over the centuries, sausage, which was not only economical but could be kept for long periods, was together with rye bread behind the development of  smørrebrød . By the end of the 18th century, there were several different kinds of sausage but the preparation of cold meat products developed rapidly in the 1840s when the French butcher Francois Louis Beauvais opened a business in Copenhagen. In the 1880s, Oskar Davidsen opened a restaurant specializing in  smørrebrød  with a long list of open sandwiches.  Leverpostej  (liver pâté) became available in grocery shops at the end of the 19th century but it was some time before its price was comparable with that of cold cuts. Around the same time, the one-hour lunch break which had allowed people to enjoy a hot midday meal was shortened to 30 minutes, encouraging them to take a few pieces of  smørrebrød  to work in a lunch box. In the 1920s and 1930s, tomatoes and cucumbers were added as a topping to the cold cuts. In the 1940s, Henry Stryhn popularized  leverpostej  by making deliveries around Copenhagen on his bicycle. [8] 
 In the 1960s and 1970s, with the availability of  deep frozen goods , the concept of  fast food  arrived together with an interest in  Mediterranean dishes  as Danes travelled more widely. By the 1990s, ingredients were being imported from the south while new products were farmed at home, providing a basis for a developing interest in  gourmet  dishes. Much of the inspiration came from France, as Danish chefs went on television explaining how to prepare dishes such as  canard à l'orange  or authentic  sauce Béarnaise . A younger generation of chefs soon started to travel abroad themselves, learning how to adapt the expertise of French and Spanish chefs to the use of local ingredients as a basis for creating beautifully presented, finely flavored Nordic dishes. As a result, in recent years Danish chefs have helped to put Denmark on the world gastronomic map, with several  Michelin-starred restaurants  in Copenhagen and the provinces. [6] 
 
 New Danish cuisine [ edit ] 
 Main article:  New Danish cuisine 
   New Nordic dish made from local ingredients exclusively. "White asparagus with poached egg yolk and sauce of woodruff" at Restaurant  Noma . 
 Danish cuisine has also taken advantage of the possibilities inherent in traditional recipes, building on the use of local products and techniques that have not been fully exploited. Local products such as rapeseed, oats, cheeses and older varieties of fruits are being rediscovered and prepared in new ways both by restaurants and at home, as interest in locally sourced  organic foods  continues to grow. The  Nordic Council 's agricultural and food ministers have supported these developments in the form of a manifesto designed to encourage the use of natural products from the Nordic countries in the food production industry, while promoting the "purity, freshness, simplicity and ethics" associated with the region's cuisine. [9] 
 In 2010, 2011, 2012, and 2014 the Copenhagen restaurant  Noma  (short for  nordisk mad  – Nordic food) was named the world's best restaurant by the magazine  Restaurant . [10] 
 In 2012, the Danish chef and food activist  Claus Meyer  had his own show about Nordic cuisine on  BBC Lifestyle . [11]  His recent book  Almanak  contains 365 new cuisine recipes, one for each day of the year. [12] 
 
 Main meals [ edit ] 
 Most Danes have three regular meals a day, usually consisting of a cold breakfast with coffee or tea, a cold lunch at work and a hot dinner at home with the family. Some also have a snack in the middle of the afternoon or in the late evening. Meat, especially pork, is by far the most common ingredient of hot meals. It is usually accompanied by potatoes and sometimes by another vegetable such as carrots or lettuce. Most hot meals consist of only one course: starters are fairly rare but desserts such as ice cream or fruit are a little more frequent. Beer and wine are fairly common drinks at mealtimes but so are soft drinks, plain water and, to a lesser extent, milk and coffee. [13]  Many families follow the old traditions. Mothers and fathers cook together and teach their children how to cook. Meals form an important part of family life, allowing for socializing and contributing to the sense of the well-being and coziness known as  hygge . [14] 
 
 Breakfast [ edit ] 
   Bread with cheese and salami, soft-boiled egg and coffee; a typical everyday breakfast. 
 The basic Danish breakfast consists of coffee, or tea, and  rye bread , white bread, or rolls with cheese or jam. Bread at breakfast time most often comes in the form of a white loaf known as  franskbrød  (French bread), a  baguette , or a variety of white or brown rolls ( boller ,  birkes ,  rundstykker ,  håndværkere ) or  croissants . [15]  The bread is usually buttered and topped with soft or creamy cheese, sausage, pâté, cured cold meat or jam. On festive gatherings or when time permits, as on Sundays, for example, a variety of bread rolls can be included as well as  wienerbrød , as  Danish pastry  is known in Denmark. Fruit juice, mostly orange or apple, and sometimes a bitter such as  Gammel Dansk , may also be served, especially when breakfast is served to guests or on special occasions and celebrations like birthdays and anniversaries. [16]  In Danish hotels, soft-boiled eggs and cold meats are usually served for breakfast, too. [17] 
 On weekdays, various cereals, such as  corn flakes ,  muesli  or  rolled oats , are often served for breakfast with just cold milk and sugar. Soured milk products are popular, too, and are served either plain or with cereals or fruit. The typical local soured milk product of  ymer  is topped with  ymerdrys , a mixture of dried grated rye bread and brown sugar. Porridges such as  oatmeal  and a traditional local porridge called  Øllebrød  are also popular on work days. Øllebrød, a thin porridge cooked with bits of rye bread,  hvidtøl , water, and sugar, and served with milk or sometimes whipped cream, is gaining in popularity as reflected on the breakfast menus of many cafés. [18] 
 
 Lunch [ edit ] 
   Slices to carry to work/school in a lunchbox are prepared in the morning. 
 Rather than eating at home, most Danes have a quick lunch at work or school either in the  cafeteria , if there is one, or more often in the form of a  packed lunch  or  madpakke  prepared before they leave home. Lunch is usually a cold meal consisting of a few simply prepared pieces of  smørrebrød  (often referred to as  håndmad , i.e. hand-food) with slices of  cold meat ,  sliced sausage  or hard-boiled egg.  Leverpostej , a liver pâté prepared from pig's liver and lard, is also frequently used as a spread. [19] 
 
 Dinner [ edit ] 
 For the average family,  dinner  is the one meal of the day where everyone can be gathered, due to the pressures of the modern life where both parents are likely to work, and the children are in school or pre-school institutions.  This a great time to talk about the day-to-day life of each family member. Dinner usually consists of just one main course, often a meat dish with potatoes and a vegetable or salad. Starters are seldom served at home. If there is a dessert, it is likely to be ice cream or a fruit dish. Much more substantial, and delicious dinners are served on weekends, special occasions or when guests have been invited. [20] 
 Confusingly, the evening meal is sometimes called  middag  (midday) because hot meals were formerly served in the middle of the day. The variety of evening meals has developed as a result of the increasing availability of foods from supermarkets as well as the development and growth of the local food industry. As a result of American influence, there is now considerable interest in barbecues, salad buffets and ready-to-serve dishes. Italian-inspired preparations, including pizza and pasta, have also become common options. Meat is very popular, pork ranking as the most frequently served. Cuts are often prepared in the frying pan and accompanied by gravy and potatoes. [20] 
 
 Open sandwiches [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Smørrebrød 
   " Smørrebrød ". Danish open sandwiches are usually made with dark rye bread, but come with a large variety of suitable toppings 
 Smørrebrød  (originally  smør og brød , meaning "butter and bread") usually consists of a piece of buttered rye bread ( rugbrød ), a dense, dark brown bread.  Pålæg  (meaning put-on, actually "that which is laid on [the bread]"), the topping, then among others can refer to commercial or homemade cold cuts, pieces of meat or fish, cheese or spreads. More elaborate, finely decorated varieties have contributed to the international reputation of the Danish  open sandwich  or  smørrebrød . A slice or two of  pålæg  is placed on the buttered bread and decorated with the right accompaniments to create a tasty and visually appealing food item. [21] 
 Some traditional compositions include: [22] 
 
 Dyrlægens natmad  (veterinarian's late-night snack). On a piece of dark rye bread, a layer of liver pâté ( leverpostej ), topped with a slice of  saltkød  (salted beef) and a slice of  sky  ( meat jelly ). This is all garnished with raw  onion  rings and  garden cress . [23] 
 Røget ål med røræg , smoked  eel  on dark rye bread, topped with scrambled eggs, chives and a slice of lemon. 
 Leverpostej , warm rough-chopped liver pâté served on dark rye bread, often topped with  bacon  and/or sauteed  mushrooms . Additions can include lettuce, and sliced pickled/fresh cucumber. 
 Roast beef , thinly sliced and served on dark rye bread, topped with a portion of  remoulade , and decorated with a sprinkling of shredded  horseradish  and crispy fried onions. 
 Ribbensteg , thin slices of roast pork with crackling, served on dark rye bread with  rødkål  (pickled red cabbage), and decorated with a slice of orange. 
 Rullepølse , spiced meat roll with a slice of meat jelly, onions, tomatoes and parsley. Usually pork meat, but sometimes lamb. 
 Tartar , with salt and pepper, served on dark rye bread, topped with raw onion rings, grated horseradish and a raw egg yolk. 
 Røget laks . Slices of  cold-smoked  salmon on white bread, topped with  shrimp  and garnished with a slice of  lemon  and fresh  dill . 
 Stjerneskud  (Shooting star). On a base of buttered toast, two pieces of  fish : a piece of steamed white fish (mostly  plaice ) on one half, a piece of fried, breaded plaice or  rødspætte  on the other half. On top is piled a mound of shrimp, which is then garnished with a dollop of  mayonnaise , sliced  cucumber ,  caviar  or blackened lumpfish roe, and a  lemon  slice. [24] 
 Cold buffet [ edit ] 
   " Det Kolde Bord " with beer and  snaps . 
 Det Kolde Bord  is a cold buffet served with bread on special occasions. The food is usually brought to the dining table and passed around family-style and the idea is similar to the Swedish counterpart, the  smörgåsbord , but with slightly different ingredients.  Det Kolde Bord  is usually served at lunch time, but may well carry on into the evening. [25] 
 The meal begins with seafood, usually  pickled herring , or another  herring  dish. The cured and pickled herring fillets are typically made and served in a white and a red variety, but a multitude of pickled herring dishes exists. [26] [27]  White herring has marinated in a clear, sweet and mildly spiced  vinegar  marinade while the sharper tasting red herring has marinated in a red, seasoned vinegar marinade, owing their red colour to  sandal wood . [28]  Other common variations includes a variety of  sour cream -based sauces, of which a  curry  flavoured type is very popular.  Spegesild  is usually served on buttered, black rye bread, topped with onion rings, pickled  capers  and a glob of curry salad – a sour-cream based sauce, flavored with curry and chopped pickles – and chopped hard boiled eggs on the side. Alternative, but common, herring dishes served at the cold buffet includes  stegte sild i eddike  (fried herring in vinegar) consisting of rye-battered, fried fillets of herring in a spiced vinegar marinade or the more elaborate  silderet  (herring dish) where the herring is arranged in a large serving dish with various sides such as warm, boiled potatoes, raw onion, pickled capers and a  dill -flavoured sour-cream or mayonnaise sauce, or diced apple, shredded horseradish and curry salad, as two common options. [29] [25]  Other seafood dishes may include: [30] 
 
 Rejer  (shrimps), usually served on white bread with mayonnaise and lemon 
 Røget ål  (smoked eel) with scrambled egg 
 Gravad laks  (salt-cured salmon) with a dill and mustard sauce 
 Rødspættefilet  (breaded filets of plaice), served hot with lemon and remoulade 
 Røget laks  (smoked salmon) 
 Røget hellefisk  (smoked halibut) 
 The cold table also consists of a wide variety of meat dishes and, despite its name, nearly always includes a few items which are served hot. Some of the more common components are: [30] 
 
 Frikadeller  (meat balls), sometimes hot 
 Leverpostej  (liver paste), sometimes hot, with pickled beetroot, mushrooms or fried bacon 
 Mørbradbøf  (pork tenderloin), hot, with fried onions 
 Flæskesteg  (roast pork) with crackling, usually with red cabbage 
 Medisterpølse  (a coarsely ground pork sausage, fried) 
 Pariserbøf  (ground beef steak), usually served hot on toast with pickles 
 There might also be cold cuts from hams, roast beef, salami, brisket of beef and spiced roulade.  Det Kolde Bord  usually include accompaniments such as potato salad, scrambled egg and a variety of salads. Desserts like fruit salad and fruit pies, as well as various cheeses may also be served. [30]  Around Christmas, the buffet will sometimes include  sylte  (meat jelly from pork) and other Christmas-related specialties. [31] 
 
 
 
 
 
 " Spegesild ", cold pickled herring
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Shrimps on white bread
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Smoked eel and trout with scrambled eggs
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fishcake, smoked herring and prawns with dark rye bread.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 " Leverpostej " (hot) served with bacon and pickles
 
 
 
 
 
 
 " Pariserbøf " with accompaniments
 
 
 
 
 
 
 " Frikadeller " and potato salad
 
 
 
 
 Options for dinner [ edit ] 
 The everyday evening meal for most Danes consists of a main course and perhaps a dessert. At weekends and on special occasions, a more elaborate meal is served. Good restaurants usually serve a three course dinner. While an ever-wider range of foreign foods are available in Denmark, traditional dishes are still popular. A selection of the more common options is given below. [22] 
 
 Appetizer [ edit ] 
 The first course is typically  fish  or soup, although a wide variety of other  appetizers  are becoming more common. Common traditional appetisers include:
 
 Shellfish , including mussels, shrimp, oyster, crab and lobster. Usually served poached with white bread and various toppings for an appetiser or small meal.
 Shrimp  ( rejer ) are mostly from the Greenland or the North Atlantic. Fjord shrimp from Denmark are a seasonal and less common delicacy: very small and flavorful, about the size of the smallest fingernail. Special shrimp appetisers are  shrimp cocktail  ( rejecocktail ), shrimp salad (with mayonnaise) and shrimp  terrine . Apart from appetisers, shrimps also features as toppings for some fish servings. 
 Mussels  ( muslinger ), is fished and farmed on a large scale in Danish waters and is served poached.  Blue mussels  is by far the most common, but razor clams, green lipped mussel and common cockle is sometimes served as well. As with shrimps, mussels may feature in some fish dishes. 
 Oyster  is usually served raw, and sometimes smoked, as an appetiser for more lavish dinners. 
 Fish served for appetiser or entrée, includes  pickled  herring and  gravad laks  served cold with bread; rye bread for the herring and white bread for the salmon. There are many kinds of pickled herring, with a large variety of vinegar marinades and smoked or fried pickled herring is also served. Fish  pâté  of various kinds with bread might also be had. 
 Soups [ edit ] 
   " Hønsekødssuppe " 
 Soup  is often a meal on its own and mostly served with bread. It can also be served as an  entrée  before the main course. In addition to soups also common outside of Denmark, specialities include:
 
 Gule ærter  ( pea soup ), a meal in itself served together with salted pork, carrots and other vegetables 
 Hønsekødssuppe  (chicken soup) served with  melboller  (small flour dumplings), meatballs and cubed vegetables. 
 Main dishes [ edit ] 
 Fish ,  seafood  and  meat  are prominent parts of any traditional  Danish  dish.
 With a very long coastline and large number of smaller islands, Denmark has a long tradition of fishing and seafood takes a natural part of the Danish food tradition.
 The most commonly eaten fish and seafood are: [ citation needed ] 
 
 Cod  ( torsk ), a common white fish in general food preparation (baked, steamed, poached). It is also dried ( klipfisk ). Danes are particularly fond of cod's roe. The  roe  are in season in January–February, but is sold and consumed year round canned. [32] [33]  Prices on cod have risen in recent years, making this once-favorite fish drop down the list. It has mainly been replaced by other white fish, such as  haddock  and  ling . 
 Norway lobster  ( jomfruhummer ) 
 Herring  ( sild ), features prominently in the traditional Danish cuisine and is served in a large variety of ways either smoked, fried, pickled, breaded, or charred. [34] [35] 
   " Culottesteg ", top sirloin roast. More expensive meat cuts are usually reserved for weekends or special occasions. 
 Plaice  ( rødspætte ), in the form of fried, battered fish filets or as a white fish in general food preparation (baked, steamed, poached). It is often replaced with the more common  European flounder , known as  skrubbe  in Danish. 
 Eel  ( ål ), is smoked or pan-fried. Smoked eel is almost exalted in some homes. 
 Salmon  ( laks ), poached or broiled and served in a variety of ways. Smoked and gravad  lox  salmon with bread is reserved for appetisers or  smørrebrød . 
 Roe  ( rogn ), fish  roe  from cod is by far the most common, but  lumpfish  ( stenbider ) is also served on occasion. Poached or pan-fried is most typical. Salmon roe is used for toppings of some seafood dishes. 
 Fish from  Bornholm ,  Iceland  and  Greenland  also has a special place in the Danish cuisine. The island of Bornholm, a part of Denmark located in the  Baltic Sea , to the east of  Zealand  and south of  Sweden , is noted for its smoked fish items. Iceland and Greenland have long shared histories with Denmark, and the fish from these North Atlantic lands is a sign of quality.
 Pork is the favourite meat in Denmark and pork meat has been a major export sector for more than 100 years. [36]  As regards home cooking and meat, the Danes primarily eat  pork  (42%), followed by poultry (28%) and beef (26%). These are 2016 numbers and does not include processed meat and eating out. Processed meats comprise a lot of pork in Danish cuisine, including  hams , smoked pork, many kinds of cold cuts, sausages and salamis, so the pork consumption percentage would be even larger if processed meat were included. [37]  Ground pork meat is used in many traditional recipes requiring ground meat.  Danish bacon  is generally of good quality (exported Danish bacon is of exceptional quality), and available in both the striped and back varieties.
 Beef is also very popular in the modern Danish kitchen. Danish cattle are primarily used for dairy and Denmark has a centuries-old tradition of dairy products. Hence, cattle bred for their meat were formerly rare and expensive. [ citation needed ]  Dairy cattle rarely make good meat cattle – especially after several years as dairy cows- and for that reason, beef has traditionally been ground and cooked as patties or prepared as boiled roast or soup. Today meat-cattle is more common and  steaks  are popular, especially top sirloin steak of beef ( culottesteg ) is a classic dish to serve for guests.
 Poultry consumption is dominated by  chicken , with chicken filet and as the most popular choice. [37] [38] 
 The Danes meat consumption remains high, but meat has overall lost a little bit of ground to vegetables and vegetarian food in the 2010s. Also there is a tendency to replace popular meats with chicken. [39] [40] 
 
 Traditional main course dishes [ edit ] 
 Many traditional dishes have been abandoned in Denmark in the last 4-5 decades, especially dishes requiring long preparations but also  organ meat  dishes. Fast preparations, pre-cooked meals and foreign inspired cooking from around the world, has increasingly found its way into the kitchens of the common Danish family. [41] [42]  Traditional Danish main course dishes includes:
 
   " Stegt flæsk med persillesovs ", fried, uncured bacon with  parsley sauce 
   Ham with stewed kale and caramelized potatoes 
   " Boller i karry " made with apples and celery and served with rice and cucumber pickle 
   " Brunkål med flæsk ", browned cabbage with sliced roasted pork meat and boiled potatoes 
 Boller i karry  (Dumplings in curry). Meat balls of pork in curry sauce, served with rice. 
 Gammeldags kylling  (Old-fashioned chicken). Pot-roast whole chicken stuffed with parsley and served with boiled potatoes, thick brown sauce, cucumber pickle and rhubarb compote. 
 Frikadeller , pan-fried meat balls of pork, or a mix of veal and pork, with spices. There are many variations on the recipe and  frikadeller  can be served with a variety of accompaniments and vegetable side dishes, hot and cold.  Stuvet hvidkål  comprising stewed  white cabbage  in  white sauce  is a classic. 
 Hakkebøf , ground beef steak. Traditionally served with soft caramelized onions (on top), brown sauce, boiled potatoes and pickled beets or cucumbers. 
 Hjerter i Flødesovs  (Hearts in cream sauce) Calf's hearts are cleaned and stuffed with parsley and smoked bacon or lard from pork. They are seasoned and fried in a pot with butter and onions. Bouillon and cream is added and they are left to simmer for 1½ hour. The hearts are sliced and served with the sauce, mashed potatoes and  surt  (a general term for pickled vegetables). [42] 
 Stegt lever  (Fried liver), fried slices of calf's  liver  served like  hakkebøf , but without the pickles. Sometimes accompanied with fried mushrooms and often substituted with pig's liver. 
 Stegte sild  (Fried herrings).  Herring  has traditionally been a popular fish and there are numerous recipes for fried, pickled or smoked herring served as a main course. [43] 
 Æbleflæsk  (Apple-pork), fried pork slices served with a compote of apple, onion and bacon. 
 Stegt flæsk  med persillesovs , slices of fried belly pork served with  persillesovs  ( white sauce  with chopped parsley) and potatoes. In 2014, voted as the national dish in a vote organised by the Ministry of Environment and Food of Denmark. [44] 
 Medisterpølse , thick, spiced, minced pork sausage, fried and served in a variety of ways.  Rødkål  (see below), rye bread and mustard are classic accompaniments. 
 Gule Ærter  (Yellow peas), a thick and hearty soup of yellow split peas, cooked and served with pork. Served with ryebread and mustard and sometimes  medisterpølse  and potatoes. In some families and in some regions  Gule Ærter  is enjoyed at specific events, traditions or at larger gatherings. [45] [46] 
 Hønsekødssuppe  (Hens-meat-soup). A strong soup boiled on a large  hen  with herbs and vegetables like carrots,  celeriac , onions and  leeks . The meat is usually reserved for other dishes like  Høns i Asparges ,  Høns i peberrod  or chicken salad for  smørrebrød , and the soup is then served on its own with meatballs of pork ( kødboller ), small white dumplings of flour and milk ( melboller ), and a few of the vegetables. [47] 
 Høns i Asparges  (Hens in Asparagus) Boiled hens meat (traditionally from  Hønsekødssuppe ) is cooked with a little chicken soup, a bit of flour and some chopped  white asparagus . Sometimes chopped  champignons  are added. The dish is thickened and flavoured with cream and egg yolks and served with boiled potatoes and a drizzle of parsley. [47] 
 Tarteletter  (Tartlets). Small bowls of crusty pastry. They can be filled with a variety of ingredients, but tradition calls for  Høns i Asparges . [47] [48] 
 Æggekage  (Egg-cake) -- similar to an  omelette . Traditionally served in the pan with fried bacon, sliced tomatoes, copious amounts of chopped  chives  and buttered rye bread. Smoked herring is sometimes offered on the side. 
 Påskelam  (Easter-lamb) grilled lamb with dry herbs and garlic. 
 Culottesteg ,  top sirloin  roast beef with dry herbs served with potatoes and green salad or gravy. 
 Stegt gås , roast  goose  is sometimes served for Christmas. 
 Stegt and , roast  duck  prepared like roast goose, stuffed with apples,  prunes  and  thyme . Most popular Christmas dish in Denmark, often accompanied with  flæskesteg  and almost always with  rødkål . Also served on  Morten's aften  ( St. Martin's Day , November 11), where it has replaced an older tradition of roast goose. 
 Flæskesteg , roast pork with crackling, often served at Christmas. 
 Rødkål , sliced and stewed  red cabbage . Recipes has a large variety, but almost always include vinegar, sugar and some spice, with  cinnamon ,  bay leaves  and  cloves  as common choices, while other recipes adds  allspice  or  cardamom  as well. Apples, onions, and sometimes oranges or red wine might be added, and for more luxurious versions, the cabbage is stewed with duck grease. Served for Christmas, but not exclusively.  Rødkål  is a traditional accompaniment to  flæskesteg ,  medister ,  frikadeller ,  stegt and , and  stegt gås . 
 Brunede kartofler  (Browned potatoes), boiled potatoes caramelized with sugar and butter. Mostly served for Christmas, accompanying the roast duck, goose or pork. 
 Øllebrød  (Beer-bread), a porridge made of rye bread, sugar and beer. Formerly served unsweetened accompanying main courses like fried herring, but now almost exclusively served for breakfast with cold milk or whipped cream. Lemon or orange zest is sometimes added for spice. 
 Millionbøf , (Million-steak), fried ground beef (a million tiny steaks) with gravy. Usually served over pasta or mashed potatoes. 
 Brændende kærlighed  (Burning love), mashed potatoes made with butter and milk or cream. A well is made in the top of the mashed potatoes and filled with a mix of fried diced bacon and onions. 
 Risengrød , (Rice-porridge), a dish that has a special relationship to Christmas. It is traditionally the favorite dish of the  Nisse . Usually served with butter,  cinnamon sugar  and  nisseøl . It is also the basis of the Danish Christmas dessert  Risalamande . 
 Desserts [ edit ] 
 See also:  List of Danish desserts 
 Desserts from the traditional Danish cuisine that are still popular, includes:
 
   " Æblekage ", a cold apple charlotte. 
 Æblekage , (apple charlotte). Stewed sweetened apples layered with butter-roasted bread crumbs and crushed  makroner  (an almond-flavoured  meringue ), topped with whipped cream and sometimes  redcurrant  jelly. Served cold. 
 Citronfromage  (lemon custard). A very thick lemon flavoured  custard  made with both  gelatin  and beaten egg whites with sugar (see  Meringue ). Served cold with whipped cream. Flavouring with  rum  instead of lemon, is a traditional variation known as  Romfromage . [49] 
 Karamelrand  (lit.: Caramel-ridge). A cream and egg based custard flavoured with  caramel  and shaped like a ring. Served cold with a caramel sauce. A traditional variation is  Fløderand , which is flavoured with vanilla and served with pickled fruit, instead of the caramel. [50] 
 Frugtsalat .  Fruit salad  topped with vanilla cream or whipped cream and grated chocolate. This is a more recent addition to the Danish cuisine and tropical or foreign fruits like banana, grapes, orange or pineapple are standard ingredients. Also known as  abemad  (monkey food). [51] 
 Rødgrød med fløde , stewed, thickened red berry compote (usually a mix of strawberries, rhubarb, raspberry) served with cream or as topping on ice cream. 
 Pandekager , a thin, crepe-like  pancake , often sprinkled with confectioner's sugar, rolled up, and served with strawberry jam or vanilla ice cream. Since 2006,  Shrove Tuesday  has been celebrated as Pancake Day in Denmark. [52] 
 Koldskål . A sweet cold buttermilk dish with vanilla and lemon, often served in the summer. 
 Danish strawberries with cream and sugar, served in the summer when in season. [53] 
 Risalamande  (or  ris à l'amande ), a cold  rice pudding  mixed with whipped cream, sugar,  vanilla beans  and chopped almonds, served cold with hot or cold cherry-sauce. Almost exclusively served on festive events related to Christmas and commonly eaten on Christmas Eve in particular. 
 Cakes [ edit ] 
 Cakes are usually not served for dessert in Denmark, but as an occasional sweet treat in between meals or at celebrations and particular festive events. Coffee or tea is usually offered with cakes.
 
 Traditional feasts [ edit ] 
 Danish culture has a number of annual recurring traditional feasts. Most of them are rooted in both the  Norse pagan  tradition and the  Christian  culture, including the most widely celebrated feast of  Christmas , known as  Jul  in Denmark. Christmas and Easter are the most prominent feasts in Danish culture, both in terms of religious and traditional importance but also food wise. A number of smaller feasts such as  Fastelavn  (Carnival),  Pinse  ( Pentecost ) and  Mortensaften  ( St. Martin's Day ), are also of some importance regarding food while other traditional celebrations such as  Grundlovsdag ,  May Day  and  Sankthans  ( St. John's Eve ) are not coupled to the Danish food culture in any special way.
 The celebration of  New Year's Eve  is perhaps on par with both Christmas and Easter in modern times and is also coupled with some strong food traditions. Poached  cod  served with mustard sauce, boiled potatoes and horseradish is traditionally enjoyed as the main course on this evening, known as  nytårstorsk  (New Year's Cod), with  champagne  and  kransekage  served later in the night. [54] [55]  Slices of boiled ham served with stewed kale is another traditional dish for this particular evening. In recent decades, the traditional menus has given way to contemporary gourmet servings in many places, even though the champagne and the  kransekage  remains very popular. [56] 
 
 Christmas [ edit ] 
 There are some regional variations of the traditional Christmas cuisine within Denmark, but it is generally the same across the country. [57] [58]  It includes a lot of spices, in particular  cinnamon ,  cloves  and  cardamom . [59] 
 
 Christmas lunch [ edit ] 
   " Risalamande ", a vanilla flavored rice pudding with almonds for Christmas 
 Julefrokost , or Christmas lunch, is a variation on  Det Kolde Bord  buffet, celebrated on various occasions throughout the whole Christmas month of December. Most communities, workplaces, organisations and associations set aside time for an annual gathering and  julefrokost  on a non-specific Friday or Saturday. This includes coworkers, club members and all kinds of organizations and the festivities often include music and dancing, and usually continues into the early hours of the morning with plentiful drinking. In addition to these public gatherings, there is also tradition for a special family event  julefrokost , but this is celebrated in the home on Christmas Day or shortly after.
 Apart from the standard food items for a Danish cold buffet, Christmas lunch  julefrokost  traditionally also includes some specialities, such as  sylte  (pork meat jelly), fried  blodpølse , and  Risalamande .  Blodpølse  is a sweetened and spiced  blood sausage  with raisins, but it has decreased a lot in popularity since the 19th century. [60]   Risalamande  is a rice pudding served with hot or cold cherry sauce and it is very popular. The pudding consists mainly of sweetened and cooled rice porridge mixed with whipped cream, vanilla and chopped almonds. A popular and traditional game is to put a whole, peeled almond in the common bowl of pudding. The lucky person to find it in his or her serving wins a prize, which in popular traditions would be a pig shaped of marzipan. [61] 
 Juleøl  Christmas beer brews and herb infused  akvavit  spirit is commonly paired with the  julefrokost . All over Denmark,  trains  and  buses  run all night during the  julefrokost  season and the police are on a special lookout for drunk drivers to avoid alcohol related accidents. [61] 
 A special part of not only the  julefrokost  lunch but of many festive, celebratory meals is the  selskabssang  (party song). It is a tradition unique to Denmark, and includes event-specific sing-along songs to traditional tunes, but with lyrics specifically written for the occasion. [62] 
 
 Christmas dinner at home [ edit ] 
   " Flæskesteg ", roast pork with crackling 
 In Denmark, the Christmas dinner is served on the evening of 24 December ( Christmas Eve ). It takes the form of a main dish (usually pork, goose or duck) and the  Risalamande  dessert. The traditional recipes from Frk. Jensen's 1901 cook book (see below) still form the basis of Christmas cooking today. [63] 
 Flæskesteg , a pork roast cut from the breast or neck and with the skin left on, is prepared by cutting the skin through to the meat layer sideways and rubbing it thoroughly with coarse salt flakes and sometimes spices to guarantee crispy tasty cracklings. Slices of roasted  flæskesteg  is served with brown gravy and accompanied by both boiled potatoes and caramelized potatoes ( brunede kartofler ) specially prepared in a frying pan with melted sugar and a lump of butter. Sour-sweet spiced red cabbage is always included too and is widely available in jars and cans. [64] 
 Goose and duck are filled with a stuffing of apple boats and prunes before they are roasted in a hot oven. The bird is served with a brown sauce based on the broth obtained by boiling the heart, neck, liver and gizzard, thickened with a little fat from the bird, flour and sour cream. Gravy browning may be added. [64]  Just like the pork, the bird is served with two kinds of potatoes and red cabbage. [64] 
 
 Easter [ edit ] 
 Holy Saturday lunch [ edit ] 
 Holy Saturday the traditional dish served for lunch is  Skidne æg  (Dirty eggs), [65]  the name referres to fact that the homes were usually dirty on Holy Saturday, as no work and no cleaning or laundry would be done on the two holidays: Maundy Thursday and Good Friday. Skidne æg is medium boiled eggs, served with mustard sauce, cress and ryebread.
 
 Easter Sunday lunch [ edit ] 
 Families gather for lunch on Easter Sunday. The lunch will typically consist three courses, starting with "det kolde bord" with pickled herring, prawns, hard-boiled eggs, tuna, liverpaté and various cold cuts. Strong Easter Brew beer and snaps is usually served. The second dish is a warm dish, that according to tradition should contain either lamb, eggs or chicken. The third dish is cheeses with grapes, red peppers and crackers. [66] 
 
 Restaurants and dining venues [ edit ] 
   Vesterbrogade  in Copenhagen was the location of Denmark's first Burger King (opened 1977) and McDonald's (opened 1981). 
   Many old inns in the countryside serve traditional dishes. 
   Cafés are popular for light meals and some cafés serves as restaurants. 
 Eating out in restaurants can be a costly affair, with the average price running higher than that of the European average. [67]  As a result of the New Nordic Cuisine trend, Danish restaurants are now firmly on the international gourmet map.
 In the big cities, and in shopping districts, there are many more reasonably priced eating places, including such  chain fast food  possibilities as  McDonald's  and  Burger King . The most common quick food restaurant is the "burger bar" or "grill bar", offering  hamburgers ,  hot dogs  and a wide variety of other fast food staples. Pizzerias are equally popular and can be found in every town in the country, large or small. Other commonly found fast foods include Turkish and Middle East food specialties such as  falafel ,  shish-kebab  and spit-roasted meat (most often  shawarma ) with  salad  in  pita bread , or wrapped in durum wheat based  flatbread . [68] 
 
 Restaurants [ edit ] 
 Denmark has many fine dining restaurants, not only in the larger cities, but also in the countryside. The  kro  (roughly equivalent to an inn, but held in higher social regard) provides lodging as well as meals and drinks. Especially the royally privileged lodges have a long and interesting history. [69]  Danish cuisine continues to evolve and keep up with the times. It has become more health-conscious, and has drawn inspiration not only from the traditional French and Italian kitchens, but also from many other more exotic gastronomical sources. Increasingly, restaurants are turning to trends based on a combination of continental cooking and the growing interest in products from the local environment served in accordance with seasonal availability. [9] 
 
 Cafés [ edit ] 
 Another reasonable place to eat is at a  café . These are plentiful, especially in the bigger cities, and usually offer  soups ,  sandwiches ,  salads ,  cakes ,  pastries , and other light foods, in addition to the expected  coffee ,  tea ,  beer  and other  beverages . Quite a few cafés serve breakfast and brunch, and some double as evening restaurants.
 Most cafés in Denmark are unique, but chains are increasingly popular. The Danish coffee-bar chain of Baresso Coffee, founded in 1999, mainly serves coffee and tea related products and is present with many cafés in most larger towns across Denmark, but also in the  Faroe Islands  as well as  Copenhagen Airport  and  MS Crown of Scandinavia . [70]  International café chains has gained ground in the capital of  Copenhagen , currently including two  Starbucks  and several  Caffè Ritazza  (UK), at the  Copenhagen Airport , Magasin Torv by the  Magasin Du Nord  department store, and at  Copenhagen Central Station .
 
 Street food [ edit ] 
 Street food  has made an enormous impact on the way Danes eat in the 2010s, but street food has been part of Danish dining culture for many years. [71] [72] 
 
 Hot dog vans [ edit ] 
   Red sausages ( røde pølser ) 
   A pølsevogn in the city center of  Kolding  ( Jutland ) 
 The  pølsevogn  (lit. sausage wagon)  food truck  is a well-established common fast food option and the "original" street food outlet in Denmark. They serve a variety of pork  sausages , including Denmark's renowned red sausages,  røde pølser . These hot dog-like sausages of the  Vienna type  are about 20 cm long, about the diameter of an index finger and stuffed in brightly coloured red skin.  Røde pølser  are traditionally served on a small, rectangular paper plate with a bread (similar to a  hot dog bun , but without a slice in it) on the side, and a squirt of both  ketchup , Danish  remoulade  sauce and  mustard . Danish remoulade is somewhat similar to American  relish  and the mustard served with sausages is hot and unsweetened. The bread and sausage is eaten alternately, dipped into the condiments. [73]  Typical and classic sausages served from a pølsevogn also includes, thick and juicy  knækpølser  (both red and uncoloured), long thick and grilled  frankfurtere , hearty grilled  medisterpølse , large grilled  kryddersvend  sausages spiced with curry, and  pølse i svøb  (sausage in a wrap) which are a sausage wrapped in and grilled with bacon.
 When the sausage is served in a traditional hot dog bun, it is called a " hot dog ". It is commonly served with Danish remoulade, ketchup, mustard, onion (both raw and toasted, i.e.  ristede ) and thinly sliced pickles on top. The  ristede løg  fried onions are similar in taste to French-fried onion rings. The pickled condiment varies from region to region, and includes  rødkål  red cabbage in some places, but cucumber relish is the most widespread. Another variety is the French hot dog ( Fransk hotdog ) which is a sausage stuffed into a special long  baguette -like bread roll. The roll has a hole in one end, and after the requested condiment has been squirted in (ketchup, mustard, different kinds of dressing), a sausage is slipped through. The simplest sausage wagons are portable and very temporary. They are typically a metal wagon with an open window to the street, and a counter where customers can stand and eat their sausages. More advanced wagons includes limited seating, usually both inside and outside. Through the years the number of sausage wagons has dropped as competition from convenience stores, gas stations, kebab and pizza-places has increased. [73] 
 
 Social dining [ edit ] 
 Food courts  emerged on the Copenhagen dining scene in 2011 and quickly became very popular, inspiring similar initiatives in Aarhus from 2015. [74] [75]  Parallel with the stationary and sheltered food courts, mobile  food trucks  appeared, selling a wide variety of meals at events and random popular spots. This new development is part of a broader popular movement of  social dining  across the country, with a multitude of local  food ,  dining  and  cooking clubs ,  purchasing societies  and  urban farming  projects sprouting among citizens in larger cities. [76] [77] [78] [79] 
 
 Other popular foods [ edit ] 
 Potatoes [ edit ] 
   Roast pork served with both white and caramelized potatoes ( brunede kartofler ) 
 Potato  recipes are ubiquitous in Danish cooking. The potato was first introduced into Denmark by French immigrant  Huguenots  in  Fredericia  in 1720. [80]  The potato is considered an essential side dish to every hot meal. [81] 
 Especially prized are the season's early potatoes, such as those from  Samsø .
 Some favorites:
 
 Au gratin potatoes 
 Baked potatoes with crème fraiche 
 Boiled new potatoes with herbs 
 Potato wedges au natural or baked with beetroots and carrots marinated in olive oil, garlic and dry herbs. 
 Boiled potatoes smothered in butter with fresh dill or chives 
 Caramelized browned potatoes ( brunede kartofler ). Usually an accessory to the Christmas meal, roast goose, duck or pork. 
 Cold sliced potatoes arranged on buttered rye bread and decorated with mayonnaise and chives 
 Mashed potatoes covered with a meat stew 
 Pommes frites  (French fries) 
 Potato salad  ( kartoffelsalat ) 
 Potato and Parsley Broth 
 Vegetables and salads [ edit ] 
   Agurkesalat : pickled cucumber salad 
 Although the potato is the central vegetable in traditional Danish cooking, it is by no means the only vegetable associated with Danish cuisine. Those other vegetables that play an important role often had to be preserved for long periods of time in cold rooms, or were pickled or marinated for storage. Cauliflower, carrots and a variety of cabbages were often a part of the daily meal, especially when in season, in the days prior to widespread refrigeration.
 
 Beans  ( bønner ) 
 Peas ( ærter ) Especially popular when freshly picked. 
 Brussels sprouts  ( rosenkål ) 
 Cabbage  ( kål ) 
 Carrots  ( gulerødder ) 
 Creamed  kale  ( grønlangkål ),  spinach  or white  cabbage 
 Cauliflower  ( blomkål ) 
 Cucumber salad  ( agurkesalat ) 
 Italian salad  ( italiensk salat ), a mixture of vegetables in a mayonnaise dressing, served on  ham  and other cold cuts. The name comes from the red-white-green coloring, the colors of the Italian flag. The salad's colouring originates from carrots, mayonnaise and asparagus, and green peas. 
 Onion  ( løg ) 
 Pickled red  beet  slices ( rødbeder ) 
 Pickles , a mixture of pickled vegetables in a yellow gelatinous sauce, served with corned beef 
 Russian salad ( russisk salat ), a red beet salad (not to be confused with  Olivier salad , which is also known as  Russian salad ). 
 Sweet and sour  red cabbage  ( rødkål ). Sautéed red cabbage, boiled with red currant juice, apples and vinegar. Additional sugar may be added, and sometimes  cinnamon  or cloves. 
 Sauces and condiments [ edit ] 
   Danish remoulade is a widely used condiment 
 Sauces  and  condiments  are an important part of the Danish meal:
 
 Béarnaise sauce , served with beef steaks 
 Brown sauce  ( brun sovs ). Variations include mushroom sauce, onion sauce and herbed brown sauce. 
 Horseradish sauce  ( peberrodssovs ), a cream sauce served with roast beef or prime rib. Sometimes frozen into individual servings for placement on hot roast beef. 
 Ketchup , a must with red sausages, along with  mustard . 
 Mayonnaise , used in food preparation, and as a condiment with  pommes frites  (French fries). A generous dollop of mayonnaise is generally placed on top of shrimp. 
 Mustard  ( sennep ). A wide variety of mustards are available. Traditional mustard is a sharp flavored, dark golden brown, but many other types are used, including dijon, honey-mustard and other specialty flavored variants. Prepared salad mustard (yellow mustard) is generally eaten with red sausage or hot dogs. A special sweet mustard with dill is eaten with smoked salmon (laks). 
 Parsley sauce  ( persillesovs ), a white sauce with generously amounts of chopped fresh parsley. 
 Pepper sauce, served with beef steaks and roasts. 
 Remoulade , a very commonly used condiment. A popular dipping sauce for  pommes frites  (French fries). 
 Whiskey sauce , served with beef steaks and roasts 
 White sauce . Various kinds of blanched vegetables are often added such as peas, peas and carrots, cauliflower, spinach, parsley or shredded cabbage. White sauce is typically flavoured with black pepper and nutmeg. 
 Cheese [ edit ] 
   Danablu  (Danish Blue cheese) 
 Denmark is known for quality dairy products, and that includes cheese. In Denmark, cheese might be served as part of breakfast, lunch or in salads and also as an after-dinner snack, referred to as a so-called  ostebord  (lit.: cheese-table) or  ostetallerken  (lit: cheese-plate) along with grapes, crackers and wine.
 While the most commonly eaten cheese in Denmark is mild, there are also stronger Danish cheeses available, some of which are very pungent. Danish  Blue cheese  can be quite strong, and Danish cheese manufacturers produce molded cheeses that span the range from the mildest and creamiest to the intense blue-veined cheese internationally associated with Denmark. Another strong cheese is  Gamle Ole  (lit: Old Ole – Ole is a man's name), a brand of pungent aged cheese that has matured for a longer period of time. It can be bitingly strong. It is often served in combination with sliced onion and aspic ( sky ) on Danish  rugbrød  spread with lard.  Rum  may be dripped on this pungent cheese prior to serving.
 Strong cheeses are an acquired taste for Danes too. Elderly Danes who find the smell offensive might joke about  Gamle Ole's  smelling up a whole house, just by being in a sealed plastic container in the refrigerator. One might also refer to Gamle Ole's pungency when talking about things that are not quite right, i.e. "they stink". Here one might say that something stinks or smells of  Gamle Ole . [82] 
 Danish cheese is almost exclusively produced from cow's milk. Some well-known Danish cheeses include: [83] 
 
 Danablu , a strong blue creamy cow's milk cheese. 
 Blue Castello , a blue cheese 
 Esrom , a semi-soft and aged cow's milk cheese. Both young and more matured versions are produced. 
 Danbo , a semi-soft and aged cow's milk cheese. Mostly mild in flavor, but extensively aged and more pungent versions are also produced. 
 Mycella , a traditional cow's milk creamy cheese. This cheese is often described as a Danish version of  Gorgonzola . 
 Vesterhavsost , a hard cheese from cow's milk, and aged in caves. Has a slightly nutty flavor. 
 Havarti , a semi-soft cow's milk cheese, named after the experimental farm from which it originated in the mid-19th century. 
 Apetina , a blanched cow's milk cheese. This cheese is often sold sliced up in small cubes, sometimes submerged in herb flavoured oil and used in salads much like Greek  feta . 
 Rygeost  or  røgeost . A smoked fresh soft cream cheese, made of cow's milk and  buttermilk  and an original speciality from the island of Funen. This cheese is spiced with  caraway  seeds and traditionally served with radish, chives and rye bread. [84] 
 In relation to  Apetina , Denmark lost a long legal battle with Greece, [85]  to use the term " feta " for Danish cheese produced using artificially blanched cow's milk. Since July 2002, feta has been a  protected designation of origin  (PDO), which limits the term within the  European Union  to feta made exclusively of sheep's/goat's milk in Greece. [86] [87]  Because of the decision by the European Union, Danish dairy company  Arla Foods  (who also manufacture  Danbo ) changed the name of their Feta product to  Apetina . [88] 
 
 Seasonings and herbs [ edit ] 
   Parsley, used fresh and in sauces 
 Fresh  herbs  are very popular, and a wide variety are readily available at  supermarkets  or local produce stands. Many people grow fresh herbs either in the kitchen window, in window boxes or outside, weather permitting. Most commonly used herbs and other seasonings in Danish cooking: [ citation needed ] 
 
 Bay leaves 
 Black pepper 
 Chives 
 Cress 
 Curry powder 
 Dill 
 Garlic 
 Parsley 
 Rosemary 
 Thyme 
 Oregano 
 Other spices used in the traditional Danish cuisine includes  nutmeg ,  carraway ,  juniper ,  allspice  and  ginger  (powder and candied). In modern times, the use and variety of spices has increased and now spices like  chilli ,  paprika ,  basil  and  star anise  is used widely.
 
 Fruit [ edit ] 
   Fresh strawberries, a Danish summertime favourite 
 Similarly to vegetables,  fruit  had to withstand long storage during the winter to become a part of the traditional cuisine. Fruit is generally eaten in smaller portions, often as an accompaniment to cheese, or as decoration with desserts.
 Fruit that is traditionally associated with Danish cuisine:
 
 Apples  ( Æbler ) Popular in traditional dishes as 'winter apples' store well. Can be fried and served with  Flæsk  (thick bacon) 
 Blackcurrant  ( Solbær ), literally 'sun berries' 
 Cherries  ( Kirsebær ) When in season eaten fresh. But famously cooked into cherry sauce, traditionally served over rice pudding ( risalamande ) at Christmas. Also used in making Heering, a famous cherry liqueur, produced in Denmark. 
 Gooseberry  ( Stikkelsbær ) literally 'thorny berries'. Used for stewed gooseberries ( stikkelsbærgrød ). 
 Pears  ( Pærer ) 
 Plums  ( Blommer ) 
 Raspberries  ( Hindbær ) 
 Redcurrants  ( Ribs ) Made to jelly or simply mixed raw with sugar as ( Rysteribs ), served to roast. 
 Strawberries  ( Jordbær ), literally 'earth berries' 
 A combination of strawberries, red currants, black currants, blueberries and mulberries is known as "forest fruits" ( skovbær ) and is a common component in tarts and marmalades. A popular dessert is  rødgrød , made from one or more kinds of berries or rhubarbs, boiled down to a red porridge. It is served with cream, sometimes milk.
 " Rødgrød med fløde " is often jokingly used by Danes as a  shibboleth , as it contains the soft "d" several times, which most foreigners find difficult to pronounce.
 
 Baked goods [ edit ] 
   " Rundstykker ", Danish breakfast rolls 
 Bread is a very important part of the Danish table. [89]  It is enjoyed at home, in the workplace or in restaurants and is usually based primarily on  rugbrød , which is sour-dough  rye bread . It is a dark, heavy bread which is sometimes bought pre-sliced, in varieties from light-colored  rye , to very dark, and refined to  whole grain . Rugbrød forms the basis of  smørrebrød  (see above). [90]  Many people still bake at home, particularly  boller , which are small bread rolls, and often the traditional  kringle , which is a pastry filled with  Zante currants  and  remonce  paste. The Danish  franskbrød  (lit: French-bread) are leavened wheat breads, roughly equivalent to  white bread . Franskbrød are available in many varieties, ranging from whole wheat to pumpkin, chestnut, or poppy-seed sprinkled loaves and loaves containing maize, müsli or honey. Some loaves are made with alternative wheat sorts like  emmer  or  spelt  and some contains small amounts of low-gluten grains such  rye . Leavened brown loaves are also referred to as  franskbrød . [91]  People often eat  jam  with cheese on crusty white bread for  breakfast , and also very thin slices of  chocolate , called  pålægschokolade . Because of the popular rye bread, Danes eat less wheat bread than most other western countries, even though bread is part of most daily meals.
 
 Cakes [ edit ] 
 Denmark has a large variety of cakes and in 1997, the bakers guild launched the now countrywide celebration of  Kagens Dag  (Day of the Cake) as an annual recurring event in April–May. [92] [93]  The region of  Sønderjylland  has become known for its concept of  Sønderjydsk kaffebord , serving copious amounts of coffee and regional cakes on gatherings and festive afternoons. [94] [95]  Typical Danish cakes include:
 
   " Kanelsnegl ". In Denmark, Danish pastry comes in many shapes and sizes. 
   " Småkager ". Denmark is a noted exporter of butter cookies. 
 Wienerbrød  (Danish pastry)  – Denmark has a large variety of Danish pastries; most of the recipes are based on the same kind of dough.
 Kringle  – a pretzel-shaped Danish pastry. It has symbolized bakers in Denmark since the early Middle Ages, and in the United States "kringle" is associated with the country of Denmark. [96] 
 Kagemand  ("cake-man") – a Danish pastry in the shape of a man. Decorated with icing and candy. Traditionally served at children's birthday parties. In a traditional game, before serving, the head is cut off the cake man while the children scream loudly. 
 Småkager  ("small-cakes") –  Cookies , usually baked hard and crusty in an oven, but both pan and deep fried versions exist. There is a large variety of  småkager  in Denmark. Most of the recipes came about when  stoves  became common property in the last part of the 1800s, but some recipes like  Klejner  and  Pebernødder  have been around since the Middle Ages. Quite a few recipes are associated with Christmas. [97]  Denmark has a significant export of quality  butter cookies . [98] 
 Pebernødder  – ("pepper nuts") – A small, spicy cookie associated with Christmas. Traditionally used in a number of games. 
 Vaniljekranse  – Vanilla-flavoured butter cookies in a ring-shape. [99] 
 Flødekager  ("cream-cakes") – These cakes earn their name from the generous amounts of whipped cream used to make them and are served cold. The many varieties do not always include baked ingredients. They were largely introduced in the 1800s and 1900s when  Konditorier  became popular in larger towns. A  Konditori  is the Danish version of the French  patisserie , and they were booming in the 1940s and 1950s. [100] 
 Lagkage  ( layer cake ) – This cake has thin sponge cake layers, often with mashed berries and whipped cream or custard between the layers and decorated with fruit on top. Layer cakes are usually considered a  flødekage  in Denmark. They are often used to celebrate birthdays, on which occasion they will traditionally be decorated with as many lit candles as the age of the celebrated individual. He is then supposed to blow them all out in one try or he will be in bad luck. Some Danish layer cakes follow strict recipes like the  Rugbrødslagkage  made with crumbled and toasted rye bread or the  Othellolagkage , made with marzipan and chocolate cream. [101] [95] 
 Gåsebryst  ("Goose breast") consists of a crisp  puff pastry  bottom with a generous spread of  prune  jam and a thick layer of whipped cream on top. The cake is wrapped in a thinly rolled layer of marzipan. Several slight variations exists and this particular cream cake is also popular in Norway. [95] 
 Tørkager  ("dry-cakes") – As the name implies this kind of cake comprise dry cakes, as compared to the moist cream cakes and layer cakes, and they are often made with sweet  shortcrust  dough and served cold.
 Kransekage  ("ringcake") is a  marzipan -based cake, usually served at special celebrations and on  New Year's Eve . It comes in various shapes and sizes. A popular arrangement consists of a stack of ring shaped cakes of increasingly smaller size, creating an upside down cone form. The cake rings are decorated with white icing, and the arrangement is decorated with small red-and-white Danish paper flags. On special occasions they will hide a bottle of champagne.  Kransekage  is typically served with champagne on New Year's Eve or to celebrate weddings, "round" birthdays and anniversaries. 
 Studenterbrød  ("graduates-bread") is a popular cold confectionery cake consisting of scratch-made thick  cookie butter  on a thin crispy crust of shortcrust dough with a spread of raspberry jam in-between. The cookie butter is flavoured with  cocoa powder  and rum, although the more inexpensive rum essence is normally used. Topped with chocolate icing and sprinkles. 
 Hindbærsnitte  ("raspberry-slice") consists of two thin and crusty baked pieces of shortcrust with a spread of raspberry jam in between, covered in white icing and sprinkles. Similar to  Alexandertorte 
 Pies and tarts
 Strawberry pie – very popular in the summer. Normally sold in bakeries with a chocolate covered crust and filled with marzipan. 
 Apple pie – oven baked. Served either hot or cold, usually with a dollop of  crème fraîche  or whipped cream, occasionally vanilla ice cream. 
 Other cakes
 Æbleskiver  ("apple slices") – Fried spherical cakes made in special pans. Contrary to the name,  æbleskiver  is not made with apples, but of a puffy pancake dough with buttermilk and cardamom. Danes eat them hot throughout December as a Christmas tradition, served with both  confectioner's sugar  and jam (strawberry or black currant). 
 Pandekager  ( pancakes ) – These are thin pancakes usually served with jam, granulated sugar and sometimes vanilla ice cream and rolled up before eaten. 
 
 
 
 
 " Napoleons Hat ", a marzipan-filled cake dipped in dark chocolate
 
 
 
 
 
 
 " Tebirkes ", a Danish pasty with poppy seeds
 
 
 
 
 
 
 " Æbleskiver "
 
 
 
 
 
 
 " Kransekage "
 
 
 
 
 
 
 " Fastelavnsboller ", carnival cakes
 
 
 
 
 
 
 " Kagemand "
 
 
 
 
 
 
 " Othellolagkage "
 
 
 
 
 
 
 " Kaj kage ", cream cakes resembling a frog [102] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 " Gåsebryst ", a cream cake with marzipan
 
 
 
 
 Sweets [ edit ] 
 Denmark is not a noted exporter of candies, but Danes eat more candy per capita than other countries. [103] 
 
   Liquorice and banana candy 
 Chocolate  – Denmark has a long tradition of producing chocolate known worldwide, the most famous brand is  Anthon Berg . 
 Liquorice  – A very popular herb extraction in Denmark used for a number of widely available sweets, but also ice cream, desserts and in some dishes as well.  Salmiaklakrids , flavoured with  salmiak , and salty  Salt lakrids  are typical  Danish  candy. Denmark produces some of the strongest liquorice in the world and many  Danes  have a tendency to put liquorice (“lakrids” in Danish) on many other foods. 
 Marzipan  – A typical treat for Christmas, but enjoyed year round and also exported. Marzipan in Denmark is typically less sweet and with a higher content of almonds (or other nuts) than what you normally find elsewhere. The largest and best known exporter is perhaps  Anthon Berg . However, in Denmark, only  Ægte Marcipan  (True Marzipan) is required to contain almonds; for ordinary marzipan,  apricot kernels  are widely used as substitutes for the more expensive almonds. Marzipan made with  pistachios  or  walnuts  is also sold but is not as common. [104] [105] 
 Wine gums  – While similar looking and often similar branded as in other European countries, Danish wine gums are much less sweet and have more texture. 
 There also exists a vast number of other types of sweets and candy, ranging from  gumdrops  and  dragée  to mints and  caramel  sweets. A concept known as  Bland selv slik  (literally "mix-yourself candy") is common in Danish supermarkets and kiosks. It comprises a number of lined-up containers, usually between 20 and 50, each with a different kind of candy, and customers then service themselves with a paper bag and a small scoop. The paper bag is then weighed, and paid for.
 Both Danish and imported candy are found in these box assortments, and the shape, texture and flavor differences are often very creative. Candy has been manufactured resembling a vast number of objects, such as flying saucers, tennis racquets, soccer balls, butterflies, and even teeth and toothbrushes. [106] 
 
 Drinks [ edit ] 
 Traditional or popular drinks consumed in Denmark includes:
 
   Along with other Nordic countries, Denmark is among the largest consumers (per capita) of coffee in the world. 
 Coffee  ( Kaffe ).  Filter coffee  is the most popular way to make coffee, closely followed by  pressing . The coffee is mostly had black, but milk and sugar is usually offered. It is drunk throughout the day and evening, and always in the morning. Nearly all cafés serves a wide variety of coffee brews, from  espresso  to  flat white  and  caffè latte . Coffee is a very popular beverage throughout the Nordic countries and Denmark has the fifth highest coffee consumption per capita in the world. [107] 
 Chocolate milk  ( kakaomælk ) and  hot chocolate  ( varm kakao ). Cold chocolate milk is widely consumed and hot chocolate can be had in most cafés. At home, hot chocolate is often served to children as an essential part of family  hygge . [108] [109] 
 Hyldeblomstsaft . Sweetened elderflower drink, often mixed at home with added water. Sometimes served hot in the winter but usually cold. [110] 
 Danskvand , or  hvid vand , is simply  carbonated water . It is often flavoured with citrus. 
 Saftevand , a diluting juice made from concentrated and sweetened fruit syrup. The syrup is mixed with plain water by the consumer and served right away. In former times, diluting juices were a luxury product in Denmark, because of the limited availability of sugar, but from the 1980s and 90s, the consumption had risen to the popularity it experiences today. Many different kinds, including artificial products. [111] 
 Sodavand  are  soft drinks  of various flavours and it has long been a very popular drink. International brands like Coca-Cola, Pepsi, Fanta and Sprite is widely consumed, but there are many local brands of soft drinks as well, some of which are unique. This includes Nikoline (without artificial flavours),  Tuborg Squash ,  Faxe Kondi  or the traditional  citronvand  (lemon soda) and  hindbærbrus  (raspberry soda). [112] 
 Notable alcoholic beverages includes:
 
   Øl og snaps , (beer and akvavit) 
 Akvavit , usually called  snaps . A clear, high proof spirit made from potatoes but, unlike vodka, always flavoured with herbs (dill,  caraway ,  sweetgale , etc.) [113] 
 Beer  ( øl ) has been widely consumed in Denmark for millennia. Carlsberg and Tuborg are two large Danish producers with a notable export. Drinking a "pilsner" is a favored activity by many Danes after work or, when relaxing or socialising. The  pilsner  type is the dominant beer type, but many other types are available. In the 2000s, small breweries have been budding up all over the country with new local brews of all kinds. [114] 
 Bitters . The most popular bitter is  Gammel Dansk  (translated, Old Danish). [113] 
 Mjød , mead is known from the Norse Mythology and is rarely consumed in Denmark. [115] 
 Fruit  wines . Cherry wine, apple wine, black currant wine, elderberry wine. 
 Gløgg , hot punch made with red wine, brandy and sherry with raisins and almonds. Spiced with cloves and cinnamon, part of the Christmas tradition. [116] 
 Wine  ( vin ) is ever more popular. Almost exclusively imported wines, as  Danish wine  is only produced in small quantities and is still rare to find outside speciality shops. [117] 
 Criticism [ edit ] 
 The Danish food culture is sometimes criticized by gastronomes and nutritionists.
 Substantial criticism has been directed at the nutritional content of Danish food; for example, at the ratio of meat, side dishes, and greens on the plate. Nutrition information campaigns have been trying to get the Danes to become healthier by eating less meat, fat, and sugar, and more raw vegetables. Instead of a healthier diet, however, the results too often have been feelings of guilt and a view of food as something which is just the correct fuel for the body's machinery. [118] 
 Historian Søren Mørch has characterized the Danish cuisine as a "garbage kitchen" of insipid, sweet and unspiced "baby food" where the tastes of milk and sweetness forms the key elements. He believes that it arose because the export policy of the Danish food sector was to use the Danish home market as a "gutter" for left over products, after high quality bacon and butter had been sold abroad. Skimmed milk, meat scraps only suitable for chopping up, and the replacement product  margarine , are all products which Søren Mørch describes as residue products. [119] 
 
 Frøken Jensens Kogebog [ edit ] 
   Cover to Frk. Jensens Kogebog, 1901 
 The cookery book was published by  Kristine Marie Jensen  (1858–1923) in 1901 and titled  Frk. Jensens Kogebog  (Miss Jensen's Cookbook) is considered by many Danes to contain all the authentic recipes for traditional dishes as well as for baking bread, cakes, and biscuits. It has been reprinted dozens of times and new editions can be found in most Danish bookshops today. When Danes prepare meals for special occasions, for example at Christmas time, they frequently follow Frøken Jensen's detailed descriptions. [120] [121]  The book has not been translated into English but many of the traditional Danish recipes on English-language websites are those of Frøken Jensen. The original edition (only in Danish) is available online. [122] 
 
 See also [ edit ] 
 Faroese cuisine 
 Greenlandic cuisine 
 List of Christmas dishes 
 Sønderjysk kaffebord 
 Literature [ edit ] 
 Kristine Marie Jensen (2008):  Frøken Jensens Kogebog   Archived  2014-10-18 at the  Wayback Machine ,  (in Danish)  1st ed., Gyldendal.  ISBN   9788702070385 The first revised and updated edition by Nanna Simonsen. Published on K.M. Jensens 150 year birthday. 
 Bent Christensen (2008):  Gastronomien i Danmark , Lindhart og Ringhof Forlag,  ISBN   978-87-11-43071-2   (in Danish) The story of the most famous chefs and the best restaurants in Denmark since WW II. 
 Bettina Buhl (2015):  Danskernes Småkager – et småkageleksikon , Gyldendal  (in Danish) Småkager  in Denmark from a food-historical viewpoint. 
 Bettina Buhl (2017):  Sovs skal der til – opskrifter & historie , Gyldendal  (in Danish) Sauces in the traditional Danish cuisine from a food-historical viewpoint. 
 References [ edit ] 
 
 
 ^   Rasmus Holmgård (16 July 2009).  "We drink more wine and less beer"  (in Danish). Holmgårds . Retrieved  18 October  2014 . 
 
 ^   Ritzaus Bureau (16 October 2002).  "Wine consumption drops after 40 years" .  BT  (in Danish) . Retrieved  18 October  2014 . 
 
 ^   "Food and drink in the middle ages" .  danmarkshistorien.dk  (in Danish). Aarhus University . Retrieved  19 October  2014 . 
 
 ^   "Herbs, spices and vegetables in the Viking period" . The National Museum of Denmark. Archived from  the original  on 18 March 2015 . Retrieved  19 October  2014 . 
 
 ^  a   b   "La cuisine danoise"   Archived  2010-01-02 at the  Wayback Machine ,  Ambassade du Danemark Luxembourg .  (in French)  Retrieved 6 December 2011. 
 
 ^  a   b   "Histoire de la gastronomie danoise" [ permanent dead link ] , Le Danemark, ses produits et sa gastronomie, Sirha , 22-26 janvier 2011, Eurexpo Lyon".  (in French)  Retrieved 6 December 2011. 
 
 ^   Also known as  krebinetter . See  "Krebinetter eller karbonader?"  (in Danish). Gastromand. 14 October 2017. 
 
 ^   Bettina Buhl, "Pålæg – fladt eller højtbelagt – en historisk køkkenvandring" [ permanent dead link ] ,  Dansk Landbrugsmuseum .  (in Danish)  Retrieved 8 December 2011. 
 
 ^  a   b   "Denmark Special"   Archived  2012-04-26 at the  Wayback Machine ,  Food & design , #9 2011. Retrieved 11 December 2011. 
 
 ^   "Noma"   Archived  2011-12-08 at the  Wayback Machine ,  The S.Pellegrino World's 50 Best Restaurants . Retrieved 9 December 2011. 
 
 ^   "New Scandinavian Cooking"   Archived  2011-11-15 at the  Wayback Machine ,  BBC Lifestyle . Retrieved 12 December 2011. 
 
 ^   Meyer, Claus:  Almanak , Copenhagen, Lindhardt og Ringhof , 2010, 694 p.  (in Danish) 
Extent 694 s.  ISBN   978-87-11-43070-5 
 
 ^   Unni Kjærnes (ed.), "Eating Patterns: A Day in the Lives of Nordic Peoples" ,  National Institute for Consumer Research , Lysaker, Norway, 2001, p. 13 et seq. Retrieved 6 December 2011. 
 
 ^   "Cuisine in Denmark"   Archived  2011-11-18 at the  Wayback Machine ,  @llo' Expat Denmark . Retrieved 9 December 2011. 
 
 ^   "Dagligt Brød"   Archived  2011-12-14 at the  Wayback Machine ,  Møllebageriet.dk .  (in Danish)  Retrieved 7 December 2011. 
 
 ^   Else-Marie Boyhus and Claus Meyer, "Breakfast"   Archived  2011-12-13 at the  Wayback Machine ,  Denmark.dk . Retrieved 5 December 2011. 
 
 ^   "Les repas"   Archived  2012-04-26 at the  Wayback Machine ,  VisitDanmark.fr .  (in French)  Retrieved 5 December 2011. 
 
 ^   Dorthe Boss Kyhn (8 January 2013).  "Så er øllebrøden tilbage i varmen"  (in Danish). DR . Retrieved  11 November  2014 . 
 
 ^   "Danish lunch"   Archived  2011-12-04 at the  Wayback Machine ,  Denmark.dk . Retrieved 5 December 2011. 
 
 ^  a   b   Else-Marie Boyhus and Claus Meyer, "Dinner"   Archived  2011-12-13 at the  Wayback Machine ,  Denmark.dk . Retrieved 6 December 2011. 
 
 ^   "Smørrebrød" ,  Den Store Danske .  (in Danish)  Retrieved 7 December 2011. 
 
 ^  a   b   "Danish Food Culture" ,  Copenhagen Portal . Retrieved 7 December 2011. 
 
 ^   "Dyrlægens natmad" ,  Den Store Danske .  (in Danish)  Retrieved 7 December 2011 
 
 ^   "Stjerneskud" ,  Den Store Danske . Retrieved 7 December 2011. 
 
 ^  a   b   "Koldt bord" ,  Den Store Danske .  (in Danish)  Retrieved 8 December 2017. 
 
 ^   Nanna Simonsen (21 December 2013).  "Sild til julefrokosten på syv måder [Herring for the Christmas-lunch in seven ways]" .  Berlingske  (in Danish) . Retrieved  8 December  2017 . 
 
 ^   "Dejlige julesild fra danske kroer [Lovely Christmas-herring from Danish Inns]"  (in Danish). ALT. 7 December 2014 . Retrieved  8 December  2017 . 
 
 ^   Camilla Zarah Lawes, Louisa Lorang (31 October 2011).  "Hjemmelavet sild til julen [Homemade herring for Christmas]" .  femina  (in Danish) . Retrieved  8 December  2017 . 
 
 ^   Nanna Simonsen (18 December 2009).  "Stegte sild i lage" .  Berlingske  (in Danish) . Retrieved  8 December  2017 . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   "Udvalgte Traditionelle Danske Retter"   Archived  2014-03-13 at the  Wayback Machine ,  København Spiseder .  (in Danish)  Retrieved 8 December 2011. 
 
 ^   Nanna Simonsen (4 December 2009).  "Sådan laver du julesylten [This is how you make the Christmas- sylte ]" .  Berlingske  (in Danish) . Retrieved  8 December  2017 . 
 
 ^   "Cods roe 600 g seasonal item" .  Fiskehuset  (in Danish). Archived from  the original  on 23 October 2014 . Retrieved  17 October  2014 . 
 
 ^   Ulrik Baltzer (5 February 2014).  "Roe Scam" .  Ekstrabladet  (in Danish) . Retrieved  17 October  2014 . 
 
 ^   Merete Wandall (1963):  Morsomme silderetter , Husmoderens Bibliotek – Spektrum  (in Danish) 
 
 ^   "Årets Sildeopskrift [Herring recipe of the year]"  (in Danish). Visit Denmark. Archived from  the original  on 8 December 2017 . Retrieved  8 December  2017 . 
 
 ^   "Danish Pig Meat Industry" . Danish Agriculture & Food Council . Retrieved  5 May  2018 . 
 
 ^  a   b   "Fakta om kødforbrug [Facts about meat consumption]"  (in Danish). Landbrug & Fødevarer. 1 March 2016. Archived from  the original  on 6 May 2018 . Retrieved  5 May  2018 . 
 
 ^   "Travel Denmark" . Retrieved 30 December 2011. 
 
 ^   Lars Dahlager (25 August 2017).  "Det vegetariske breder sig: Salget af kød i Coop falder" .  Politiken  (in Danish) . Retrieved  5 May  2018 . 
 
 ^   Niels Philip Kjeldsen (4 February 2017).  "Vi spiser mindre kød [We eat less meat]"  (in Danish). Søndagsavisen . Retrieved  5 May  2018 . 
 
 ^   Inger Abildgaard (30 September 2011).  "Save 10 endangered dishes" .  Samvirke  (in Danish). Archived from  the original  on 17 October 2014 . Retrieved  18 October  2014 . 
 
 ^  a   b   Hanne Bloch.  "Classic of the Week: "Hjerter i Flødesovs" " .  hjemmet  (in Danish). Archived from  the original  on 22 October 2014 . Retrieved  18 October  2014 . 
 
 ^   "Homemade  Stegte Sild " .  sildeelsker.dk  (in Danish). Lykkeberg. Archived from  the original  on 22 October 2014 . Retrieved  17 October  2014 . 
 
 ^   "Denmark's Official National Food: Crispy Pork with Parsley Sauce" . VisitDenmark – The official tourism site of Denmark. Archived from  the original  on 10 June 2016 . Retrieved  20 May  2016 . 
 
 ^   "Familien Løcke" .  guleærter.dk  (in Danish). Møllerens. Archived from  the original  on 22 October 2014 . Retrieved  17 October  2014 . 
 
 ^   " "Gule Ærter" – Split-Pea Soup – A Old National and Everyday Dish" .  Danish Food Culture . Copenhagen Portal. Archived from  the original  on 22 August 2015 . Retrieved  17 October  2014 . . Beware: This is not always a solid source. 
 
 ^  a   b   c   Homemade  Hønsekødssuppe  and  tartelatter  with  Høns i asparges .   (in Danish) . A private blog. 
 
 ^   "Tarteletter" .  viskalspise.dk  (in Danish). Coop . Retrieved  17 October  2014 . 
 
 ^   Camilla Plum (7 May 2013).  "Recipe for Citronfromage" .  Søndag  (in Danish). Archived from  the original  on 22 October 2014 . Retrieved  17 October  2014 . 
 
 ^   "Desserts – Karamelrand" .  Opskrifter – De Gamle Danske  (in Danish). 27 August 2011 . Retrieved  17 October  2014 . 
 
 ^   "Abemad med råcreme"  (in Danish). Alletiders Kogebog. 26 April 2006 . Retrieved  18 October  2014 . 
 
 ^   Rydzy, Mikkel Sander (24 February 2009).  "I dag er det store Pandekagedag"  [Today is Pancake Day].  Berlingske  (in Danish) . Retrieved  5 June  2016 . 
 
 ^   Strawberries have a short season in the Danish climate, but a more intense fruit flavour. 
 
 ^   "Hvorfor spiser vi nytårstorsk?" .  Historie-online.dk . Retrieved  2 August  2017 . 
 
 ^   Traditional recipe for  nytårstorsk :  Hel nytårstorsk med baconsmør, peberrod, rødbeder, hakkede æg og fiskesennepssauce  Skagen Foods  (in Danish) 
 
 ^   "Derfor har vi så skøre nytårstraditioner"  [This is why we have such crazy New Year's traditions].  B.dk  (in Danish). Berlingske. 31 December 2008 . Retrieved  22 May  2021 . 
 
 ^   Lena Masri (21 December 2013).  "Det spiser danskerne juleaften [This is what the Danes eat on Christmas Eve]" .  Berlingske  (in Danish) . Retrieved  8 December  2017 . 
 
 ^   Laura Labarca Clausen (1 December 2011).  "Så forskelligt spiser vi julemaden [This is how different we eat Christmas-food]" .  Berlingske  (in Danish) . Retrieved  8 December  2017 . 
 
 ^   Kasper Iversen (14 December 2014).  "Julestemningen sidder i krydderierne [The Christmas spirit is in the spices]" .  Politiken  (in Danish) . Retrieved  8 December  2017 . 
 
 ^   Kasper Iversen (23 December 2012).  "Et stykke med fortid: Blodig juleklassiker er på retræte [A piece of the past: Bloody Christmas-classic is on retreat]" .  Politiken  (in Danish) . Retrieved  8 December  2017 . 
 
 ^  a   b   "Christmas in Denmark" ,  Welcome to my Copenhagen . Retrieved 8 December 2011. 
 
 ^   "Festsange" ,  EMU .  (in Danish)  Retrieved 8 December 2011. 
 
 ^   "Recipes for Christmas dinners"   Archived  2011-11-28 at the  Wayback Machine ,  Denmark.dk . Retrieved 13 December 2011. 
 
 ^  a   b   c   "Danish Christmas dinner"   Archived  2019-09-17 at the  Wayback Machine ,  Wonderful Denmark . Retrieved 13 December 2011. 
 
 ^   "Skidne Æg – Smiling Eggs In Mustard Sauce" .  Mydanishkitchen.com . 17 March 2014 . Retrieved  2 August  2017 . 
 
 ^   "Mad og menu til påskefrokosten, læs om den gode påskefrokost her" .  Godpaaske.dk . Retrieved  2 August  2017 . 
 
 ^   "Eurostat News Release: Consumer price levels in 2008 (104/2009)"   (PDF) . Eurostat Press Office. 6 July 2009. Archived from  the original   (PDF)  on 4 June 2011 . Retrieved  4 Sep  2010 . 
 
 ^   "Danish-food" ,  Denmark-Getaway.com . Retrieved 8 December 2011. 
 
 ^   "Warm-welcome Inns" ,  VisitDenmark . Retrieved 8 December 2011. 
 
 ^   "Baresso Coffee" . 
 
 ^   "Det vrimler med madmarkeder: Her kan du finde dem"  [Food markets are swarming: Here you can find them] (in Danish). TV2 Lorry. 1 May 2018 . Retrieved  13 October  2018 . 
 
 ^   "Aarhus er gået Street Food amok"  [Aarhus has gone Street Food amok] (in Danish). Gastromand. 31 October 2016 . Retrieved  13 October  2018 . 
 
 ^  a   b   Mylius Thomsen, Allan (2006). Café Fodkold – Eventyret om den danske pølsevogn. Copenhagen: Lindhardt & Ringhof.  ISBN   87-90189-15-9 . 
 
 ^   Noe Habermann (1 September 2011).  "Storbyens spisekammer"  [The big city's pantry] (in Danish). Magasinet KBH . Retrieved  13 October  2018 . 
 
 ^   "Street food-bølgen rammer Aarhus"  [The street food wave hits Aarhus].  Århus Stiftstidende  (in Danish). 10 December 2015 . Retrieved  13 October  2018 . 
 
 ^   Elisabeth Eskildsen (11 May 2014).  "Madklubber med ukendte venner er et nyt fænomen"  [Food clubs with unknown friends is a new phenomenon].  Politiken . Retrieved  13 October  2018 . 
 
 ^   Lea Pagh (28 May 2012).  "Madklubber er kropslig nydelse, vi kan dyrke sammen"  [Food clubs are bodily pleasure we can cultivate together].  Politiken . Retrieved  13 October  2018 . 
 
 ^   "Sammen dyrker vi byen – Urban farming"  [Collectively we cultivate the city – Urban farming] (in Danish). University of Copenhagen. February 2016 . Retrieved  13 October  2018 . 
 
 ^   "Urban Farming strategi"  (in Danish). Landsforeningen Praktisk Økologi. 27 May 2015 . Retrieved  13 October  2018 . 
 
 ^   "Cuisine of Denmark"   Archived  2012-04-26 at the  Wayback Machine   Eatoutzone.com . Retrieved 31 December 2011 
 
 ^   "Danish Food and Danish Recipes" ,  Danishnet.com . Retrieved 8 December 2011. 
 
 ^   "Danish Cuisine"   Archived  2012-04-26 at the  Wayback Machine .  Sattlers.net . Retrieved 31 December 2011. 
 
 ^   "Cheeses by country – Denmark" .  Cheese.com . Retrieved  27 June  2015 . 
 
 ^   "Røgeost"  (in Danish). Arla . Retrieved  27 June  2015 . 
 
 ^   The Feta Legend drawing to a close, Press release by the Danish Dairy Board 4 March 2005   [1]  Accessed 12 December 2006 
 
 ^   Feta battle won, but terms must be obeyed,  Kathimerini  newspaper archived article 16 Oct 2002   "Ekathimerini.com | Feta battle won, but terms must be obeyed" . Archived from  the original  on 2008-06-30 . Retrieved  2008-07-06 .  Accessed 12 December 2006. 
 
 ^   Protected Designation of Origin entry on the European Commission website.  "Agriculture – Quality Policy" . Archived from  the original  on 2008-06-29 . Retrieved  2008-07-06 . 
 
 ^   Apetina skal markedsføres som feta-mærke   Archived  2012-06-06 at the  Wayback Machine .  (in Danish)  Retrieved 1 January 2012. 
 
 ^   "About Brødbanken – Bank of Bread" .  Brødbanken . The National Museum of Denmark. 27 June 2012 . Retrieved  18 October  2014 .  A collection of facts and stories about bread and baking in the Nordic countries. 
 
 ^   "Rugbrød" ,  Den Store Danske .  (in Danish)  Retrieved 7 December 2011. 
 
 ^   "Alle franskbrød"   Archived  2013-05-25 at the  Wayback Machine ,  Kohlberg .  (in Danish)  Retrieved 7 December 2011. 
 
 ^   "Kagens Dag"  (in Danish). Bager- og Konditormestre i Danmark (BKD) . Retrieved  18 October  2014 . 
 
 ^   "Kagens Dag – en idé, der gør godt!"  (in Danish). Københavns Bagerlaug . Retrieved  18 October  2014 . 
 
 ^   Inge Adriansen (1998).  "Det sønderjyske kaffebord – et samspil mellem nationalpolitik og kosttradition"  (in Danish). Grænseforeningen. Archived from  the original  on August 19, 2007 . Retrieved  18 October  2014 .  A critical review and historical analysis with recipes. 
 
 ^  a   b   c   Fie Kruse (27 June 2012).  "21 cakes that was invented in Denmark" .  Samvirke  (in Danish). Coop . Retrieved  18 October  2014 . 
 
 ^   "Faglig stolthed og traditioner".  Historien om Københavns Bagerlaug  (in Danish). Københavns Bagerlaug. Archived from  the original  on 29 September 2013 . Retrieved  18 October  2014 . 
 
 ^   "Småkager" .  historie-online.dk  (in Danish). Dansk Historisk Fællesråd . Retrieved  18 October  2014 . 
 
 ^   Nikolai Steensgaard (11 June 2012).  "Danish småkager sells big time in China" .  Berlingske Business  (in Danish) . Retrieved  18 October  2014 . 
 
 ^   Rikke Gryberg (25 November 2009).  "Vaniljekranse" .  Politiken  (in Danish) . Retrieved  11 November  2014 . 
 
 ^   Henrik Palle and Joakim Grundahl (31 October 2008).  "Kaffeslabberas Guide: Byens lækreste konditorier" .  Politiken  (in Danish). Archived from  the original  on 22 October 2014 . Retrieved  18 October  2014 . 
 
 ^   Isabellas:  Rugbrødslagkage med flødeskum og chokolade   (in Danish) 
 
 ^   "Kaj" is a Danish male name and refers to a celebrated  frog-character  from Danish children's TV. 
 
 ^   Richardson, Tim H. (2002).  Sweets: A History of Candy . Bloomsbury USA. pp.  375 .  ISBN   1-58234-229-6 . 
 
 ^   Marcipan er ikke altid fyldt med mandler [Marzipan is not always filled with almonds]  Danmarks Radio  (in Danish) 
 
 ^   Ægte marcipan er en dyr fornøjelse [True marzipan is an expensive pleasure]  TÆNK  (in Danish) 
 
 ^   Mobilereference (2007).  Travel Denmark .  ISBN   978-1-60501-137-0 . Retrieved  29 November  2015 . 
 
 ^   Jones, Lora (2018-04-13).  "Coffee: Who grows, drinks and pays the most?" .  BBC News . Retrieved  2018-05-13 . 
 
 ^   "Danskerne er vilde med kakaomælk [Danes are crazy about chocolate milk]" .  Politiken  (in Danish). 14 July 2004 . Retrieved  21 May  2018 . 
 
 ^   "Arla sidder på al kakaomælk [Arla dominates all chocolate milk]"  (in Danish). DR. 8 January 2008 . Retrieved  21 May  2018 . 
 
 ^   "Hyldeblomstsaft" ,  Den Store Danske .  (in Danish)  Retrieved 9 December 2011. 
 
 ^   Massimo Grillo (18 May 2018).  "Populær drik fra køleskabet var luksusvare før i tiden [Popular drink from the fridge was a luxury product in the past]" .  fyens.dk  (in Danish) . Retrieved  21 May  2018 . 
 
 ^   Dorthe Lønstrup (25 June 2008).  "Farvestof tager livet af citron- og sportsvand [dye kills  citron - and  sportsvand ]" .  Politiken  (in Danish) . Retrieved  21 May  2018 . 
 
 ^  a   b   "Akvavit"   Archived  2012-01-14 at the  Wayback Machine ,  VisitDenmark . Retrieved 9 December 2011. 
 
 ^   "Danish Breweries" . Retrieved 9 December 2011. 
 
 ^   "Danish Mead Making" ,  The Joy of Mead . Retrieved 9 December 2011. 
 
 ^   "Danish doughnuts and glogg"   Archived  2017-01-20 at the  Wayback Machine ,  Wonderful Copenhagen . Retrieved 9 December 2011. 
 
 ^   Stina Hald, "Danish wine still not favored by Danes"   Archived  2012-04-26 at the  Wayback Machine ,  CulinaryDenmark . Retrieved 9 December 2011. 
 
 ^   Den intensive ernæringsoplysning efterleves ikke altid, men kan føre til dårlig samvittighed, og flere har spiseforstyrrelser end tidligere. Read cand.phil.  Bi Skaarups  article  Maden i kulturhistorisk perspektiv  s. 22 nederst i  Jacobsen et al. 1997 
 
 ^   Søren Mørch, "Om dansk mad"   Archived  2012-04-19 at the  Wayback Machine ,  Det Danske Gastronomiske Akademi .  (in Danish)  Retrieved 9 December 2011. 
 
 ^   "Danish Specialities"   Archived  2008-08-02 at the  Wayback Machine ,  Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Denmark . Retrieved 9 December 2011. 
 
 ^   "Recipes for Christmas Dishes"   Archived  2011-12-04 at the  Wayback Machine ,  Denmark.dk . Retrieved 9 December 2011. 
 
 ^   "Frøken Jensens kogebog (1921)" ,  Internet Archive . Retrieved 9 December 2011. 
 
 
 Bibliography [ edit ] 
 Jacobsen, Jan Krag; Husby, Ida; Skaarup, Bi; Holm, Lotte; Carlsen, Helle Brønnum; Bojesen, Rasmus Bo (1997),  Maden i kulturhistorisk perspektiv 
 Jensen, Kristine Marie (edited and updated by Lundsgaard, Bente Nissen and Bloch, Hanne): Frøken Jensens kogebog, Copenhagen, Gyldendal, 2003, 366 p.  (in Danish)   ISBN   87-00-21271-7 
 Meyer, Claus:  Almanak , Copenhagen, Lindhardt og Ringhof, 2010, 694 p.  (in Danish)   ISBN   978-87-11-43070-5 
 Redzepi, René:  Noma: Time and Place in Nordic Cuisine , London, Phaidon Press, 2010, 368 p.  ISBN   978-0-7148-5903-3 . 
 Færch, Tove; Møller, Maja; Hougaard, Anne Kirstine, eds. (2008), Det gode madliv – Karoline, maden og måltidet i kulturen, Arla Foods.  (in Danish)   ISBN   978-87-992509-1-2 
 Astrup, Arne; Meyer, Claus (2002),  Spis igennem  (in Danish) (1. ed.), Politikens Forlag,  ISBN   87-567-6742-0 
 External links [ edit ] 
 
 
 
 Wikibooks  Cookbook  has a recipe/module on
 
  Cuisine of Denmark 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons has media related to  Cuisine of Denmark . 
 
 Danish Food Culture – Copenhagen-Portal.dk 
 Christian's Danish Recipes— over 600 Danish recipes in English   Archived  2007-05-10 at the  Wayback Machine 
 Danish Tourist Board: Tipping whilst eating out 
 v t e European cuisine Sovereign states European Union 
 Austria 
 Belgium 
 Bulgaria 
 Croatia 
 Cyprus 
 Czech Republic 
 Denmark 
 Estonia 
 Finland 
 France 
 Germany 
 Greece 
 Hungary 
 Republic of Ireland 
 Italy 
 Latvia 
 Lithuania 
 Luxembourg 
 Malta 
 Netherlands 
 Poland 
 Portugal 
 Romania 
 Slovakia 
 Slovenia 
 Spain 
 Sweden 
 Other 
 Albania 
 Andorra 
 Armenia 
 Azerbaijan 
 Belarus 
 Bosnia and Herzegovina 
 Georgia 
 Iceland 
 Kazakhstan 
 Liechtenstein 
 Moldova 
 Monaco 
 Montenegro 
 North Macedonia 
 Norway 
 Russia 
 San Marino 
 Serbia 
 Switzerland 
 Turkey 
 Ukraine 
 United Kingdom 
 Vatican City 
 States with limited recognition 
 Abkhazia 
 Kosovo 
 Nagorno-Karabakh 
 Northern Cyprus 
 South Ossetia 
 Transnistria 
 Dependencies  and other territories 
 Faroe Islands 
 Gibraltar 
 Guernsey 
 Isle of Man 
 Jersey 
 
 v t e Cuisines Continental 
 African 
 North 
 West 
 list 
 Americas 
 Caribbean 
 North 
 South 
 list 
 Asian 
 Caucasian 
 Central 
 Indian subcontinent 
 Levantine 
 list 
 European 
 Balkan 
 Central 
 Eastern 
 list 
 Oceanic 
 Intercontinental
 Global 
 Latin American 
 Mediterranean 
 Middle Eastern 
 National  and regional 
 Afghan 
 Albanian 
 Algerian 
 American 
 Californian 
 Floribbean 
 Hawaiian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Lowcountry (South Carolina) 
 New England 
 New Mexico 
 Pacific Northwest 
 Pennsylvania Dutch 
 Puerto Rican 
 Southern US 
 Southwest US 
 Texas 
 Angolan 
 Argentine 
 Armenian 
 Australian 
 Austrian 
 Azerbaijani 
 Bahraini 
 Bangladeshi 
 Barbadian 
 Belarusian 
 Belgian 
 Belizean 
 Beninese 
 Bhutanese 
 Bolivian 
 Bosnian-Herzegovinian 
 Botswana 
 Brazilian 
 British 
 Channel Islands 
 English 
 Gibraltarian 
 Northern Irish 
 Saint Helena 
 Scottish 
 Welsh 
 Bruneian 
 Bulgarian 
 Burkinabé 
 Burmese 
 Burundian 
 Cambodian 
 Cameroonian 
 Canadian 
 Acadian 
 Québécois 
 Central African Republic 
 Chadian 
 Chilean 
 Chinese 
 Cantonese 
 Hong Kong 
 Macanese 
 Tibetan 
 Xinjiang 
 Colombian 
 Congolese 
 Corsican 
 Croatian 
 Cuban 
 Cypriot 
 Czech 
 Danish 
 Faroese 
 Greenlandic 
 Djiboutian 
 Dominican 
 Dominican Republic 
 Dutch 
 East Timorese 
 Ecuadorian 
 Egyptian 
 Emirati 
 Equatorial Guinean 
 Eritrean 
 Estonian 
 Ethiopian 
 Fijian 
 Filipino 
 Finnish 
 French 
 Occitan 
 French Guianan 
 Gabonese 
 Gambian 
 Georgian 
 German 
 Ghanaian 
 Greek 
 Cretan 
 Epirotic 
 Greek Macedonian 
 Heptanesean 
 Guatemalan 
 Guinea-Bissauan 
 Guinean 
 Haitian 
 Honduran 
 Hungarian 
 Icelandic 
 Indian 
 Arunachalese 
 Assamese 
 Bengali 
 Bihari 
 Goan 
 Gujarati 
 Himachal Pradesh 
 Kashmiri 
 Jharkhandi 
 Karnataka 
 Kerala 
 Maharashtrian 
 Manipuri 
 Meghalayan 
 Mizo 
 Naga 
 Odia 
 Punjabi 
 Rajasthani 
 Sikkimese 
 Sindhi 
 Tamil 
 Telangana 
 Telugu 
 Indonesian 
 Acehnese 
 Balinese 
 Banjar 
 Batak 
 Betawi 
 Indo 
 Javanese 
 Madurese 
 Makassar 
 Minahasan 
 Minangkabau 
 Palembangese 
 Sundanese 
 Iranian 
 Iraqi 
 Irish 
 Israeli 
 Italian 
 Abruzzese 
 Ligurian 
 Lombard 
 Lucanian 
 Neapolitan 
 Roman 
 Sardinian 
 Sicilian 
 Venetian 
 Ivorian 
 Jamaican 
 Japanese 
 Okinawan 
 Jordanian 
 Kazakh 
 Kenyan 
 Korean 
 North Korean 
 South Korean 
 Kosovan 
 Kuwaiti 
 Kyrgyz 
 Lao 
 Latvian 
 Lebanese 
 Lesotho 
 Liberian 
 Libyan 
 Liechtensteiner 
 Lithuanian 
 Luxembourg 
 Macedonian 
 Malagasy 
 Malawian 
 Malaysian 
 Sabahan 
 Sarawakian 
 Maldivian 
 Malian 
 Maltese 
 Mauritanian 
 Mauritian 
 Mexican 
 Moldovan 
 Monégasque 
 Mongolian 
 Montenegrin 
 Moroccan 
 Mozambican 
 Namibian 
 Nauruan 
 Nepalese 
 New Zealand 
 Nicaraguan 
 Niger 
 Nigerian 
 Niuean 
 Norwegian 
 Omani 
 Pakistani 
 Palestinian 
 Panamanian 
 Peruvian 
 Polish 
 Portuguese 
 Qatari 
 Romanian  (incl.  Transylvanian Saxon ) 
 Russian 
 Bashkir 
 Chechen 
 Circassian 
 Komi 
 Mordovian 
 Sakha 
 Tatar 
 Udmurt 
 Yamal 
 Rwandan 
 Saint Lucian 
 Salvadoran 
 Sammarinese 
 São Tomé and Príncipe 
 Saudi Arabian 
 Senegalese 
 Serbian 
 Seychellois 
 Sierra Leonean 
 Singaporean 
 Slovak 
 Slovenian 
 Somali 
 South African 
 Spanish 
 Andalusian 
 Asturian 
 Balearic 
 Basque 
 Canarian 
 Cantabrian 
 Catalan 
 Extremaduran 
 Galician 
 Manchegan 
 Valencian 
 Sri Lankan 
 Sudanese 
 Swazi 
 Swedish 
 Swiss 
 Syrian 
 Taiwanese 
 Tajik 
 Tanzanian 
 Zanzibari 
 Thai 
 Togolese 
 Tunisian 
 Turkish 
 Turkmen 
 Trinidadian and Tobagonian 
 Ugandan 
 Ukrainian 
 Uruguayan 
 Uzbek 
 Venezuelan 
 Vietnamese 
 Western Saharan 
 Yemeni 
 Zambian 
 Zimbabwean 
 Ethnic 
 Ainu 
 Arab 
 Indonesian 
 Aromanian 
 Assyrian 
 Balochi 
 Berber 
 Cajun 
 Chinese 
 American 
 Canadian 
 Chifa 
 Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Crimean Tatar 
 Greek American 
 Hazaragi 
 Indian 
 Anglo-Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Indigenous American 
 Inuit 
 Italian American 
 Kurdish 
 Livonian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Malay 
 Ossetian 
 Parsi 
 Pashtun 
 Peranakan 
 Romani 
 Sámi 
 Soul food 
 Sylheti 
 Transylvanian Saxon 
 Yup'ik 
 Religious 
 Buddhist 
 Christian 
 Goan Catholic 
 Mangalorean Catholic 
 Mennonite 
 Hindu 
 Islamic 
 Chinese 
 Ital 
 Jain 
 Jewish 
 American 
 Ashkenazi 
 Bukharan 
 Ethiopian 
 Mizrahi 
 Sephardic 
 Syrian 
 Ritual slaughter 
 Sikh 
 Historical 
 Ancient Egyptian 
 Ancient Greek 
 Ancient Israelite 
 Ancient Roman 
 Antebellum America 
 Aztec 
 Byzantine 
 Early modern European 
 Historical Chinese 
 Historical Indian subcontinent 
 Historical North Indian and Pakistani 
 History of agriculture 
 History of alcoholic drinks 
 History of bread 
 History of seafood 
 History of vegetarianism 
 Historical Argentine 
 Historical Japanese 
 Inca 
 Mayan 
 Muisca 
 Mughal 
 Medieval 
 Ottoman 
 Peasant 
 Soviet 
 Thirteen Colonies 
 Styles 
 Classique 
 Fast food 
 Fusion 
 New American 
 Eurasian 
 Haute 
 Molecular gastronomy 
 Note by Note 
 Nouvelle 
 Lists 
 List of cuisines 
 List of historical cuisines 
 Lists of prepared foods 
 Related 
 Cookbook 
 Cooking 
 Culinary arts 
 Drink 
 Food 
 history 
 Diet 
 Meal preparation 
 
   Food portal 
   Drink portal 
   Category 
   Commons 
   Cookbook 
   WikiProject 
   Outline 
 
 v t e Denmark   articles Part of the  Kingdom of Denmark History 
 Archaeology 
 Viking Age 
 Kalmar Union 
 Reformation 
 Danevirke 
 Denmark–Norway 
 Danish Empire 
 Colonization of the Americas 
 Golden Age 
 Scandinavian Monetary Union 
 Postal history 
 Skånelandene 
 Slesvig-Holsten 
 Duchy of Schleswig 
 Duchy of Holstein 
 Duchy of Lauenburg 
 World War II 
 Rescue of the Danish Jews 
 Geography 
 Birds 
 Cities 
 Danish straits 
 Extreme points 
 Geography 
 Forests 
 Islands 
 Lakes 
 Mammals 
 Mountains and hills 
 Regions 
 Rivers 
 Politics 
 Administrative divisions 
 Current cabinet 
 Constitution 
 Courts 
 Elections 
 Folketing ( Danish Parliament ) 
 Foreign relations 
 Human rights
 LGBT rights 
 Law 
 enforcement 
 Monarchy 
 The unity of the Realm 
 Prime Minister 
 Military 
 Political parties 
 Economy 
 OMX Copenhagen 25 
 2000s property bubble 
 Energy 
 Flexicurity 
 Krone  (currency) 
 National Bank 
 Stock Exchange 
 Taxation 
 Communications 
 Tourism 
 Transport 
 Society 
 Danes 
 Demographics 
 Education 
 Immigration 
 Health care 
 Languages 
 Culture 
 Art 
 Architecture 
 Cinema 
 Cuisine 
 Folklore 
 Jante Law 
 Literature 
 Modern Breakthrough 
 Media 
 Music 
 People 
 Photography 
 Prostitution 
 Public holidays 
 Religion 
 Sport 
 Symbols 
 Coat of arms 
 Flag 
 National (civic) anthem 
 Royal anthem 
 Outline Index 
 Category 
 Portal 
 Authority control   National libraries 
 Spain 
 France 
 BnF data 
 Israel 
 United States 
 Other 
 IdRef 
 
  
NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw2329
Cached time: 20230311144052
Cache expiry: 1814400
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc, no‐toc‐conversion]
CPU time usage: 1.524 seconds
Real time usage: 1.791 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 24627/1000000
Post‐expand include size: 307692/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 20918/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 60/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 293896/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.767/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 24868856/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/400
 
 
Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1435.038      1 -total
 36.19%  519.377      1 Template:Reflist
 29.12%  417.837      3 Template:Navbox
 16.98%  243.741     51 Template:Cite_web
 16.04%  230.226      1 Template:European_topic
  8.74%  125.473     55 Template:Iso2country
  8.27%  118.749      1 Template:Culture_of_Denmark
  8.15%  116.918      1 Template:Culture_of_region
  7.97%  114.420      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  6.98%  100.147      1 Template:Lang-da
 
  Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:idhash:488597-0!canonical and timestamp 20230311144050 and revision id 1137485834. Rendering was triggered because: page-view
  
 esi <esi:include src="/esitest-fa8a495983347898/content" />  
 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Danish_cuisine&oldid=1137485834 " 
 Category :  Danish cuisine Hidden categories:  CS1 Danish-language sources (da) Webarchive template wayback links Articles with French-language sources (fr) All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from December 2017 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with dead external links from September 2017 Articles with Danish-language sources (da) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Danish-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2017 Articles with unsourced statements from October 2014 Articles with unsourced statements from December 2017 Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with BNE identifiers Articles with BNF identifiers Articles with J9U identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers Articles with SUDOC identifiers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  This page was last edited on 4 February 2023, at 22:00  (UTC) . 
 Text is available under the  Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0 ;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the  Terms of Use  and  Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the  Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. 
 
 
 Privacy policy 
 About Wikipedia 
 Disclaimers 
 Contact Wikipedia 
 Mobile view 
 Developers 
 Statistics 
 Cookie statement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
