
 
 
 Jump to content 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle sidebar 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Create account Log in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Personal tools 
 
 
 
 
   Create account   Log in 
 
 
 
 
		Pages for logged out editors  learn more 
 
 
 Contributions Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Navigation 
 
 
 Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate 
 
 
 
 
 Contribute 
 
 
 Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file 
 
 
 
 
 Tools 
 
 
 What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item 
 
 
 
 
 Print/export 
 
 
 Download as PDF Printable version 
 
 
 
 
 In other projects 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons 
 
 
 
 
 Languages 
 
 On this Wikipedia the language links are at the top of the page across from the article title.  Go to top . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CentralNotice  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Contents 
 move to sidebar 
 hide 
 
 
 
 
 (Top) 
 
 
 
 
 
 1 Dishes and their origins 
 
 
				Toggle Dishes and their origins subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 1.1 Taíno dishes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.2 Spanish dishes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.3 African dishes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.4 Middle Eastern dishes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.5 Cocolo influence 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.6 Cuban and Puerto Rican influences 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.7 Dominican dishes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.8 Pastelón 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.9 Sauces 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.10 Breads 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.11 Soups 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.12 Rice 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 Desserts 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 Beverages 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4 Geographical differences 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5 References 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6 Further reading 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 7 External links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
						Toggle the table of contents
					 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle the table of contents 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dominican Republic cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 8 languages 
 
 
 
 Čeština Español Français 한국어 Hrvatski Polski Slovenčina Українська 
 Edit links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Article Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 English 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 More 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
 
 
 Culinary traditions of the Dominican Republic 
 This article  needs additional citations for  verification .  Please help  improve this article  by  adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources:   "Dominican Republic cuisine"  –  news   ·   newspapers   ·   books   ·   scholar   ·   JSTOR   ( June 2019 )  ( Learn how and when to remove this template message ) 
   Chimichurri burger 
 This article is part of  a series  on the Culture of the  Dominican Republic 
Society 
 History 
 Language 
 People 
 Religion 
 Cuisine 
 Art 
 Literature 
 Sport 
 
Symbols 
 Anthem 
 Flag 
 Coat of arms 
 World Heritage Sites 
 
Politics 
 Presidency 
 Government 
 Military 
 
Economy 
 Tourism 
 Telecommunications 
 
   Dominican Republic portal v t e 
 Dominican cuisine  is made up of  Spanish , indigenous  Taíno ,  Middle Eastern  and  African  influences. [ citation needed ] 
 As in  Spain , the largest, most important meal of the day is lunch. Its most typical form, nicknamed  la bandera  ("the flag"), consists of white rice, red beans and meat (beef, chicken, pork, or fish), sometimes accompanied by a side of salad. [ citation needed ] 
 
 
 Dishes and their origins [ edit ] 
 The  Dominican Republic  was formerly a  Spanish colony . Many Spanish traits are still present in the island. Many traditional Spanish dishes have found a new home in the Dominican Republic, some with a twist. African and Taíno dishes still hold strong, some of them unchanged. [ citation needed ] 
 All or nearly all  food groups  are accommodated in typical Dominican cuisine, as it incorporates meat or seafood; grains, especially rice, corn (native to the island [1] ), and wheat; vegetables, such as beans and other  legumes , potatoes,  yuca , or plantains, and salad; dairy products, especially milk and cheese; and fruits, such as oranges, bananas, and mangos. However, there is heaviest consumption of starches and meats, and least of dairy products and non-starchy vegetables.
 Sofrito , a sautéed mix including local herbs and spices, is used in many dishes. Throughout the  south-central coast   bulgur , or  whole wheat , is a main ingredient in  quipes  and  tipili , two dishes brought by  Levantine   Middle Eastern  immigrants. Other favorite foods and dishes include  chicharrón ,  yautía ,  pastelitos  or  empanadas ,  batata  (sweet potato),  pasteles en hoja  (ground roots pockets),  chimichurris ,  plátanos maduros  (ripe plantain),  yuca con mojo  (boiled yuca/cassava) and  tostones/fritos  (fried plantains). [ citation needed ] 
 Bouillon cubes  are used heavily in the preparation of Dominican lunch food. [ citation needed ] 
 
 Taíno dishes [ edit ] 
 Mabí  - a  root beer -like drink made from the roots of a local tree 
 Casabe  – Flatbread made out of  yuca .  Resembles a round  cracker . 
 Pera Piña  – Rice and pineapple peel drink. Before rice was introduced it was made with corn and pineapple and called  chicha . 
 Guarapo de Piña  – Fermented pineapple juice. 
 Guanimo  – Same as  tamales  with no filling or stuffed with  picadillo . 
 Spanish dishes [ edit ] 
 Arroz con leche  –  rice pudding made with long-grain rice, milk, sugar, cinnamon, raisins, star anis, clove, and nutmeg. 
 Buñuelos de bacalao  – a cod fish fritter popular throughout the Caribbean and Latin America. Also known as  bacalaíto  in the Dominican Republic, a name borrowed from Puerto Rico but nonidentical. 
 Crème caramel  – sweet egg custard known as  flan . Coconut flan is known as  quesillo de coco . 
 Gofio  – sweet cornmeal powder from the  Canary islands . 
 African dishes [ edit ] 
   Mondongo  beef tripe soup 
 Mangú  –    Mangú  mashed, boiled plantains can be traced back to west Africa where it is known as  fufu . This is a typical and official national breakfast in the Dominican Republic but can also be served at lunch and dinner. Mangú is typically served with  queso frito  (white cheese fried in a pan), fried Dominican salami, fried eggs and topped with onions cooked in vinegar. This is also known as   los tres golpes  (the three hits). Plantains can be replaced with green bananas or squash where it is known as  mazamorra . 
 Middle Eastern dishes [ edit ] 
 Few dishes have been adopted from a wave of  Lebanese  immigration into the Dominican Republic. Drastic changes from the traditional Middle Eastern, starting with the preparation, and just as importantly, using beef instead of lamb, and leaving out many spices (cumin, cardamom, coriander seeds, saffron, and others), herbs ( rosemary , mint, dill,  marjoram , Greek oregano, and others), spice blends ( za'atar  and  baharat ), seeds, and nuts (pine nuts, pistachios, sesame seeds, hazel nuts, and others). Many of these dishes would be served with a sauce while in the Dominican Republic they are served alone. Much of these spices and flavoring have been replaced with Dominican oregano, bell peppers, and chicken bouillon.
 
 Arroz con almendras y pasas  – Rice with raisins and almonds. It is usually eaten around Christmas. 
 Arroz con fideos  - Rice cooked with toasted pasta. This dish is eaten with fresh cilantro. 
 Kipes  or Quipes  - Deep fried bulgur roll filled with  picadillo . 
 Niño envuelto  – Cabbage roll filled with beef and rice. 
 Cocolo influence [ edit ] 
 Cocolo  is a term used in the Spanish-speaking Caribbean to refer to non- Hispanic African descendants, or darker skin people in general. The term originated in the Dominican Republic, and was historically used to refer to the Anglophone and Francophone Caribbean descendants. The Cocolo cuisine brought over through various parts of the Caribbean have influenced Dominican cuisine. Some recipes have changed but most have stood the same but with different names.
 
 Chen-chen  – A cracked corn pilaf dish from Haiti that has made its way through the Dominican Republic. 
 Dumplings - Dumplings in the Dominican Republic are eaten with braised meats or seasoned tomato sauce. They came from the British Caribbean mostly in and around San Pedro de Macorís. Simple recipe including all-purpose flour, water, and salt made into a thick dough before boiling. When cornmeal is added they're known as  bollitos de maíz  (boiled cornmeal dumplings). 
 Guavaberry  - Guavaberry is used to make  jams  and drinks.  Guavaberry  liqueur , which is made from  rum , is a common  Christmas  drink on many of the islands, particularly in  Sint Maarten  and the  Virgin Islands . The colonists from Denmark and Holland found it could flavor rum by infusion similar to infused  schnapps . [2]  In the Dominican Republic it is associated with the eastern town of  San Pedro de Macorís  which has a large population of Eastern Caribbean descent. [3] 
 Yaniqueque  –  Jonnycakes , a dish brought by sugarcane  workers from the Lesser Antilles  over a century ago.   Yanikeiki, also called Yaniqueques 
 Cuban and Puerto Rican influences [ edit ] 
 Dominican cuisine is adopted from  Puerto Rico  and  Cuba , though the dish names differ sometimes. Because of the historic  migration between Cuba, Dominican Republic, and Puerto Rico its three cultures are closely related. It is unclear for most dishes between these countries on where it originated from. Some dishes like mofongo and pastlese are from Puerto Rico and became a part of Dominican cuisine.  Moros y Cristianos  and yuca con mojo from Cuba. While the Dominican pastelón is seen in Cuba and Puerto Rico.
 
 Asopao  – Rice, chicken or fish and vegetable soup similar to Gumbo originating in Puerto Rico. Dominicans have a unique asopao adding chicarron de pollo or coconut milk with seafood. 
   Pasteles en hojas 
 Pasteles  en hojas  – Puerto Rican tamales have been an important part of Dominican Christmas. These tamales are made from plantains, squash, tubers, stuffed with meat and wrapped in banana leaf. 
 Majarete  – Corn pudding made with fresh blended corn, cornstarch, milk, vanilla and cinnamon. This dessert is claimed by Cuba and Dominican Republic. The only difference is Dominicans add nutmeg while Cubans add lemon zest and raisins. When corn isn't blended it is known as  Chaca  and can sometimes have rice. 
 Mofongo  –    Mofongo  Original from Puerto Rico. It is made from fried, boiled or roasted plantains, cassave, or breadfruit mashed with  chicharrón  and seasoned typically with  garlic , fat (olive oil, lard, or butter) and, broth. 
 Tostones  –    Tostones  known as  fritos verdes . They are fried green plantain slices served flattened and salted. Tostones first appeared in Puerto Rico's first cookbook, El Cocinero Puertorriqueño, in 1859. They are tilted as  fritos verde . That name is still used only in the Dominican Republic. All three islands claim tostones as their birthplace. 
 Yuca con mojo  – Boiled or fried cassava with olive oil, oregano, garlic, citrus, onions and cilantro. A classic Cuban dish popular among Dominicans and other Latin countries. 
 Dominican dishes [ edit ] 
 Arepitas  – Shredded  yuca  or cornmeal fritters mixed with eggs, sugar, and anise seeds. Yuca arepitas also go by  arañitas  "little spiders". 
 Bollitos de yuca  – The recipe is exact to  carimañola  in  Colombia  and  Panama . 
 Catibía  – Empanada dough made from  tapioca  flour and water. 
 Camarones con coco y gengibre  – Shrimp with coconut and ginger with Dominican seasoning as a base. 
 Chicharrón de pollo  – This  fried chicken  dish also goes by  pica pollo . Chicken is marinated in lime juice and coated with flour, garlic, and orégano. There are existing recipes with rum or soy sauce as a marine. It is served with tostones and lime. 
 Chulitos  – Fresh grated cassava filled with ground meat and fried. 
 Chimichurris  – The chimichurri is a burger top with slaw made by Argentinean street vendors living in Santo Domingo. It is similar to  Argentina  sandwiches, in which meat is topped with  chimichurri sauce  and  slaw . 
 Spaghetti a la Dominicana  – Spaghetti  with Dominican salami eaten for breakfast, lunch and dinner. 
 Pico y pala  – Chicken feet and neck is associated with the popular dining rooms and cafeterias, very common in low income neighborhoods. Usually cooked with onions, cilantro, culantro, oregano, and sugar. 
 Guisados  – Meat, fish, beans, or vegetables cooked in a tomato sauce base with Dominican style "sazón". A small amount of sour orange or lime juice, and sugar is traditional added. [4]  When done it is served with rice. This is a popular staple in Dominican kitchens, and carnes guisadas are one of the components of the traditional Dominican lunch meal (La Bandera).  Carne mechada  is braised  tenderloin  or flank. Brasied oxtail and cow tongue are usually spicy using scotch bonnet or other local chilies. Beans and vegetables are cooked the same but with no citrus added. 
 Yaroa  – Boiled mashed plantains or yuca layerd with meat, melted cheese, with ketchup and mayonnaise on top. Sold on trucks. 
 Pastelón [ edit ] 
 Pastelón  can de describe as a casserole or shepherd's pie. A main element of Dominican cuisine. There are more than six variations in the Dominican Republic the most popular ones being pastelón de platano maduro (yellow plantain casserole) and pastelón de yuca (cassava casserole). Pastelón can be found in other Latin American Countries like Puerto Rico, Venezuela, Panama and Cuba, specially the eastern part which has great Dominican influence. Pastelón are usually stuffed with ground meat or chicken.
 
 Pastelón de arroz  - Rice, meat, and cheese casserole. 
 Pastelón de berenjena  - Eggplants are sliced, floured and fried in oil. They are layered with cheese (cheddar and mozzarella are frequently used) and occasionally meat. It's similar to eggplant  parmigiana  and  moussaka  but with no sauce. 
 Pastelón de maíz  -  Tamale pie . 
 Pastelón de plátano maduro  - Sweet plantain casserole. 
 Pastelón de papa  -  Shepherd's pie  using Dominican spices. 
 Sauces [ edit ] 
 Agrio de naranja  - Sour orange juice steeped with oregano, garlic, and chilies. It's concentrated a  pique sauce  usually paired with soup. 
 Wasakaka  –  Very similar to  mojo  and  chimichurri . The sauce is made by simmering water with garlic, parsley, olive oil, and sour orange. Once cooled it is served with roasted chicken and boiled cassava. 
 Breads [ edit ] 
 Telera  – Dominican bread similar to Mexican  Telera . Typically served on Christmas. 
 Pan de agua 
 Pan de coco  – Coconut bread show up in many Central American cuisines and Caribbean cuisinines. Particularly in Nicaragua, Venezuela, Honduras, Brazil, Colombia, Guatemala, Jamaica, Puerto Rico and the Dominican Republic. Recipes are the same or similar but results in the same flavor and most of the time texture. It's oragin are between Jamaica and Honduras. 
  Pan de mantequilla 
 Soups [ edit ] 
 Dominicans take much pride in their soups and most cooks on the island claim to make the best soup. More than a third of the country's total population lives in poverty, and almost 20 per cent are living in extreme poverty. In rural areas poor people constitute half of the population. Soup in the Dominican Republic is easy, cheap and can feed a large number of people.
 
 Aguají  – Plantain puree soup seasoned with sofrito. 
 Buche e perico   – Corn chowder. 
 Chambre  or  Chapea  – Kidney beans or white beans, rice, pigeon peas, squash, longaniza (sausage), plantains, vegetables, tubers, and sofrito. 
 Guandules de coco  - Pigeon peas stewed in coconut milk, squash, and sofrito. 
 Sancocho de guandules  - Pigeon peas stewed with squash, sofrito, and pork. 
 Sancocho de siete carnes  – Seven meat stew is the Dominican Republicans national soup. If beans are added it is known as sancocho de habichuela. 
 Sopa de mondongo  - Beef tripe soup. 
 Rice [ edit ] 
 Most dishes in the Dominican Republic are served with long-grain rice. A popular staple of the Dominican cuisine.
 
 Arroz blanco - White rice. This basic rice can be served with stew beans, braised meat, or soups. 
 Arroz con maíz  or Moro de maíz  - Rice with corn combines the sweet flavor of corn with the salty flavor of rice cooked with red onions, orégano and cilantro. 
 Chofan  - Although it's referred to as "Dominican  fried rice " there has been no change to its Asian origin, only adding Dominican orégano. 
 Concón  - Is usually something not cooked on its own. Instead, it is a byproduct of cooking rice. Simply put, it is the layer of burnt hard oily rice left behind when cooking in a caldero (iron pot). Historians have also traced Dominican love for 'concón' from the  Nigerian  word 'konkon' for oily. 
 Locrio  - Classic style of mixing rice with other kind of meat. 
 Moro de guandules con coco  - Rice, pigeon peas ( guandules ), sofrito and coconut milk dish served for Christmas. 
 Moro de habichuela  - Rice cooked with beans and sofrito in the same pot. 
 Desserts [ edit ] 
   Habichuela con dulce 
 Almibar de frutas  – Fruit cooked in syrup. The most popular is called  mala rabia . Guava, sweet plantains, and sweet potato with cinnamon. 
 Arepa  – Cornmeal and coconut cake. Dominican arepa is different from that of the Venezuelan and Colombian arepa. 
 Bizcocho Dominicano  – Dominican cake uses a basic cake recipe with vanilla, eggs, flour, sugar,  margarine , and baking soda, milk with orange juice and lime zest. When done the cake is then filled with pineapple jam and frosted with  meringue . 
 Brazo gitano  – Rolled sponge cake with guava filling. 
 Canquiña 
 Dulce de coco tierno  – Fresh coconut cooked slowly with milk, sugar and cinnamon. 
 Dulce de Leche en Tabla  – Milk  fudge  usually eaten with pineapple jam. 
 Habichuelas con dulce  – Sweet creamed beans dessert. Made with coconut milk, sweet potato chunks, etc. 
 Jalea de batata  – Sweet potato pudding slowly cooked with spices, sugar, milk, and coconut milk. 
 Macaroon  – Coconut macaroons are popular all over the island.  Jalao  are coconut macaroons made with honey and ginger. 
 Palitos de coco  – Shredded coconut lollipops cooked with condensed milk. When done they are formed into small balls and coated in a simple syrup made from sugar, corn syrup, and red food coloring. 
 Tres leches cake [5] 
 Arroz con leche 
 Flan 
 Beverages [ edit ] 
 The most popular drinks in the Dominican Republic are rum locally known as  romo , beer (especially  Presidente ),  coffee ,  eggnog  with rum, local fruit  smoothies ,  mabí   juice made from  colubrina  bark or fruit that's done all over the Caribbean. Alcohol drinks such as  piña colada ,  coquito ,  Cuba libre , and  mojitos  from Cuba and Puerto Rico.
 
   Bottles of  mamajuana 
 Batidas  – Dominican version of  smoothies  often made with tropical fruits such as  papaya  and  sapodilla . [6] 
 Chocolate de maní  –  Peanut milk , a drink that originated in South America. Modern recipes add spices, sugar, corn, milk, and rum. 
 Mama Juana  – an alcoholic drink concocted by allowing rum, red wine, and honey to soak in a bottle with tree bark and herbs. 
 Jugo de avena  – A spiced oatmeal drink popular throughout South America and the Caribbean. 
 Morir Soñando  – Evaporated milk, sugar, orange juice, and sometimes added vanilla and lime juice. 
 Geographical differences [ edit ] 
 What Dominicans tend to eat depends highly on where they live: whether near the sea or in the interior mountains. In either case, most Dominican meat dishes tend to involve  pork , as pigs are farmed quite heavily on the island. Meat dishes tend to be very well cooked or even stewed in Dominican restaurants, a tradition stemming from the lesser availability of refrigeration on the island. [ citation needed ] 
 Seaside Dominican fishing villages will have great varieties of  seafood , the most common being  shrimp ,  marlin ,  mahi-mahi  or  dorado , and  lobster . Most villagers more commonly dine on cheap, lesser-quality fish, usually stewed with  la criolla , a type of rice. Premium seafood tends to be too expensive for the many locals, and is saved for the island's upper class and the tourist resorts. [ citation needed ] 
 Differences between Dominican cuisine and those of other parts of the  West Indies  include the milder spicing, which mainly uses  onions ,  garlic ,  cilantro , cilantro ancho ( culantro ), ají cubanela ( cubanelle pepper ), and  oregano . Dominican  sofrito  is known on the island as  sazón . [ citation needed ] 
 
 References [ edit ] 
 
 
 ^   "Food Crops" . U.S.  Library of Congress . Retrieved  2011-02-10 . 
 
 ^   Julia F. Morton (1987).  Fruits of Warm Climates . pp. 388–390.  ISBN   0-9610184-1-0 . Retrieved  January 16,  2021 . 
 
 ^   "Guavaberry Drink and Jam - Cocolo Culture" . 25 April 2019 . Retrieved  January 16,  2021 . 
 
 ^   "Pollo Guisado (Dominican Chicken)" .  Dominican Cooking . 2012-02-16.  Archived  from the original on 2021-04-17 . Retrieved  2021-11-30 . 
 
 ^   "Dominican Desserts - 100+ Popular Dessert Recipes + Videos" . 16 May 2022. 
 
 ^   "30+ Traditional Dominican Drinks - A Complete Guide" . 10 May 2022. 
 
 
 Further reading [ edit ] 
 Castro, Marianela; Clavé, Montse; Alcántara, Luz María (1996).  Cocina Dominicana: Volume 2 of Cocinas de allí, aquí . Icaria Editorial.  ISBN   978-84-7426-277-3 . 
 Féliz-Camilo, Arturo (2012).  Las recetas de Mamá Pura: Volume 1 El Fogoncito collection ( Arturo Féliz-Camilo ) . CreateSpace.  ISBN   978-1-4752-8083-8 . 
 Féliz-Camilo, Arturo (2013).  Diccionario Culinario Dominicano ( Arturo Féliz-Camilo ) . CreateSpace.  ISBN   978-1-4840-1111-9 . 
 External links [ edit ] 
 
 Food portal 
 Dominican Cooking 
 Dominican Heat 
 El Fogoncito 
 v t e Dominican Republic  articles History 
 Cacicazgo 
 Santo Domingo 
 Colonial governors 
 Slave trade 
 Maroons 
 Era de Francia 
 Spanish reconquest 
 España Boba 
 Spanish Haiti 
 Unification of Hispaniola 
 La Trinitaria 
 War of Independence 
 Spanish occupation 1861–1865 
 Restoration War 
 U.S. occupation 1916–1924 
 Trujillo Era ( Rafael  and  Héctor Trujillo ) 
 Parsley massacre 
 Dominican Civil War 
 DOMREP 
 COVID-19 pandemic in the Dominican Republic 
 Geography 
 Border 
 Cities 
 Ciudad Colonial 
 Hispaniola 
 Islands 
 Mountains 
 Municipalities 
 Protected areas 
 Provinces 
 Regions 
 Rivers 
 Wildlife 
 Politics 
 Cabinet 
 Congress 
 Senate 
 Chamber of Deputies 
 Constitution 
 Elections 
 Foreign relations 
 Human rights 
 LGBT 
 Law 
 enforcement 
 Military 
 Politics 
 Political parties 
 President 
 Economy 
 Peso  (currency) 
 Banks 
 Central Bank 
 Companies 
 Energy 
 Telecommunications 
 Tourism 
 Transport 
 Society 
 Crime 
 Demographics 
 Education 
 Health 
 Language 
 Religion 
 Water and sanitation 
 Culture 
 Anthem 
 Art 
 Cinema 
 Coat of arms 
 Cuisine 
 Flag 
 Literature 
 Music 
 People 
 Sports 
 Outline Index 
 Category 
 Portal 
 v t e North American cuisine Sovereign states 
 Antigua and Barbuda 
 Bahamas 
 Barbados 
 Belize 
 Canada 
 Costa Rica 
 Cuba 
 Dominica 
 Dominican Republic 
 El Salvador 
 Grenada 
 Guatemala 
 Haiti 
 Honduras 
 Jamaica 
 Mexico 
 Nicaragua 
 Panama 
 Saint Kitts and Nevis 
 Saint Lucia 
 Saint Vincent and the Grenadines 
 Trinidad and Tobago 
 United States 
 Dependencies and other territories 
 Anguilla 
 Aruba 
 Bermuda 
 Bonaire 
 British Virgin Islands 
 Cayman Islands 
 Curaçao 
 Greenland 
 Guadeloupe 
 Martinique 
 Montserrat 
 Puerto Rico 
 Saint Barthélemy 
 Saint Martin 
 Saint Pierre and Miquelon 
 Saba 
 Sint Eustatius 
 Sint Maarten 
 Turks and Caicos Islands 
 United States Virgin Islands 
 
   Food portal 
   Category: North American cuisine 
 
 v t e Cuisines Continental 
 African 
 North 
 West 
 list 
 Americas 
 Caribbean 
 North 
 South 
 list 
 Asian 
 Caucasian 
 Central 
 Indian subcontinent 
 Levantine 
 list 
 European 
 Balkan 
 Central 
 Eastern 
 list 
 Oceanic 
 Intercontinental
 Global 
 Latin American 
 Mediterranean 
 Middle Eastern 
 National  and regional 
 Afghan 
 Albanian 
 Algerian 
 American 
 Californian 
 Floribbean 
 Hawaiian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Lowcountry (South Carolina) 
 New England 
 New Mexico 
 Pacific Northwest 
 Pennsylvania Dutch 
 Puerto Rican 
 Southern US 
 Southwest US 
 Texas 
 Angolan 
 Argentine 
 Armenian 
 Australian 
 Austrian 
 Azerbaijani 
 Bahraini 
 Bangladeshi 
 Barbadian 
 Belarusian 
 Belgian 
 Belizean 
 Beninese 
 Bhutanese 
 Bolivian 
 Bosnian-Herzegovinian 
 Botswana 
 Brazilian 
 British 
 Channel Islands 
 English 
 Gibraltarian 
 Northern Irish 
 Saint Helena 
 Scottish 
 Welsh 
 Bruneian 
 Bulgarian 
 Burkinabé 
 Burmese 
 Burundian 
 Cambodian 
 Cameroonian 
 Canadian 
 Acadian 
 Québécois 
 Central African Republic 
 Chadian 
 Chilean 
 Chinese 
 Cantonese 
 Hong Kong 
 Macanese 
 Tibetan 
 Xinjiang 
 Colombian 
 Congolese 
 Corsican 
 Croatian 
 Cuban 
 Cypriot 
 Czech 
 Danish 
 Faroese 
 Greenlandic 
 Djiboutian 
 Dominican 
 Dominican Republic 
 Dutch 
 East Timorese 
 Ecuadorian 
 Egyptian 
 Emirati 
 Equatorial Guinean 
 Eritrean 
 Estonian 
 Ethiopian 
 Fijian 
 Filipino 
 Finnish 
 French 
 Occitan 
 French Guianan 
 Gabonese 
 Gambian 
 Georgian 
 German 
 Ghanaian 
 Greek 
 Cretan 
 Epirotic 
 Greek Macedonian 
 Heptanesean 
 Guatemalan 
 Guinea-Bissauan 
 Guinean 
 Haitian 
 Honduran 
 Hungarian 
 Icelandic 
 Indian 
 Arunachalese 
 Assamese 
 Bengali 
 Bihari 
 Goan 
 Gujarati 
 Himachal Pradesh 
 Kashmiri 
 Jharkhandi 
 Karnataka 
 Kerala 
 Maharashtrian 
 Manipuri 
 Meghalayan 
 Mizo 
 Naga 
 Odia 
 Punjabi 
 Rajasthani 
 Sikkimese 
 Sindhi 
 Tamil 
 Telangana 
 Telugu 
 Indonesian 
 Acehnese 
 Balinese 
 Banjar 
 Batak 
 Betawi 
 Indo 
 Javanese 
 Madurese 
 Makassar 
 Minahasan 
 Minangkabau 
 Palembangese 
 Sundanese 
 Iranian 
 Iraqi 
 Irish 
 Israeli 
 Italian 
 Abruzzese 
 Ligurian 
 Lombard 
 Lucanian 
 Neapolitan 
 Roman 
 Sardinian 
 Sicilian 
 Venetian 
 Ivorian 
 Jamaican 
 Japanese 
 Okinawan 
 Jordanian 
 Kazakh 
 Kenyan 
 Korean 
 North Korean 
 South Korean 
 Kosovan 
 Kuwaiti 
 Kyrgyz 
 Lao 
 Latvian 
 Lebanese 
 Lesotho 
 Liberian 
 Libyan 
 Liechtensteiner 
 Lithuanian 
 Luxembourg 
 Macedonian 
 Malagasy 
 Malawian 
 Malaysian 
 Sabahan 
 Sarawakian 
 Maldivian 
 Malian 
 Maltese 
 Mauritanian 
 Mauritian 
 Mexican 
 Moldovan 
 Monégasque 
 Mongolian 
 Montenegrin 
 Moroccan 
 Mozambican 
 Namibian 
 Nauruan 
 Nepalese 
 New Zealand 
 Nicaraguan 
 Niger 
 Nigerian 
 Niuean 
 Norwegian 
 Omani 
 Pakistani 
 Palestinian 
 Panamanian 
 Peruvian 
 Polish 
 Portuguese 
 Qatari 
 Romanian  (incl.  Transylvanian Saxon ) 
 Russian 
 Bashkir 
 Chechen 
 Circassian 
 Komi 
 Mordovian 
 Sakha 
 Tatar 
 Udmurt 
 Yamal 
 Rwandan 
 Saint Lucian 
 Salvadoran 
 Sammarinese 
 São Tomé and Príncipe 
 Saudi Arabian 
 Senegalese 
 Serbian 
 Seychellois 
 Sierra Leonean 
 Singaporean 
 Slovak 
 Slovenian 
 Somali 
 South African 
 Spanish 
 Andalusian 
 Asturian 
 Balearic 
 Basque 
 Canarian 
 Cantabrian 
 Catalan 
 Extremaduran 
 Galician 
 Manchegan 
 Valencian 
 Sri Lankan 
 Sudanese 
 Swazi 
 Swedish 
 Swiss 
 Syrian 
 Taiwanese 
 Tajik 
 Tanzanian 
 Zanzibari 
 Thai 
 Togolese 
 Tunisian 
 Turkish 
 Turkmen 
 Trinidadian and Tobagonian 
 Ugandan 
 Ukrainian 
 Uruguayan 
 Uzbek 
 Venezuelan 
 Vietnamese 
 Western Saharan 
 Yemeni 
 Zambian 
 Zimbabwean 
 Ethnic 
 Ainu 
 Arab 
 Indonesian 
 Aromanian 
 Assyrian 
 Balochi 
 Berber 
 Cajun 
 Chinese 
 American 
 Canadian 
 Chifa 
 Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Crimean Tatar 
 Greek American 
 Hazaragi 
 Indian 
 Anglo-Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Indigenous American 
 Inuit 
 Italian American 
 Kurdish 
 Livonian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Malay 
 Ossetian 
 Parsi 
 Pashtun 
 Peranakan 
 Romani 
 Sámi 
 Soul food 
 Sylheti 
 Transylvanian Saxon 
 Yup'ik 
 Religious 
 Buddhist 
 Christian 
 Goan Catholic 
 Mangalorean Catholic 
 Mennonite 
 Hindu 
 Islamic 
 Chinese 
 Ital 
 Jain 
 Jewish 
 American 
 Ashkenazi 
 Bukharan 
 Ethiopian 
 Mizrahi 
 Sephardic 
 Syrian 
 Ritual slaughter 
 Sikh 
 Historical 
 Ancient Egyptian 
 Ancient Greek 
 Ancient Israelite 
 Ancient Roman 
 Antebellum America 
 Aztec 
 Byzantine 
 Early modern European 
 Historical Chinese 
 Historical Indian subcontinent 
 Historical North Indian and Pakistani 
 History of agriculture 
 History of alcoholic drinks 
 History of bread 
 History of seafood 
 History of vegetarianism 
 Historical Argentine 
 Historical Japanese 
 Inca 
 Mayan 
 Muisca 
 Mughal 
 Medieval 
 Ottoman 
 Peasant 
 Soviet 
 Thirteen Colonies 
 Styles 
 Classique 
 Fast food 
 Fusion 
 New American 
 Eurasian 
 Haute 
 Molecular gastronomy 
 Note by Note 
 Nouvelle 
 Lists 
 List of cuisines 
 List of historical cuisines 
 Lists of prepared foods 
 Related 
 Cookbook 
 Cooking 
 Culinary arts 
 Drink 
 Food 
 history 
 Diet 
 Meal preparation 
 
   Food portal 
   Drink portal 
   Category 
   Commons 
   Cookbook 
   WikiProject 
   Outline 
 
 Authority control : National libraries  
 Israel 
 United States 
 
  
NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw2365
Cached time: 20230311030813
Cache expiry: 1814400
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc, no‐toc‐conversion]
CPU time usage: 0.544 seconds
Real time usage: 0.738 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3089/1000000
Post‐expand include size: 156389/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 14178/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 29/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 60198/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.300/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 8065839/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/400
 
 
Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  542.712      1 -total
 19.77%  107.272      1 Template:Dominican_Republic_topics
 19.48%  105.696      1 Template:Country_topics
 18.57%  100.758      1 Template:Reflist
 14.71%   79.849      5 Template:Cite_web
 12.27%   66.608      1 Template:Culture_of_the_Dominican_Republic
 11.92%   64.701      1 Template:Sidebar
 10.36%   56.224      1 Template:More_citations_needed
  9.56%   51.870      1 Template:Ambox
  9.33%   50.660      8 Template:Fix
 
  Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:idhash:8034023-0!canonical and timestamp 20230311030813 and revision id 1141659064. Rendering was triggered because: page-view
  
 esi <esi:include src="/esitest-fa8a495983347898/content" />  
 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Dominican_Republic_cuisine&oldid=1141659064 " 
 Categories :  Dominican Republic cuisine Dominican Republic culture Caribbean cuisine Latin American cuisine Hidden categories:  Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from June 2019 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2023 Articles with unsourced statements from July 2021 Articles with unsourced statements from November 2021 Articles with J9U identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  This page was last edited on 26 February 2023, at 04:36  (UTC) . 
 Text is available under the  Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0 ;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the  Terms of Use  and  Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the  Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. 
 
 
 Privacy policy 
 About Wikipedia 
 Disclaimers 
 Contact Wikipedia 
 Mobile view 
 Developers 
 Statistics 
 Cookie statement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
