
 
 
 Jump to content 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle sidebar 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Create account Log in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Personal tools 
 
 
 
 
   Create account   Log in 
 
 
 
 
		Pages for logged out editors  learn more 
 
 
 Contributions Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Navigation 
 
 
 Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate 
 
 
 
 
 Contribute 
 
 
 Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file 
 
 
 
 
 Tools 
 
 
 What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item 
 
 
 
 
 Print/export 
 
 
 Download as PDF Printable version 
 
 
 
 
 In other projects 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons Wikibooks 
 
 
 
 
 Languages 
 
 On this Wikipedia the language links are at the top of the page across from the article title.  Go to top . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CentralNotice  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Contents 
 move to sidebar 
 hide 
 
 
 
 
 (Top) 
 
 
 
 
 
 1 History 
 
 
				Toggle History subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 1.1 12th–13th centuries 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.2 14th–15th centuries 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.3 16th–17th centuries 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.4 18th–19th centuries 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.5 20th–21st centuries 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 Regional cuisines 
 
 
				Toggle Regional cuisines subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 2.1 Northeastern cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.2 Western cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.3 Southern cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 Foods origin 
 
 
				Toggle Foods origin subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 3.1 Native 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.2 Colonial influences 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.3 International influences 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4 Structure of meals 
 
 
				Toggle Structure of meals subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 4.1 Breakfast and lunch 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.2 Tea time 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.3 Borreltijd 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.4 Dinner 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.5 Dessert 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.6 Special occasions 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.7 Sweets 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.8 Alcoholic drinks 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.9 Fast food 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5 Gallery 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6 See also 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 7 References 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8 External links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
						Toggle the table of contents
					 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle the table of contents 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dutch cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 29 languages 
 
 
 
 Ænglisc العربية Azərbaycanca Български Čeština Deutsch Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Jawa ქართული Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Русский Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 
 Edit links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Article Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 English 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 More 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
 
 
 Culinary traditions of the Netherlands 
 
 
 Life in the  Netherlands 
 Culture 
 History 
 People 
 Language 
 Art 
 Architecture 
 Cuisine 
 Culture 
 Customs 
 Holidays 
 Literature 
 Media 
 Film 
 Television 
 Radio 
 Newspapers 
 Magazines 
 Internet 
 Music 
 Sport 
 
 Economy 
 Economy 
 Recycling 
 Taxation 
 Transport 
 Tourism 
 
 Society 
 Demographics 
 Education 
 Customs 
 Languages 
 Religion 
 Health 
 
 Government 
 Foreign Policy 
 Human Rights 
 Law 
 Law enforcement 
 Military 
 Politics 
 
 Policies 
 Gedogen 
 Abortion 
 Drug policy 
 Euthanasia 
 Pillarisation 
 Prostitution 
 Same-sex marriage 
 v t e 
 Dutch cuisine  ( Dutch :  Nederlandse keuken ) is formed from the  cooking  traditions and practices of the  Netherlands . The country's cuisine is shaped by its location in the fertile  North Sea   river delta  of the  European Plain , giving rise to  fishing ,  farming  (for crops and domesticated animals), and trading over sea, its former colonial empire and the  spice trade .
 Dutch cuisine is often seen as bland, due to a culture of frugality. In the late 19th and early 20th century, Dutch food became designed to be economical and filling rather than pleasing, [1]  with many vegetables and little meat: breakfast and lunch are typically bread with toppings like  cheese , while dinner is  meat and potatoes , supplemented with seasonal vegetables. The diet contains many dairy products and is relatively high in carbohydrates and fat, reflecting the dietary needs of the  laborers . Without many refinements, it is best described as  rustic , though many holidays are celebrated with special foods.
 During the 20th century, Dutch cuisine and diet changed. Influenced by the eating culture of its colonies (particularly the  Dutch East Indies ), it became more  cosmopolitan  and most international cuisines are represented in the  major cities .
 
   A  still life  with turkey pie,  oysters ,  lemon  and  grapes  by  Pieter Claesz  (1627). 
 
 History [ edit ] 
 12th–13th centuries [ edit ] 
 See also:  History of the Netherlands 
 Little evidence is available about food and drink in the late medieval  Low Countries . In the consumption of  pottage , the Low Countries were not very different from other Western European countries during the Middle Ages. Half-liquid pottage consisted of milk, beer, water, root vegetable and peas or grain, sometimes enriched with a piece of meat. The content changed throughout the seasons. [2] 
 Beer  flavoured with  gruit  was produced until the 14th century at the monasteries. Gruit was replaced with  hop , a tradition introduced from the German city of  Bremen , and this started off a beer culture and the Low Counties as a major exporter of beer. Beer was in medieval times the common drink as water was of poor quality, and  milk —coming from the low-lying grasslands of Holland and Friesland—was mainly used for the production of  butter  and  cheese . Dutch butter and cheese became famous products at an early stage and continued to be so for centuries. [2] 
 
 14th–15th centuries [ edit ] 
 The sea and the rivers provided an abundance of fish. The process of  gibbing  was invented by  Willem Beukelszoon , [3]  a 14th-century  Zealand  fisherman. The invention created an export industry for  salt herring  ( Dutch :  maatjesharing ) that was monopolized by the Dutch. They began to build ships and eventually moved from trading in herring to colonizing and the Dutch Lowlands (the Netherlands as a country did not exist until 1581), ultimately leading to the Dutch becoming a seafaring power. [4] 
 Herring is still very important to the Dutch who celebrate  Vlaggetjesdag  (Flag Day) each spring, as a tradition that dates back to the 14th century when fishermen went out to sea in their small boats to capture the annual catch ( Hollandse Nieuwe ), and to preserve and export their catch abroad. [ citation needed ] 
 Gardening was initially practiced by monasteries, but castles and country houses began also to develop gardens with herbs and vegetables and hunting grounds. The famous tourist attraction and flower park  Keukenhof  (literally  kitchen garden ) is an example of a former 15th-century hunting ground and herbs garden for  Jacqueline, Countess of Hainaut 's castle kitchen. Orchards for pears and apples connected to castles were later used for export and set off a Dutch  horticulture  tradition that remains to this day. [2] 
 During the 15th century  haute cuisine  began to emerge, largely limited to the aristocracy. Cookery books from this period are aimed at the upper class. The first Dutch-language cook book printed in Brussels is called  Een notabel boecxken van cokeryen  ( A notable book of cookery ) from ca. 1510. [5]  It offers medieval recipes for festivities, such as sauces, game, jellies, fish, meat, pies, eggs, dairy products, candied quinces and ginger and contains one of the oldest known recipes for  appeltaerten , apple pie. The recipes come from various sources, 61 of them are translations of the French recipe book  Le Viandier . [6] 
 Historically, Dutch cuisine was closely related to northern  French cuisine , since the two countries have nearby borders and the Low Countries and Northern France have been historically ruled by the  Dukes of Burgundy . This is still visible in traditional Dutch restaurants and the Southern regional cuisine, that is still colloquially referred to as  Bourgondisch . [2] 
 
 16th–17th centuries [ edit ] 
 As the  Dutch Republic  entered its  Golden Age  in the 17th century, dishes of this kind became available to the wealthy middle class as well, often consisting of a rich variety of fruits, cheeses, meat, wine, and nuts. [7] [8]  The  Dutch Empire  enabled spices, sugar, and exotic fruits to be imported to the country.
 The  Dutch East India Company  was the first to import coffee on a large scale to Europe. [9]  The Dutch later grew the crop in  Java  and  Ceylon . [10]  The first exports of  Indonesian coffee  from Java to the Netherlands occurred in 1711. [11]  By the late 17th century, tea and coffee consumption were increasing and becoming part of everyday life. Tea was served with sweets, candy or marzipan and cookies. The availability of relatively cheaper spices resulted in a tradition of spiced cookies called  speculaas , the exact recipes of which were kept secret by bakers. [12] 
 Vegetables, meat, poultry and salted, smoked or fresh fish and eggs were prepared in the Dutch kitchens of the time. [13]  The meal started with green salads and cold or warm cooked vegetables with dressing, vegetable dishes with butter, herbs or edible flowers and continued with numerous fish and meat dishes.
 Exotic ingredients such as dates, rice, cinnamon, ginger and saffron were used. Savoury tarts and pastries followed. The meal ended with jellies, cheese, nuts and sweet pastries, washed down with sweet spiced wine. [14]  Of course, even in the Golden Age, not everyone could afford such luxuries and the everyday meal of the ordinary Dutchman was still a humble affair of grain or legume pottage served with  rye . [15] 
 
 
 Dutch Golden Age  – historical cuisine 
 
 
 
 Kitchen scene from 1644, with swan pie, game, fish and apples, by  David Teniers the Younger 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mince pie and Lemon by  Pieter Claesz , 1625
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Clara Peeters  (1594–1657) Still Life with Crab, Shrimps and Lobster
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Clara Peeters  (1594–1657) Table with Orange, Olives and Pie
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Clara Peeters  (1594–1657)  Still life  with Cheeses, Artichoke, and Cherries
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Still-Life with fruit, nuts and cheese by  Floris Claeszoon van Dyck 
 
 
 
 
 18th–19th centuries [ edit ] 
   Vincent van Gogh ,  Woman lifting Potatoes , 1885 
 In the late 18th century the  potato  gained popularity, to become a staple food by 1800. [16]  In the early 19th century, while the rich could eat what they desired, the working population ate bread ( rye bread  in some areas) and potatoes, pancakes in some areas, occasionally fish and other seafood, fruit and vegetables, but usually little meat: "the diet of the Dutch in the nineteenth century consisted of some bread, and a great deal of potatoes". Their diet was frugal, composed of such simple dishes as  bread  and  herring . Throughout the 19th century many people suffered from some form of malnutrition. [16] 
 Potatoes, in fact, were often eaten at every meal, every day of the week. They were peeled and boiled for the main meal, lunch, and then warmed and mashed for dinner, with leftovers saved for breakfast. They were served with salt, sometimes vinegar, but without gravy or any other fat, making for a diet with "incredible monotony". [16] 
 During the 19th century, the poor people drank little else but water (of poor quality), sometimes watery coffee (or  chicory ) or tea. In some areas hot chocolate was consumed, but the most popular drinks (beside water) were  beer  and  jenever . For most of the century beer was drunk in the southern part, where Catholicism dominated, and in Catholic enclaves in the other areas. Jenever consumption early in the 19th century was twice that of the equivalent consumption of distilled spirits in neighbouring countries. [16] 
 
 20th–21st centuries [ edit ] 
 The modest and plain look of what is nowadays considered the traditional Dutch cuisine, appears to be the result of a fairly recent development. In the twentieth century, the new availability of  mass education  meant that a great number of girls could be sent to a new school type, the  Huishoudschool  (housekeeping school), where young women were trained to become housewives and where lessons in cooking cheap and simple meals were a major part of the curriculum, often based on more traditional Dutch dishes, and leading to increased uniformity in the Dutch diet. Values taught in that school system included frugality, proper table manners, and healthy eating.
 
 Regional cuisines [ edit ] 
   The  Gouda  cheese market 
 Modern culinary writers distinguish between three general regional forms of Dutch cuisine. [17] 
 
 Northeastern cuisine [ edit ] 
   A  metworst  from  Groningen . 
 The regions in the north and east of the Netherlands, roughly the provinces of  Groningen ,  Friesland ,  Drenthe ,  Overijssel  and  Gelderland  north of the  great rivers  make up north eastern Dutch cuisine.
 The region is the least populated area of the Netherlands. The late (18th century) introduction of large scale agriculture means that the cuisine is generally known for its many kinds of meats. The relative lack of farms allowed for an abundance of  game  and  husbandry , though dishes near the coastal regions of Friesland, Groningen and the parts of Overijssel bordering the  IJsselmeer  also include a large amount of fish.
 The various dried sausages, belonging to the  metworst -family of Dutch sausages, are found throughout the region and are highly prized for their often very strong taste. Most towns and various villages have their own variety of this sausage. The region also produces the traditional smoked sausages, of which ( Gelderse )  rookworst  is the most renowned. These sausages traditionally have been smoked over wood chips, and are served after they have been boiled in water. The sausage contains a lot of fat and is very juicy. Larger sausages are often eaten alongside  stamppot ,  hutspot  or  zuurkool  ( sauerkraut ); whereas smaller ones are often eaten as a  street food . In Gelderland and Overijssel  kruudmoes  [ nl ]  was a traditional food.
 The provinces are also home to  rye bread  (a kind of  Pumpernickel ) and many kinds of pastries and cookies. In contrast to southern Dutch cuisine, which tends to be soft and moist, the northeastern rye bread and pastries generally are of a hard texture, and the pasties are heavily spiced with  ginger  or  succade  or contain small bits of meat. Various kinds of  Kruidkoek  (such as  Groninger koek  [ nl ] ),  Fryske dúmkes  [ nl ]  and  spekdik  [ nl ]  (small savory pancakes cooked in a waffle iron) are considered typical.
 Each of the provinces of Gelderland, Overijssel and Groningen has a long-standing  rye bread  tradition, but rye bread from Friesland became well known because of its taste. Notable characteristics of  Roggebrood  [ nl ]  (Frisian rye bread) is its long baking time (up to 20 hours), resulting in a sweet taste and a deep dark color.
 In terms of alcoholic beverages, the region is renowned for its many  bitters  (such as  Beerenburg ) and other high-proof liquors rather than beer, which is, apart from  Jenever , typical for the rest of the country.
 As a coastal region, Friesland is home to low-lying grasslands, and thus has a cheese production in common with the Western cuisine.  Friese Nagelkaas  ( Friesian Clove ) is a notable example.
 
 Western cuisine [ edit ] 
   A small  Edam  cheese 
   A  Zeeuwse bolus  with butter 
 The provinces of  North Holland ,  South Holland ,  Zeeland ,  Utrecht  and the Gelderlandic region of  Betuwe  are the parts of the Netherlands which make up the region in which western Dutch cuisine is found.
 Due to the abundance of surface water and grassland, necessary to sustain dairy cattle, the area is known for its many dairy products, which for centuries includes prominent cheeses such as  Gouda ,  Leyden  (spiced cheese with cumin) and  Edam  (traditionally in small spheres), as well as relatively new trademarked cheese brands such as  Leerdammer , and  Beemster . Zeeland and South Holland produce a lot of butter, which contains a larger amount of  milkfat  than most other European butter varieties. A by-product of the butter-making process,  buttermilk  ( karnemelk ), is also considered typical for this region.
 Seafood  such as  soused herring ,  mussels  (called  Zeeuwse Mosselen , since all Dutch mussels for consumption are cleaned in Zeeland's  Oosterschelde ),  eels ,  oysters  and  shrimps  are widely available and typical for the region.  Kibbeling , once a local delicacy consisting of small chunks of battered  white fish , has become a national  fast food , just as  Lekkerbekje .
 
   Ossenworst with Amsterdam onions. 
 Indirectly a product of the sea is  Ossenworst  (''ox sausage''), a raw beef sausage originating in  Amsterdam , which used to be made of  ox  meat. This specialty has its origins in the seventeenth century, when oxen were imported large-scale from Denmark and Germany. The spices in the sausage, such as  pepper ,  cloves , mace and  nutmeg , came from the  Dutch East Indies . Traditionally,  aged beef  was used for this sausage, that was then  smoked  at a low temperature such that the meat remained raw. Present-day Amsterdam ossenworst is made with lean beef, and the sausage is now often neither smoked nor aged. It is often eaten with  Amsterdamse uitjes , a kind of  pickled onion .
 Pastries in this area tend to be quite doughy, and often contain large amounts of sugar; either caramelized, powdered or crystallized. The  oliebol  (in its modern form) and  Zeeuwse bolus  are good examples. Cookies are also produced in great number and tend to contain a lot of butter and sugar, like  stroopwafel , as well as a filling of some kind, mostly almond, like  Gevulde koek  [ nl ] .
 Zaanstreek  in  North Holland  is known for its  chocolate  industry, due to the development of the  Dutch process chocolate  in 1828 by  Coenraad van Houten , that introduced the modern era of chocolate and was instrumental in the transformation of chocolate to its solid form which was up till then drunk as a liquid. The popular  chocomel , a since 1932 trademarked chocolate-flavoured milk, is often the choice of drink as  Koek-en-zopie , the food and drink sold on the ice during periods of ice skating. Zaanstreek is since the 16th century also known for its  mayonnaise  (for the Dutch a popular condiment to eat with  French fries ), and typical whole-grain  mustards  (popular to eat with  bitterballen ) .
 The traditional alcoholic beverages of this region are  beer  (strong pale lager) and  Jenever , a high proof  juniper -flavored spirit, that came to be known in England as  gin . A noted exception within the traditional Dutch alcoholic landscape,  Advocaat , a rich and creamy liqueur made from eggs, sugar and brandy, is also native to this region.
 
 Southern cuisine [ edit ] 
   Limburgish  vlaai 
 Southern Dutch cuisine constitutes the cuisine of the Dutch provinces of  North Brabant  and  Limburg  and the  Flemish Region  in  Belgium . It is renowned for its many rich pastries, soups,  stews  and vegetable dishes and is often called  Burgundian  which is a Dutch idiom invoking the rich Burgundian court which ruled the  Low Countries  in the  Middle Ages  renowned for its splendor and great feasts.
 It is the only Dutch culinary region which developed an  haute cuisine  and it forms the base of most traditional Dutch restaurants including typical  main courses  served such as  Biefstuk ,  Varkenshaas ,  Ossenhaas , these are premium cuts of meat, generally  pork  or  beef , accompanied by a wide variety of sauces and potatoes which have been double fried in the traditional Dutch (or Belgian) manner.
 
   Hachee 
 Stews, such as  hachee , a stew of  onions ,  beef  and a thick gravy, contain a lot of flavour and require hours to prepare. Vegetable soups are made from richly flavored  stock  or  bouillon  and typically contain small meatballs alongside a wide variety of different vegetables. Asparagus and  witloof  are highly prized and traditionally eaten with cheese or  ham .
 Pastries are abundant, often with rich fillings of cream, custard or fruits. Cakes, such as the  Vlaai  from Limburg and the  Moorkop  and  Bossche Bol  from Brabant, are typical pastries. Savoury pastries also occur, with the  Brabantian worstenbroodje  (a roll with a sausage of  ground beef , literally translates into sausage bread) being the most popular.
 The traditional alcoholic beverage of the region is beer. There are many local brands, ranging from  Trappist beer  to  Kriek lambic . 5 of the 11  International Trappist Association-recognised breweries  in the world, are located in the Southern Dutch cultural area. Beer, like wine in French cuisine, is also used in cooking; often in stews.
 
 Foods origin [ edit ] 
 Native [ edit ] 
 Dutch agriculture roughly consists of five sectors:  tillage -based,  greenhouse -based, fruit agriculture,  animal husbandry  and  fishery .
 
 Tillage-based crops include  potatoes ,  kale ,  beetroot ,  green beans ,  carrots ,  celeriac ,  onions , all the common kinds of  cabbages ,  Brussels sprouts ,  cauliflower ,  endive ,  spinach ,  Belgian endive ,  asparagus  and  lettuce . Recently some initiatives have been started to encourage interest in such "forgotten" vegetables as  common purslane ,  medlars ,  parsnips , and  black salsify . 
 Greenhouses are used to produce  tomatoes ,  lettuce ,  cucumbers , and  sweet peppers . 
 Fruits include  apples ,  pears ,  cherries ,  berries , and  plums . 
 The Dutch keep  cattle  for milk, butter, cheese, and for their meat,  chickens  for their eggs and for meat,  pigs  for their meat and a variety of non-edible products, and sheep for their  wool  and  meat .  Goats  are increasingly kept for a cheese production. Traditionally  horse meat  was a common dish (steak, sausage, and thinly-sliced smoked meat), but it is less popular today. 
 The fishery sector lands  cod ,  herring ,  European plaice ,  sole ,  mackerel ,  eels ,  tuna ,  salmon ,  trout ,  oysters ,  mussels ,  shrimp , and  sardines . The Dutch are famous for their smoked eel and  soused herring , which is eaten raw. 
 
 Colonial influences [ edit ] 
   A small  rijsttafel  at a private party in  Rotterdam ,  Netherlands 
 Further information:  Indonesian cuisine 
 Indonesian and  Indo  dishes became popular due to the arrival of former Dutch colonials and people of  Eurasian  descent into the Netherlands, especially after the  independence of Indonesia  from  Dutch colonial rule  in 1945. C.  Countess   van Limburg Stirum  writes in her book  The Art of Dutch Cooking  (1962): "There exist countless Indonesian dishes, some of which take hours to prepare; but a few easy ones have become so popular that they can be regarded as 'national dishes'". She then provides recipes for  nasi goreng  (fried rice),  pisang goreng  (fried bananas),  lumpia  goreng  (fried spring rolls),  bami  (fried noodles),  satay  (grilled skewered meat),  satay  sauce ( peanut sauce ), and  sambal  oelek  (chilli paste). [18]  Of the Dutch-Indonesian fusion dishes the best known is the  rijsttafel  ("rice table"), which is an elaborate meal consisting of many (up to several dozen) small dishes (hence filling "an entire table"). While popular in the Netherlands,  rijsttafel  is now rare in Indonesia itself, while almost every town in the Netherlands has an Indonesian-Chinese restaurant. A popular fusion dish is  friet saté  [ nl ] ,  patatje oorlog  [ nl ]  or  patatje pinda , French fries with satay sauce as condiment, served at  snack bars . [19] 
 Surinamese cuisine  is also popular in the Netherlands, especially in the bigger cities. Surinamese establishments commonly offer  roti , a staple of the  Hindustani  community in Suriname, various Surinamese interpretations of  Chinese Indonesian cuisine , as well as Surinamese sandwiches ( Surinaamse broodjes ).
 
 International influences [ edit ] 
 Italian and American style  pizzerias  have become widespread. In recent decades,  Arab  and  Turkish dishes  have become increasingly popular as well, especially as a snack food. In larger towns and cities, small restaurants selling  kebabs ,  shawarma , and  falafel  can be found on virtually any street corner. Nowadays, food from every nook or corner of the world can be found throughout the country, especially in bigger towns and cities, including Greek, Thai, Japanese, and African cuisines.
 
 Structure of meals [ edit ] 
 Breakfast and lunch [ edit ] 
   Uitsmijter spek en kaas : a couple of eggs fried with bacon and cheese 
 Breakfast and lunch are similar in Dutch cuisine and both consist of bread with a wide variety of  cold cuts , cheeses and sweet toppings, such as  hagelslag ,  vlokken ,  muisjes ,  gestampte muisjes  [ nl ] ,  treacle  (a thick, dark brown sugar syrup called  stroop ) and  apple butter . Traditionally, lunch is not to be a warm meal, [20]  and eating leftovers for lunch is not common. Non-sweet spreads are  peanut butter  and a 'spread' version of  filet americain  [ nl ] , a finely ground raw lean beef with the addition of mayonnaise, mustard, paprika and other spices.
 The Dutch are famous for their dairy products and especially for their  cheeses . The vast majority of Dutch cheeses are semi-hard or hard cheeses. Famous Dutch cheeses include  Gouda ,  Edam , and  Leyden . A typically Dutch way of making cheese is to blend in herbs or spices during the first stages of the production process. Famous examples of this are cheeses with  cloves  (usually the  Friesian clove ),  cumin  (most famously  Leyden cheese ), or  nettles .
 Dutch bread tends to be very airy, as it is made from yeast dough. From the 1970s onward Dutch bread became predominantly  whole-grain , with additional seeds such as sunflower or pumpkin seeds often mixed with the dough for taste.  Rye  bread is one of the few dense breads of the Netherlands.  White bread  used to be the luxury bread, often made with milk as well as water. A  Frisian  luxury version of white bread is  suikerbrood , white bread with large lumps of  sugar  mixed with the dough.  Kerststol  is a traditional Dutch Christmas bread made of bread dough with sugar, dried fruits, raisins, almond paste; and currants, and lemon and orange zest, eaten sliced, spread with butter.
 Ontbijtkoek  may be eaten as a substitute for a full breakfast, or simply as a snack. It is served as a small slice, usually with butter.
 
 
 
 
 
 A  boterham met oude kaas  (sandwich with "old" cheese)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hagelslag ,  muisjes  and  vlokken  on display in a Dutch supermarket.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kruidkoek, peperkoek,  and  ontbijtkoek  are a few of the regional names for a local version of gingerbread.
 
 
 
 
 Tea time [ edit ] 
   Koffie verkeerd 
 Dutch people invite friends over for  koffietijd  (coffee time), which consists of coffee and cake or a biscuit, served between 10:00 and 11:00 am (before lunch), 4:00 pm (between lunch and dinner) or between 7:00 pm and 8:00 pm (after dinner).
The Dutch drink  coffee  and  tea  throughout the day, often served with a single or double biscuit.
 Dutch thrift led to the famous standard rule of only one cookie with each cup of coffee. It has been suggested that the reasons for this can be found in the Protestant mentality and upbringing in the northern Netherlands.
The traditionally Roman Catholic south does not share this tradition as for instance in Limburg, where serving a large  vlaai  (sweet pie or pastry with filling), cut into eight pieces, is tradition when visitors are expected.
 A popular Dutch story (never confirmed) says that in the late 1940s the wife of the then  Prime Minister ,  Willem Drees , served coffee and one biscuit to a visiting  American   diplomat , who then became convinced that the money from the  Marshall Plan  was being well spent.
 Café au lait  is also very common. It is called  koffie verkeerd  (literally "wrong coffee") and consists of equal parts black coffee and hot milk. The Dutch drink tea without milk and the tea is quite a lot weaker than typical English or Irish types of tea which are stronger and are usually taken with milk. Other hot drinks used to include warm  lemonade , called  kwast  (hot water with  lemon  juice), and  anijsmelk [21]  (hot milk with  aniseed ). In the autumn and winter the very popular  hot chocolate  or  chocolate milk  is drunk. Both  anijsmelk  and  kwast  are hardly drunk any more, having lost popularity.
 
 Borreltijd [ edit ] 
   Borrelnootjes 
 Between 5:00 pm and 9:00 pm it is time for an alcoholic beverage ( borrel ), beer or wine, and a savory snack. This is when the famous  bitterballen  are served, a miniature variant of the  kroket  ( croquette ), deep-fried ragout-filled balls with a crunchy layer of very fine bread crumbs.  Bitterballen  are served with mustard.
 Borreltijd  mostly occurs on the weekends.  Borrelnootje  (peanuts in a spiced crusty coating) and  kaasstengels  (crusty cheese sticks) are other typical  borrel  snacks.
 
 Dinner [ edit ] 
   Boerenkoolstamppot , with  rookworst 
   Dutch pea soup, also called  snert  [ nl ] 
 Dinner, traditionally served early by international standards, starts around or even before 6 p.m. It is not uncommon for restaurants outside of major cities to be closed by 8 p.m. The old-fashioned Dutch dinner consists of one simple course: potatoes, meat and vegetables—known under the acronym "AVG" ( aardappelen, vlees, groente ). AVG consists traditionally of potatoes with a large portion of vegetables and a small portion of meat with gravy, or a potato and vegetable stew. Vegetable stews served as side dishes are for example  rodekool met appeltjes  (red cabbage with apples), or  rode bieten  ( beetroot ). Regular spices used in stews of this kind may be  bay leaves ,  juniper  berries,  cloves , and vinegar, although strong spices are generally used sparingly. Stews are often served with  pickles , including  augurken  ( gherkins ) or cocktail onions ( zilveruitjes ). Due to the influx of other countries, traditional meals have lost some popularity.  Stamppot , mashed potatoes with different options for vegetables, is traditionally eaten in winter. If there is a  starter , it is usually soup.
 The below-listed meals have historic origins as meals for common laborers. From the 17th to the 19th century workers worked 10 to 16 hours on farms or in factories in unheated rooms, hence these meals are very heavy on calories and fat and were meant to replenish a laborer's energy.
 
 Stamppot , boiled potatoes mashed with vegetables and served with meat and/or gravy, coming in a number of varieties:
 Hutspot , made with potatoes, carrots, and onions served with meats like  rookworst  (smoked sausage), slow-cooked meat, or  bacon . Before potatoes were introduced in Europe  hutspot  was made from  parsnips , carrots, and onions. 
 Stamppot andijvie , raw  endive  mashed with hot potatoes, served with diced fried  spek  (a kind of bacon). 
 Hete bliksem  ("hot lightning"), boiled potatoes and green apples, served with  stroop  ( treacle ) or tossed with diced speck. 
 Stamppot zuurkool ,  sauerkraut  mashed with potatoes. Served with fried bacon or a sausage. Sometimes  curry  powder, raisins or slices of pineapple or banana are used to give a  stamppot  an exotic touch. 
 Stamppot boerenkool , curly  kale  mixed with potatoes, served with gravy, mustard, and  rookworst  sausage. It is one of the oldest and most popular Dutch dishes.  Boerenkool  was mentioned in cookbooks from the year 1661. Mashed potatoes were not used in this dish at that time, although the sausage was already served with the cabbage in this dish. The dish became popular after a few bad corn seasons, when potatoes became popular as food.  Stamppot boerenkool  is high in carbohydrates, which makes it a popular meal for cold winter days. 
 Snert , also called  erwtensoep , is a very thick pea soup that can be served either as a main dish or as an appetizer and is traditionally eaten during the winter.  Snert  has a very thick consistency and often includes pieces of pork and  rookworst  and is almost a stew rather than a soup. Due to the thick consistency of Dutch pea soup, it is often said that "...you should be able to stand a spoon upright in a good pea soup". [22]  It is customarily served with  roggebrood  ( rye bread ) spread with butter and topped with  katenspek  [ nl ] , a variety of bacon which is first cooked and then smoked. The meat from the soup may also be put on the rye bread and eaten with mustard. 
 Meat dishes:
 
   Slavink  (at top) with potatoes and sweet pepper sauce 
 Gehaktballen  ( meatballs , usually half pork, half beef). 
 Slavink , minced meat wrapped in bacon. 
 Balkenbrij , a type of  liverwurst  and  meatloaf . The butter-based  gravy  ( boterjus ) in which the meat has been fried or cooked is also served. A variant of this, eaten around the  IJsselmeer , is  butter en eek , where  vinegar  is added to the gravy. 
 Flour dishes:
 
 Pannekoeken  (large and thin pancakes) with bacon, apples, cheese, or raisins. 
 Poffertjes  (miniature pancakes) and  spekdik  (a Northern variant with  bacon ). 
 Wentelteefjes  [ nl ]  (similar to  French toast ). 
 Broeder , a type of boiled pudding usually containing  buckwheat , is a traditional dinner mainly in  West Friesland . 
 Seafood:
 
 Mosselen  [ nl ]  ( mussels ) are quite popular and commonly served with  French fries . 
 Kibbeling , chunks of sea fish that are battered and fried. 
 Dessert [ edit ] 
   chocolate and vanilla  vla 
 The final course is a sweet dessert, traditionally  yogurt  with some sugar or  vla , thin milk pudding (cooked milk with custard). Other desserts include:
 
 Vla  (vanilla custard) is often mixed with  yogurt  (and sometimes yoghurt and syrup, making the Dutch vla-flip). 
 Broodpap  [ nl ] , a bread porridge made from old bread, milk, butter, and sugar. 
 Griesmeelpudding  [ nl ] , a sweet pudding made of  semolina  and served with red berry coulis. 
 Grutten  [ nl ] 
 Haagse bluf  [ nl ] 
 Hangop  [ nl ] 
 Karnemelkse bloempap  [ nl ] 
 Karnemelkse gortepap  [ nl ] 
 Rijstebrij  [ nl ]  ( rice pudding ) 
 Krentjebrij  (also called  watergruwel ) 
 Special occasions [ edit ] 
   Appeltaart , Dutch  apple pie 
 The birth of a child is an occasion for serving   beschuit met muisjes  (Dutch  rusk  covered with sugared  aniseed ).
 The Dutch festival of  Sinterklaas  is held on 5 December. Saint Nicholas leaves gifts in the children's shoes. On this occasion, the Dutch drink hot chocolate milk and eat spice cookies, like  speculaas . Special treats distributed by Saint Nicholas' aide  Zwarte Piet  include  pepernoten  (irregularly shaped small cookies made of rye, honey and anise, often confused with kruidnoten);  kruidnoten  (gingernut-like biscuits but made with speculaas spices: a mix of cinnamon, pepper, cloves, and nutmeg);  boterletter  [ nl ]  or  banket  (a baked pastry crust filled with a sugared  almond paste  filling and shaped into a letter);  chocolate letters ;  marzipan  (often in the shape of animals or other topical items),  borstplaat  [ nl ]  (discs of  fondant ); and  taaitaai  [ nl ] .
 Christmas in the Netherlands is a typical family holiday. Traditionally there is family brunch with  kerststol  (fruited raisin bread; often filled with  almond paste ). Christmas dinner is also a family occasion where  rollade  [ nl ]  (a kind of  roulade  consisting of spiced pork), roast pork, game, or other luxury meat may be served. Another popular Christmas dinner tradition is  gourmetten , where people cook their own food on a special  gourmetset  on the table, although this isn't limited to Christmas.
 
   Oliebollen , a Dutch fried pastry, eaten on New Year's Eve 
 On New Year's Eve, Dutch houses smell of the piping hot oil of deep-fat fryers used to prepare  oliebollen  and  appelbeignets  [ nl ]  (a kind of  apple fritter ) – not to be mistaken for the  appelflap  [ nl ]  which is completely different. Also  ananasbeignets  (pineapple fritter) are considered a treat.  Oliebollen  are yeast dough balls, either plain or filled with glacé fruits, apple pieces, raisins, and  sultanas  are served with powdered sugar and are a special treat for New Year's Eve.
 In the 17th century, Dutch settlers also took their  oliebollen  to the  American colonies , where they are now known in a slightly different form as  doughnuts . In Limburg,  nonnevotten  are sometimes served during New Year's Eve, although it is mostly eaten during Carnival. Around New Years  kniepertjes  [ nl ]  are popular, in particular in the northern provinces.
 
   A  chocolate letter  of the first letter of the child's name is a typical present given to children during the  Sinterklaas  feast; it is supposedly thrown down the chimney by a  Piet  or by  Sinterklaas  himself 
 On birthdays all kinds of cakes and cookies are eaten, including  appeltaart ,  bokkenpootjes  [ nl ] ,  bossche bol ,  dikke koek  [ nl ] ,  Fryske dúmkes  [ nl ] ,  gevulde koek  [ nl ]  (cookies filled with  almond meal ),  Groninger koek  [ nl ] ,  janhagel ,  jan in de zak  [ nl ] ,  ketelkoek  [ nl ] ,   krakeling  [ nl ] ,  krentenwegge  [ nl ] ,  kruidkoek  [ nl ] ,  Limburgse vlaai  [ nl ] ,  oudewijvenkoek  [ nl ] ,  peperkoek  ( gingerbread ),  rijstekoekje  [ nl ] ,  spekkoek  (originally from Indonesia),  spritskoek  [ nl ] ,  tompouce ,  trommelkoek  [ nl ] ,  bitterkoekjes  [ nl ] ,  kletskopje  [ nl ] , and  stroopwafel .
 Poffertjes  are tiny puffed pancakes served on special occasions, served warm with melting butter and  powdered sugar  on top. They are mostly combined with a drink: plain milk, chocolate milk, or a yogurt drink. Cafeterias all around the Netherlands sell  poffertjes . Dutch people call such a restaurant a  poffertjeskraam  [ nl ] .  Poffertjes  can be eaten as a dessert after dinner or as a sweet lunch.
 
 Sweets [ edit ] 
   Griotten , a type of soft sweet Dutch liquorice 
 A famous Dutch sweet is  zoute drop  and other  liquorice sweets . These sweets are small, black and look much like gums. Similar to  Pontefract cakes  found in  Yorkshire , England. The four types of  drop  are soft sweet, soft salt, hard sweet, and hard salty  drop . Liquorice can be bought in shops and pharmacies. It also has a medical function as it is supposed to soften the symptoms throat and stomach aches. Dutch  drop  is sold in a large variety of shapes and forms. When they are flavored with coconut fondant they are called  Engelse drop  [ nl ]  (lit. "English liquorice";  liquorice allsorts ). Other varieties are made with honey ( honingdrop  [ nl ] ), salmiac salt ( muntdrop  [ nl ] ),  salmiac salt  ( salmiakdrop ), or bay laurel ( laurierdrop  [ nl ] ).
 Typical shapes are diamonds, ovals, oblongs, and coins (known as munten in Dutch, leading to the name "muntdrop"). A  honeycomb  shape for honey  honingdrop  [ nl ]  is also popular. Some manufacturers have introduced speciality ranges where the  drop  is made in thematic shapes, such as cars ( autodrop  [ nl ] ), farm animals, and farm machinery ( boerderijdrop  [ nl ] ), and so on.
 Another popular Dutch sweet is the  stroopwafel  (" stroop " meaning  syrup ). A thin waffle cookie, made typically in a  pizelle  pan, is sliced horizontally and used for sandwiching a layer of syrup, the  stroop . Occasionally, crushed hazelnuts will be mixed with the  stroop , and the dough may be spiced with cinnamon.
 One of the Dutch  confectionery  specialties is  vlaai . It is a sweet  pie  made with a yeast dough and filled with fruit (such as apple, apricot, pineapple, plum, or berry filling). Other ingredients may include  custard  and  rhubarb . Rice  vlaai , stuffed with a rich rice-and-cream filling, and  pudding  vlaai  sprinkled with crumbs are also popular. They can be additionally grafted with fruits,  whipped cream  or chocolate.
 Banket  is a type of pastry or cookie that is traditionally eaten on  Saint Nicholas Day  (6 December, though the actual celebration is on Saint Nicholas Eve, the 5th) and on  Christmas Eve  in  Holland .
 
 Alcoholic drinks [ edit ] 
   Bottles of  Heineken ,  Grolsch , and  Bavaria  beer 
 Wine plays only a modest role in Dutch cuisine, but there are many brands of  beer  and strong alcoholic liquor. The most famous  Dutch beer  producers are  Heineken  in the west,  Grolsch  in the east,  Alfa  and  Bavaria  in the south. Traditionally, North Brabant and Limburg had a strong beer tradition, brewing many different types of beer (not unlike  beer in Belgium ). Other traditional Dutch lagers that are commonly found in the country are Gulpener (especially in the northern Netherlands), Hertog Jan, and Budels. [23]  Jupiler is also a very common beer in the Netherlands, even though it is produced in Belgium. 
 Dutch cities in the west had a long brewing tradition as well, but in the 20th century, big brewers took over many smaller breweries or offered them a license to sell their beer brand, while stopping their own production. 
 In the 21st century, many new microbreweries were founded, brewing top fermenting beers in many different styles. In September 2013, there were 184 active breweries in the Netherlands. Popular styles include  bock ,  trappist ale ,  stout , and  wheat beer , though in the 2010s IPA variations became very popular throughout the country, especially in Amsterdam, as the craft brewing industry expanded. Some of the most popular craft breweries in the Netherlands are Brouwerij 't IJ, Jopen, and Two Chefs brewing.  
 Of the range of  bitters ,  Beerenburg  is the most famous. Strong liquors include  Jenever  (distilled malt wine and the precursor to  Gin ),  Brandewijn  [ nl ]  ( brandy ) and  Vieux , which is an imitation  Cognac , but also  Kandeel  (made from white wine),  Kraamanijs  [ nl ]  (a liquor made from  aniseed ),  Oranjebitter  [ nl ]  (an orange-flavored brandy, which is traditionally served on festivities surrounding the  royal family ),  Advocaat ,  Boerenjongens  ( raisins  in brandy), and  Boerenmeisjes  [ nl ]  ( apricots  in brandy).
 
 Fast food [ edit ] 
   A  frikandel  with fries 
   Hollandse nieuwe , "new" raw herring 
   Gerookte paling , smoked eel 
 The Dutch have their own types of  fast food , sold at a  snack bar . A Dutch fast food meal often consists of  French fries  (called  patat  or  friet ) with sauce and meat. The most common sauce to accompany French fries is  fritessaus  (a low-fat  mayonnaise  substitute), or  ketchup  (often the  currysaus  variety), hot  peanut sauce , and a pickle relish of chopped vegetables and spices, such as  piccalilli  or  joppiesaus .
 Sometimes the fries are served with a combination of sauces, such as  speciaal  (lit. "special"), which consists of mayonnaise with spiced ketchup, chopped raw onions, and  oorlog  [ nl ]  (lit. "war"), which consists of fries covered in hot peanut sauce, mayonnaise, and chopped raw onions.
 A recently introduced Dutch-Turkish variety from  Rotterdam  is the  kapsalon  (lit. "barbershop"), consisting of fries, topped with either  shawarma ,  kebab , or  döner kebab  and finished with salad, cheese, and various sauces such as  sambal  and  garlic sauce .
 Snacks made with meat are usually deep fried. This includes the  frikandel  (a skinless minced meat sausage) and the  kroket  (a meat  ragout  roll covered in breadcrumbs). They are available in bread rolls, especially  Broodje kroket  for carry out. A smaller, round version of the croquette is the  bitterballen  with mustard, often served as a snack in  bars  but also at official receptions.
 Regional snacks include the  eierbal  [ nl ]  (a combination of egg and ragout) in the north and east of the country, and  Brabants worstenbroodje  [ nl ]  or  saucijzenbroodje  [ nl ] , slightly spiced sausage meat baked in pastry (similar to the English  sausage roll ).
 Other snacks are the Indonesian-inspired  bamischijf  (a disk shaped  mie goreng   patty  which is covered with breadcrumbs and deep-fried),  nasischijf  [ nl ]  (similar to the  bamischijf , a deep-fried  nasi goreng  filled ball covered in breadcrumbs), and  kaassoufflé  (lit. "cheese soufflé", a deep fried  puff pastry  envelope with a small amount of cheese in the center, popular with vegetarians).
 Fish is also sold as a fast food at the so-called  viskraam , most often street stalls and market stalls that specialize only in prepared fish products. The Netherlands is famous for its  raw herring , optionally served together with chopped raw onions and  gherkins , which is eaten by lifting the herring high up into the air by its tail and then biting into it upwards (except for Amsterdam, where the herring is cut into pieces and served on paper plates). Raw herring is also commonly sold in a soft white bun.
 Other popular fish snacks are  kibbeling  (deep-fried, nugget-sized chunks of  Atlantic cod ),  lekkerbekje  (deep-fried cod, similar to the British  fish and chips , but delicately spiced and with a more  tempura -like batter),  gerookte paling  (smoked  European eel ), and  rollmops .
 
 
 Gallery [ edit ] 
 
 
 
 
 Bread comes in many varieties.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kapsalon , is a Dutch  fast food  dish created in 2003.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Krentenbollen  are eaten with butter or cheese for breakfast, lunch, or as a snack.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Stroopwafels  (syrup waffles) are a treat consisting of waffles with caramel-like syrup filling.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 A seasonal dish, asparagus is popularly eaten with ham, egg, and potatoes, with a butter sauce.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 A simple Dutch meal traditionally consists of meat, potatoes, butter, a boiled vegetable, and salad.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Satay, originally an Indonesian dish, is commonly served with chips in the Netherlands.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Babi panggang  speciaal  was, although seemingly  Indonesian-Chinese  in origin, possibly devised in the Netherlands.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Broodje bakkeljauw  is a Dutch-Surinamese bun containing  dried and salted cod , here with a chili dip made from  Madame Jeanette  chili peppers.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mussels ( Mosselen met friet ) are usually served with chips and dipping sauces
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sudderlapjes  is slowly simmered beef, most often served with potatoes.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gebakken sliptong : young  sole  (also known as "slip") fried in butter.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 A  nasischijf  [ nl ]  cut open showing the fried rice inside the deep fried snack
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kibbeling  are battered deep-fried pieces of fish which are popular as a snack.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Poffertjes  are made in a special, so-called,  poffertjespan .
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Griesmeelpudding met rode bessensaus  [ nl ]  is  semolina pudding  served with  red currant  sauce.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hutspot  with beef
 
 
 
 
 
 
 A  broodje  kroket  served for lunch.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bitterballen  are small snacks similar to the larger  kroketten  and are usually served with mustard.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Slices of  kerststol  showing the  almond paste  in the middle.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gebakken mosselen  (fried mussels) are cooked mussels fried with butter and onions.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Raw oysters, which are " platte zeeuwse oester ".
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Broodje bal  [ nl ] , a slice of bread with a meatball and gravy, halved meatball served on slices of Dutch whole wheat bread.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Slices of meat with hard-boiled eggs in the middle.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Eating " Hollandse Nieuwe " (Dutch  brined herring ) the Dutch way.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 A  saucijzenbroodje  [ nl ]  is a popular snack in the Netherlands and is the Dutch variant of a  sausage roll .
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bread with butter and chocolate sprinkles
 
 
 
 
 See also [ edit ] 
 
 Netherlands portal Food portal 
 Wannée Kookboek  (1910– ) 
 Nieuwe Haagse Kookboek  (1934– ) 
 List of Dutch chefs 
 Beer in the Netherlands 
 Dutch cheese markets 
 FEBO  – a chain of fast food outlets that uses vending machines to serve  krokets ,  frikandellen ,  kaassoufflés , and other items 
 Pannekoek  – a Dutch/Indonesian pancake 
 Stroopwafel  – a Dutch/Indonesian waffle 
 Babi panggang  – a Dutch/Indonesian/Chinese fusion dish 
 Spekkoek  – a Dutch/Indonesian cake 
 Coleslaw  – from the Dutch words "kool" (cabbage) and "sla" (salad) 
 Rijsttafel  – Dutch for rice table. Indonesian styled dish. Side dishes served in small portions, accompanied by rice prepared in several different ways 
 Hollandse Nieuwe  – Fresh (raw) Herring 
 References [ edit ] 
 
 
 ^   Mecking, Olga.  "The Netherlands Can Feed the World. Here's Why It Shouldn't" .  yes magizine . yes magizine . Retrieved  4 June  2022 . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   Kiple, Kenneth F. (2 August 2017).  The Cambridge world history of food. 2 . Cambridge University Press.  ISBN   978-0-521-40215-6 . Retrieved  2 August  2017  – via Google Books. 
 
 ^   "William Buckels" .  aboutus.org . 
 
 ^   "Dutch Food & Eating Out – Holland.com" .  holland.com . 10 October 2012. 
 
 ^   DBNL.  "Een notabel boecxken van cokeryen · dbnl" .  DBNL  (in Dutch) . Retrieved  4 September  2019 . 
 
 ^   DBNL.  "Een notabel boecxken van cokeryen · dbnl" .  DBNL  (in Dutch) . Retrieved  4 September  2019 . 
 
 ^   "Kantoor of bedrijfsruimte huren in Rotterdam of Zwolle" .  wereldexpat.nl . Archived from  the original  on 23 December 2008 . Retrieved  21 May  2015 . 
 
 ^   "Gastronomie: De Nederlandse keuken" .  Antiqbook.nl . Archived from  the original  on 28 September 2007 . Retrieved  2 August  2017 . 
 
 ^   Ukers, William H (1922). "The Introduction of Coffee into Holland".  All About Coffee . New York: Tea and Coffee Trade Journal.  ISBN   0-8103-4092-5 . Retrieved  12 February  2010 . 
 
 ^   Dobelis, Inge N, ed. (1986).  Magic and medicine of plants . Pleasantville, NY: Reader's Digest. pp. 370–371.  ISBN   0-89577-221-3 . 
 
 ^   Fischer, Dieter.  "History of Indonesian coffee" . Specialty Coffee Association of Indonesia. Archived from  the original  on 5 August 2009 . Retrieved  12 February  2010 . 
 
 ^   "Nederlands BakkerijMuseum" .  Bakkerijmuseum.nl . Retrieved  2 August  2017 . 
 
 ^   "Archived copy"   (PDF) . Archived from  the original   (PDF)  on 21 December 2013 . Retrieved  16 January  2015 . {{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: archived copy as title ( link ) 
 
 ^   De verstandige kok . Marleen Willebrands  ISBN   9077455205 
 
 ^   Karin Engelbrecht.  "Kastelenkookboek Cookbook Review" .  About.com Food . Retrieved  21 May  2015 . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   Wintle, Michael (2006).  "Diet and Modernization in the Netherlands During the Nineteenth and Early Twentieth Centuries" .  In Thomas M. Wilson (ed.).  Food, Drink and Identity in Europe . Rodopi. pp. 63–84.  ISBN   9789042020863 . Retrieved  28 December  2012 . 
 
 ^   Thea Spierings (2008).  Dutch Cuisine: Discover the Secrets of the Dutch Kitchen . Miller Books.  ISBN   978-9087240868 . 
 
 ^   C. Countess van Limburg Stirum:  The Art of Dutch Cooking ; First published in 1962 by Andre Deutsch Limited, London; p.179-p.185 
 
 ^   "10 Best Dutch Foods to try when in Holland" .  Explore Holland . 31 January 2020 . Retrieved  31 January  2020 . 
 
 ^   Heckmann, Chris (9 January 2022).  "Dutch Food Culture and Eating in the Netherlands" .  Around The World With Me . Retrieved  5 January  2023 . 
 
 ^   "Anijsmelk" .  Thedutchtable.com . Retrieved  2 August  2017 . 
 
 ^   Hester, Carla  Dutch food and eating habits  The Holland Ring, 28 October 2008 
 
 ^   Heckmann, Chris (28 April 2022).  "The Top 10 Breweries in Amsterdam" .  Around The World With Me . Retrieved  5 January  2023 . 
 
 
 External links [ edit ] 
 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons has media related to  Cuisine of the Netherlands . 
 
 Dutch food and eating habits 
 Hutspot recipe 
 The Dutch Table – an online resource for Dutch recipes 
 Food of the Dutch  Photo-documentary by photographer Wim Klerkx, 2005–2007 
 v t e Netherlands  articles Part of the  Kingdom of the Netherlands History 
 Germanic tribes 
 Roman Era 
 Frisii ,  Chamavi ,  Batavi ,  Cananefates 
 Migration Period 
 Saxons ,  Frisians ,  Franks 
 Dorestad ,  Utrecht 
 Development urban centers 
 Frisian Kingdom 
 Frankish Kingdom 
 Middle Francia 
 Lower Lorraine 
 Flanders ,  Holland ,  Frisian Freedom 
 Brabant ,  Guelders 
 Holy Roman Empire 
 Burgundian Netherlands 
 Habsburg Netherlands 
 Renaissance 
 Seventeen Provinces 
 Spanish Netherlands 
 Eighty Years' War 
 Dutch Republic 
 Golden Age 
 Batavian Revolution 
 Batavian Republic 
 Kingdom of Holland 
 First French Empire 
 Principality 
 United Kingdom 
 Netherlands since 1900 
 World War II 
 Charter for the Kingdom of the Netherlands 
 Geography 
 Birds 
 Cities 
 Delta Works 
 Earthquakes 
 Extreme points 
 Flood control 
 Gas field 
 Islands 
 Lakes 
 Mammals 
 Mountains and hills 
 Regions 
 Rivers 
 Rhine–Meuse–Scheldt delta 
 Volcanoes 
 World Heritage Sites 
 Zuiderzee Works 
 Politics 
 Cabinet 
 Constitution 
 Corruption 
 Demographics 
 Drug policy 
 Immigration 
 Education 
 Elections 
 Health care 
 Foreign relations 
 Human rights 
 LGBT 
 Law 
 Enforcement 
 Law Firms 
 Monarch 
 Municipalities 
 Provinces 
 Republicanism 
 Parliament 
 Political parties 
 Prime Minister 
 Military 
 Water boards 
 Economy 
 AEX index 
 Central bank 
 Energy 
 Euronext 
 Polder model 
 Taxation 
 Telecommunications 
 Tourism 
 Trade unions 
 Transport 
 Culture 
 Architecture 
 Art 
 Cinema 
 Cuisine 
 Cultural icons 
 Customs and etiquette 
 Decorations and medals 
 Languages 
 Literature 
 Media 
 Music 
 Orders of knighthood 
 People 
 Pornography 
 Public holidays 
 Religion 
 Sport 
 Symbols 
 Anthem 
 Coat of arms 
 Flag 
 Lion 
 Terminology 
 Outline 
 Category 
 Portal 
 v t e   Dutch cuisine Dishes 
 Babi ketjap 
 Babi pangang 
 Balkenbrij 
 Bami 
 Bami goreng 
 Bamischijf 
 Bapao 
 Biefstuk 
 Boerewors 
 Bokkoms 
 Bruinebonensoep 
 Doner kebab 
 Droëwors 
 Erwtensoep 
 Foeyonghai 
 Friet 
 Frikandel 
 Gadogado 
 Gehaktbrood 
 Hachée 
 Hutspot 
 Kalio 
 Kapsalon 
 Kebab 
 Kerststol 
 Krentenbollen 
 Macaroni schotel 
 Mihoen goreng 
 Moules-frites 
 Nasi goreng 
 Nasi kuning 
 Nasi rames 
 Nasischijf 
 Nasi uduk 
 Ontbijtkoek 
 Ossenhaas 
 Pannenkoek 
 Potbrood 
 Rendang 
 Roggebrood 
 Rookworst 
 Roti 
 Satay 
 Saucijzenbroodje 
 Selat solo 
 Shawarma 
 Slavink 
 Smoor 
 Soto 
 Stamppot 
 Stroopwafel 
 Suikerbrood 
 Tempeh 
 Tofoe 
 Varkenshaas 
 Wantan 
 Zuurkool 
 Snacks and koeé 
 Bitterballen 
 Broeder 
 Falafel 
 Janhagel 
 Kaassoufflé 
 Kaasstengels 
 Katte tong 
 Kibbeling 
 Klappertaart 
 Klepon 
 Kroepoek 
 Kroket 
 Kruidnoten 
 Lemper 
 Loempia 
 Loempia goreng 
 Murtabak 
 Nonnevot 
 Oliebol 
 Pisang goreng 
 Pepernoot 
 Pfeffernüsse 
 Poffertjes 
 Rissole 
 Semprong 
 Soempia 
 Speculaas 
 Desserts 
 Appeltaart 
 Banket 
 Bossche bol 
 Dadar gulung 
 Koeé lapis 
 Koeksister 
 Krentjebrij 
 Melktert 
 Pandan cake 
 Rijstevlaai 
 Spekkoek 
 Tompouce 
 Vla 
 Vlaai 
 Condiments and boemboe 
 Atjar 
 Balado 
 Curry ketchup 
 Fritessaus 
 Hagelslag 
 Joppiesaus 
 Ketjap 
 Muisjes 
 Piccalilli 
 Sambal 
 Satay sauce 
 Seroendeng 
 Trassi 
 Treacle 
 Vlokken 
 
 v t e European cuisine Sovereign states European Union 
 Austria 
 Belgium 
 Bulgaria 
 Croatia 
 Cyprus 
 Czech Republic 
 Denmark 
 Estonia 
 Finland 
 France 
 Germany 
 Greece 
 Hungary 
 Republic of Ireland 
 Italy 
 Latvia 
 Lithuania 
 Luxembourg 
 Malta 
 Netherlands 
 Poland 
 Portugal 
 Romania 
 Slovakia 
 Slovenia 
 Spain 
 Sweden 
 Other 
 Albania 
 Andorra 
 Armenia 
 Azerbaijan 
 Belarus 
 Bosnia and Herzegovina 
 Georgia 
 Iceland 
 Kazakhstan 
 Liechtenstein 
 Moldova 
 Monaco 
 Montenegro 
 North Macedonia 
 Norway 
 Russia 
 San Marino 
 Serbia 
 Switzerland 
 Turkey 
 Ukraine 
 United Kingdom 
 Vatican City 
 States with limited recognition 
 Abkhazia 
 Kosovo 
 Nagorno-Karabakh 
 Northern Cyprus 
 South Ossetia 
 Transnistria 
 Dependencies  and other territories 
 Faroe Islands 
 Gibraltar 
 Guernsey 
 Isle of Man 
 Jersey 
 
 v t e Cuisines Continental 
 African 
 North 
 West 
 list 
 Americas 
 Caribbean 
 North 
 South 
 list 
 Asian 
 Caucasian 
 Central 
 Indian subcontinent 
 Levantine 
 list 
 European 
 Balkan 
 Central 
 Eastern 
 list 
 Oceanic 
 Intercontinental
 Global 
 Latin American 
 Mediterranean 
 Middle Eastern 
 National  and regional 
 Afghan 
 Albanian 
 Algerian 
 American 
 Californian 
 Floribbean 
 Hawaiian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Lowcountry (South Carolina) 
 New England 
 New Mexico 
 Pacific Northwest 
 Pennsylvania Dutch 
 Puerto Rican 
 Southern US 
 Southwest US 
 Texas 
 Angolan 
 Argentine 
 Armenian 
 Australian 
 Austrian 
 Azerbaijani 
 Bahraini 
 Bangladeshi 
 Barbadian 
 Belarusian 
 Belgian 
 Belizean 
 Beninese 
 Bhutanese 
 Bolivian 
 Bosnian-Herzegovinian 
 Botswana 
 Brazilian 
 British 
 Channel Islands 
 English 
 Gibraltarian 
 Northern Irish 
 Saint Helena 
 Scottish 
 Welsh 
 Bruneian 
 Bulgarian 
 Burkinabé 
 Burmese 
 Burundian 
 Cambodian 
 Cameroonian 
 Canadian 
 Acadian 
 Québécois 
 Central African Republic 
 Chadian 
 Chilean 
 Chinese 
 Cantonese 
 Hong Kong 
 Macanese 
 Tibetan 
 Xinjiang 
 Colombian 
 Congolese 
 Corsican 
 Croatian 
 Cuban 
 Cypriot 
 Czech 
 Danish 
 Faroese 
 Greenlandic 
 Djiboutian 
 Dominican 
 Dominican Republic 
 Dutch 
 East Timorese 
 Ecuadorian 
 Egyptian 
 Emirati 
 Equatorial Guinean 
 Eritrean 
 Estonian 
 Ethiopian 
 Fijian 
 Filipino 
 Finnish 
 French 
 Occitan 
 French Guianan 
 Gabonese 
 Gambian 
 Georgian 
 German 
 Ghanaian 
 Greek 
 Cretan 
 Epirotic 
 Greek Macedonian 
 Heptanesean 
 Guatemalan 
 Guinea-Bissauan 
 Guinean 
 Haitian 
 Honduran 
 Hungarian 
 Icelandic 
 Indian 
 Arunachalese 
 Assamese 
 Bengali 
 Bihari 
 Goan 
 Gujarati 
 Himachal Pradesh 
 Kashmiri 
 Jharkhandi 
 Karnataka 
 Kerala 
 Maharashtrian 
 Manipuri 
 Meghalayan 
 Mizo 
 Naga 
 Odia 
 Punjabi 
 Rajasthani 
 Sikkimese 
 Sindhi 
 Tamil 
 Telangana 
 Telugu 
 Indonesian 
 Acehnese 
 Balinese 
 Banjar 
 Batak 
 Betawi 
 Indo 
 Javanese 
 Madurese 
 Makassar 
 Minahasan 
 Minangkabau 
 Palembangese 
 Sundanese 
 Iranian 
 Iraqi 
 Irish 
 Israeli 
 Italian 
 Abruzzese 
 Ligurian 
 Lombard 
 Lucanian 
 Neapolitan 
 Roman 
 Sardinian 
 Sicilian 
 Venetian 
 Ivorian 
 Jamaican 
 Japanese 
 Okinawan 
 Jordanian 
 Kazakh 
 Kenyan 
 Korean 
 North Korean 
 South Korean 
 Kosovan 
 Kuwaiti 
 Kyrgyz 
 Lao 
 Latvian 
 Lebanese 
 Lesotho 
 Liberian 
 Libyan 
 Liechtensteiner 
 Lithuanian 
 Luxembourg 
 Macedonian 
 Malagasy 
 Malawian 
 Malaysian 
 Sabahan 
 Sarawakian 
 Maldivian 
 Malian 
 Maltese 
 Mauritanian 
 Mauritian 
 Mexican 
 Moldovan 
 Monégasque 
 Mongolian 
 Montenegrin 
 Moroccan 
 Mozambican 
 Namibian 
 Nauruan 
 Nepalese 
 New Zealand 
 Nicaraguan 
 Niger 
 Nigerian 
 Niuean 
 Norwegian 
 Omani 
 Pakistani 
 Palestinian 
 Panamanian 
 Peruvian 
 Polish 
 Portuguese 
 Qatari 
 Romanian  (incl.  Transylvanian Saxon ) 
 Russian 
 Bashkir 
 Chechen 
 Circassian 
 Komi 
 Mordovian 
 Sakha 
 Tatar 
 Udmurt 
 Yamal 
 Rwandan 
 Saint Lucian 
 Salvadoran 
 Sammarinese 
 São Tomé and Príncipe 
 Saudi Arabian 
 Senegalese 
 Serbian 
 Seychellois 
 Sierra Leonean 
 Singaporean 
 Slovak 
 Slovenian 
 Somali 
 South African 
 Spanish 
 Andalusian 
 Asturian 
 Balearic 
 Basque 
 Canarian 
 Cantabrian 
 Catalan 
 Extremaduran 
 Galician 
 Manchegan 
 Valencian 
 Sri Lankan 
 Sudanese 
 Swazi 
 Swedish 
 Swiss 
 Syrian 
 Taiwanese 
 Tajik 
 Tanzanian 
 Zanzibari 
 Thai 
 Togolese 
 Tunisian 
 Turkish 
 Turkmen 
 Trinidadian and Tobagonian 
 Ugandan 
 Ukrainian 
 Uruguayan 
 Uzbek 
 Venezuelan 
 Vietnamese 
 Western Saharan 
 Yemeni 
 Zambian 
 Zimbabwean 
 Ethnic 
 Ainu 
 Arab 
 Indonesian 
 Aromanian 
 Assyrian 
 Balochi 
 Berber 
 Cajun 
 Chinese 
 American 
 Canadian 
 Chifa 
 Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Crimean Tatar 
 Greek American 
 Hazaragi 
 Indian 
 Anglo-Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Indigenous American 
 Inuit 
 Italian American 
 Kurdish 
 Livonian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Malay 
 Ossetian 
 Parsi 
 Pashtun 
 Peranakan 
 Romani 
 Sámi 
 Soul food 
 Sylheti 
 Transylvanian Saxon 
 Yup'ik 
 Religious 
 Buddhist 
 Christian 
 Goan Catholic 
 Mangalorean Catholic 
 Mennonite 
 Hindu 
 Islamic 
 Chinese 
 Ital 
 Jain 
 Jewish 
 American 
 Ashkenazi 
 Bukharan 
 Ethiopian 
 Mizrahi 
 Sephardic 
 Syrian 
 Ritual slaughter 
 Sikh 
 Historical 
 Ancient Egyptian 
 Ancient Greek 
 Ancient Israelite 
 Ancient Roman 
 Antebellum America 
 Aztec 
 Byzantine 
 Early modern European 
 Historical Chinese 
 Historical Indian subcontinent 
 Historical North Indian and Pakistani 
 History of agriculture 
 History of alcoholic drinks 
 History of bread 
 History of seafood 
 History of vegetarianism 
 Historical Argentine 
 Historical Japanese 
 Inca 
 Mayan 
 Muisca 
 Mughal 
 Medieval 
 Ottoman 
 Peasant 
 Soviet 
 Thirteen Colonies 
 Styles 
 Classique 
 Fast food 
 Fusion 
 New American 
 Eurasian 
 Haute 
 Molecular gastronomy 
 Note by Note 
 Nouvelle 
 Lists 
 List of cuisines 
 List of historical cuisines 
 Lists of prepared foods 
 Related 
 Cookbook 
 Cooking 
 Culinary arts 
 Drink 
 Food 
 history 
 Diet 
 Meal preparation 
 
   Food portal 
   Drink portal 
   Category 
   Commons 
   Cookbook 
   WikiProject 
   Outline 
 
 Authority control   National libraries 
 Israel 
 United States 
 Latvia 
 Other 
 IdRef 
 
  
NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw2389
Cached time: 20230310193903
Cache expiry: 1814400
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc, no‐toc‐conversion]
CPU time usage: 1.440 seconds
Real time usage: 1.798 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 26884/1000000
Post‐expand include size: 231660/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 21099/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 16/100
Expensive parser function count: 102/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 144914/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.629/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 22187719/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/400
 
 
Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1415.488      1 -total
 24.14%  341.738      4 Template:Navbox
 17.42%  246.645     62 Template:Illm
 16.01%  226.655      1 Template:Reflist
 11.72%  165.960      1 Template:European_topic
 10.66%  150.859     15 Template:Cite_web
  9.47%  133.989      2 Template:Lang-nl
  7.66%  108.393      1 Template:Life_in_the_Netherlands
  7.50%  106.203      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  7.31%  103.510     55 Template:Iso2country
 
  Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:idhash:918733-0!canonical and timestamp 20230310193901 and revision id 1143796552. Rendering was triggered because: page-view
  
 esi <esi:include src="/esitest-fa8a495983347898/content" />  
 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Dutch_cuisine&oldid=1143796552 " 
 Categories :  Dutch cuisine Dutch culture Hidden categories:  CS1 Dutch-language sources (nl) CS1 maint: archived copy as title Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from March 2021 Articles containing Dutch-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from October 2021 Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with J9U identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers Articles with LNB identifiers Articles with SUDOC identifiers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  This page was last edited on 9 March 2023, at 23:28  (UTC) . 
 Text is available under the  Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0 ;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the  Terms of Use  and  Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the  Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. 
 
 
 Privacy policy 
 About Wikipedia 
 Disclaimers 
 Contact Wikipedia 
 Mobile view 
 Developers 
 Statistics 
 Cookie statement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
