
 
 
 Jump to content 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle sidebar 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Create account Log in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Personal tools 
 
 
 
 
   Create account   Log in 
 
 
 
 
		Pages for logged out editors  learn more 
 
 
 Contributions Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Navigation 
 
 
 Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate 
 
 
 
 
 Contribute 
 
 
 Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file 
 
 
 
 
 Tools 
 
 
 What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item 
 
 
 
 
 Print/export 
 
 
 Download as PDF Printable version 
 
 
 
 
 Languages 
 
 On this Wikipedia the language links are at the top of the page across from the article title.  Go to top . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CentralNotice  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Contents 
 move to sidebar 
 hide 
 
 
 
 
 (Top) 
 
 
 
 
 
 1 Background 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 Meals 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 Foods 
 
 
				Toggle Foods subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 3.1 Cereals 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.2 Meats 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.3 Fruits and vegetables 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.4 Fats 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.5 Sugar 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4 Drink 
 
 
				Toggle Drink subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 4.1 Wine 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.2 Spirits 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.3 Coffee, tea and chocolate 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5 National cuisines 
 
 
				Toggle National cuisines subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 5.1 Italy 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5.2 France 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6 Legacy 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 7 See also 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8 Notes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 9 References 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
						Toggle the table of contents
					 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle the table of contents 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Early modern European cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 3 languages 
 
 
 
 Deutsch Bahasa Indonesia Українська 
 Edit links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Article Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 English 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 More 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
 
 
 Cuisine of early modern Europe (c. 1500–1800) 
   Still life with a peacock pie , 1627, by Dutch artist  Pieter Claesz , showing various dishes from the 17th century including roast meat, breads, nuts, wine, apples, dried fruits, along with an elaborate  meat pie  decorated like a peacock. While common in the warmer climates of Southern Europe,  lemons  would have been a relatively new introduction to the Netherlands, requiring growing in a  orangery . 
 The  cuisine  of  early modern Europe  (c. 1500–1800) was a mix of dishes inherited from  medieval cuisine  combined with innovations that would persist in the  modern era .
 The discovery of the  New World , the establishment of new trade routes with  Asia  and increased foreign influences from  sub-Saharan Africa  and the  Middle East  meant that Europeans became familiarized with a multitude of new foodstuffs.  Spices  that previously had been prohibitively expensive luxuries, such as  pepper ,  cinnamon ,  cloves ,  nutmeg , and  ginger , [1]  soon became available to the majority population, and the introduction of new plants coming from the New World and India like  maize ,  potato ,  sweet potato ,  chili pepper ,  cocoa ,  vanilla ,  tomato ,  coffee , and  tea  transformed European cuisine forever.
 Though there was a great influx of new ideas, an increase in foreign trade and a  scientific revolution , preservation of foods remained traditional: preserved by drying, salting, and smoking or pickling in  vinegar . Fare was naturally dependent on the season: a cookbook by Domenico Romoli called "Panunto" made a virtue of necessity by including a recipe for each day of the year. [2]  Everywhere both doctors and chefs continued to characterize foodstuffs by their effects on the  four humours : they were considered to be heating or cooling to the constitution, moistening or drying.
 There was a very great increase in prosperity in Europe during this period, which gradually reached all classes and all areas, and considerably changed the patterns of eating.  Nationalism  was first conceived in the  early modern period , but it was not until the 19th century that the notion of a national cuisine emerged. Class differences were far more important dividing lines, and it was almost always upper-class food that was described in recipe collections and cookbooks.
 
 
 Background [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Medieval cuisine 
 The culinary fashion of European elites changed considerably in this period. Typically medieval spices like  galangal  and  grains of paradise  were no longer seen in recipes. Updated recipes still had the strong acidic flavors earlier centuries, but by the 1650s new innovative recipes blending subtle savory flavors like herbs and mushrooms could be found in Parisian cookbooks. [3] 
 
 Meals [ edit ] 
   Peasants by the Hearth , 1560, by  Pieter Aertsen 
 The three-meal-regimen so common today did not become a standard until well into the  modern era . [4] 
 In most parts of Europe two meals per day were eaten, one in the early morning to noon and one in the late afternoon or later at night. The exact times varied both by period and region. In Spain and in parts of Italy such as  Genoa  and  Venice  the early meal was the lighter one while supper was heavier. In the rest of Europe, the first meal of the day was the more substantial. Throughout the period, there was a gradual shift of mealtimes. The first meal, then called dinner in English, moved from before noon to around 2:00 or 3:00 in the afternoon by the 17th century. By the end of the 18th century, it could be held as late as 5:00 or 6:00. This necessitated a midday meal, luncheon, later shortened to  lunch , which was established by the late 18th century.
 Breakfast [5]  does not receive much attention in any sources.  As in the Middle Ages, breakfast in the sense of an early morning meal, is largely absent from the sources. It's unclear if this meant it was universally avoided or that it simply was not fashionable enough to be mentioned, as most sources were written by, for, and about the upper class. There is no doubt that working people since medieval times ate some sort of morning meal, but it is unclear exactly at what time and what it consisted of. Peasants in the early modern world commonly ate a diet that consisted of "gruels, pottages, and ... grains". [6]  Breakfast, when it began to be fashionable, was usually just a coffee, tea or chocolate, and did not become a more substantial meal in many parts of Europe until the 19th century. In the south, where supper was the largest meal, there was less need for breakfast, and it therefore remained unimportant, something that can still be seen today in the traditionally light breakfasts of southern Europe, which usually consists of coffee or tea with bread or pastry.
 
 Foods [ edit ] 
 Cereals [ edit ] 
   The Harvesters  by  Pieter Bruegel the Elder ;  Antwerp , 1565. 
 For most of Europe, the many varieties of grain were the most important crop and formed the daily staple for segments of society. The differentiation was in the varieties, its quality and how it was prepared. The lower classes ate bread that was coarse and of considerably higher bran content while the upper classes enjoyed the finely ground, white wheat flour that most modern Europeans are used to. Wheat was considerably more expensive than other grains, and rarely eaten by many. Most bread was made with a mixture of wheat and other grains. [7] 
 Grain remained the undisputed main staple of early modern Europe until the 17th century. By this time the skepticism towards New World imports such as  potatoes  and  maize  had softened among the general populace, and the potato in particular found new appreciation in  northern Europe , where it was a much more productive and flexible crop than wheat. In Ireland, this would later have disastrous results. In the early 19th century, when much of the country depended almost exclusively on potato, the  potato blight , a fungus that rotted the edible tubers of the potato plant while still in the ground, caused a massive famine that killed over a million people and forced another two million to emigrate. In regions of Europe such as  Scotland ,  Scandinavia , and northern  Russia , the climate and soil types were less suited for wheat cultivation, and rye and barley were far more important. Rye was used to bake the dense, dark bread that is still common in countries like Sweden, Russia, and Finland. Barley was more common in the north, and was often used to make  beer .
 Oats  made up a considerable minority of the produced grain but stood very low in status and was commonly used as animal feed, especially for horses.  Millet , grown in much of Europe since prehistoric times was still used throughout much of the early period, but had largely disappeared by the 18th century although its exceptional storage period of up to twenty years meant it was used for emergency reserves. [8]  For example, the Italian dish  polenta , previously made from millet, later was made with  maize .  Pasta  had been a common food since the middle of the medieval period, and gained in popularity during the early modern period (notably in  Naples , where it was not often seen until the late 18th century), but it was not yet usual to use the hard variety of  durum wheat  or  semolina  to make dried pasta until the  Industrial era .  Rice  became established in many places, especially Italy and Spain, during the period, but was regarded as a low-status food; the well-off might occasionally have  rice pudding  but otherwise ignored it. [9] 
 Peas  and beans, which made up a very large part of the diet of the medieval poor, were still often treated as a staple food, but to a diminishing extent over the period, to be replaced by cereals and the potato. [10] 
 
 Meats [ edit ] 
   A Meat Stall with the Holy Family Giving Alms , 1551, by  Pieter Aertsen , showing various meat ingredients of the 16th century. 
 European consumption of meat remained exceptional by world standards, and during the period high levels generally moved down the social scale. But the poor continued to rely mainly on  eggs , dairy products, and pulses for  protein , though wild game and fish were caught and eaten in less populated regions. The richer nations, especially England, ate considerably more meat than the poorer ones. In some areas, especially Germany and the Mediterranean counties, the meat consumption of ordinary people actually declined, beginning in about 1550, and continuing throughout the period. Increasing population seem to lie behind this trend. [11] 
 
 Fruits and vegetables [ edit ] 
 Fruits and vegetables that were introduced to Europe during this time include the  tomato ,  chili pepper , and  pumpkin  (from the Americas) and the  artichoke  (from the Mediterranean). Additionally, while  wild strawberry  had existed, the modern garden  strawberry  was domesticated in France in the late 18th century from varieties found in the Americas.
 The innovation and popularization of the  orangery , an early form of  greenhouse , in the 17th century enabled the growing or wintering of fruiting plants that would otherwise be unable to survive the climate of more northerly locations in Europe. This enabled the wealthy to have access to fresh oranges, lemons, limes, and even pineapples prior to the advent of refrigerated transport.
 
 Fats [ edit ] 
 A map of Early Modern Europe could be drawn based on the characteristic  fats  that predominated:  olive oil ,  butter  and  lard . These kitchen staples had not changed since Roman times, but the onset of the  Little Ice Age  that coincided with Early Modern Europe affected the northernmost regions where olives would flourish. Only olive oil was a subject of long-distance trade.
 
 Sugar [ edit ] 
 See also:  History of sugar 
 Cane sugar , native to India, was already known in Europe in the Middle Ages, expensive and mainly regarded as a  medicine . From the end of the 17th century, greatly increased New World production struggled to meet the increase in European demand, so that by the end of the period the maritime nations of England, France, the Low and Iberian Countries were consuming large quantities, but other parts of Europe used it far less. [12]  At the same time, modern distinctions between sweet and savoury dishes were becoming general; meat dishes were much less likely to be sweetened than in the Middle Ages.
 
 Drink [ edit ] 
   The morning chocolate  by  Pietro Longhi ; Venice, 1775–1780. 
 Water  as a neutral table beverage did not appear in Europe until well into the  Industrial era , when efficient water purification could ensure safe drinking water. All but the poorest drank mildly  alcoholic drinks  on a daily basis, for every meal;  wine  in the south,  beer  in the north, east, and  middle Europe . Both drinks came in many varieties, vintages, and at varying qualities. Those northerners who could afford to do so drank imported wines, and wine remained an integral part of the  Eucharist , even for the poor.  Ale  had been the most common form of beer in England through most of the Middle Ages, but was mostly replaced with  hopped  beer from the  Low Countries  in the 16th century.
 
 Wine [ edit ] 
 See also:  History of wine 
 Further information:  History of Bordeaux wine ,  History of Champagne , and  History of Portuguese wine 
 Shifting trade patterns and political events resulted in the growth of new regional wine industries and winemaking traditions. It saw the rise of sparkling  Champagne ,  Madeira wine ,  Sack , and fortified  Port wine . In England, repeated wars with France resulted in regular disruptions of trade and thus difficulties importing French wines. Following the  Methuen Treaty  of 1703 between England and Portugal, which favorably taxed Portuguese wines, England became increasingly reliant instead on Portuguese imports.
 
 Spirits [ edit ] 
 The art of distillation was perfected in Europe during the 15th century, and many of today's most common and familiar spirits were invented and perfected before the 18th century.
 Brandy  (from Low German  Brandwein  via Dutch  brandewijn , meaning "distilled wine") first appeared in 15th-century Germany. When the English and Dutch were in fierce competition for the control of the lucrative European export market, the Dutch encouraged wine growing outside the  Bordeaux  area, where the English had strong connections. The result that the regions of  Cognac  and  Armagnac  became famous for producing high-quality brandy.  Whisky  and  schnapps  were produced in small household stills. Whisky became fashionable, commercialised, and exported in the 19th century.  Gin , grain liquor flavored with  juniper , was invented by the Dutch and commercial production by  Lucas Bols  began in the mid-17th century. [13]  The production was later refined in England and became immensely popular among the English working classes, ultimately resulting in the  Gin Craze  of the early 18th century.
 In the  triangular trade  which began in the 16th and 17th century between Europe, North America and the Caribbean,  rum  was one of the most important commodities. It was made from  molasses  and was one of the most important products made from the sugar grown on the  Caribbean  Islands and in  Brazil . In Britain,  punch  developed as a result of various influences, and was popularized during this time.
 
 Coffee, tea and chocolate [ edit ] 
 Before the Early modern period, the social drinks of Europe had all been alcoholic. With the increased contact with Asia and Africa and the discovery of the Americas meant that Europeans came into contact with  tea ,  coffee , and  drinking chocolate . But it was not until the 17th century that all three products became popular as social beverages. The new drinks contained  caffeine  or  theobromine , both mild stimulants that are not intoxicating in the same way as alcohol. Chocolate was the first drink to gain popularity, and was one of the preferred drinks of the Spanish nobility in the 16th and early 17th century. All three remained very expensive throughout the early modern period.
 
 National cuisines [ edit ] 
 As nations began to form in Europe, the foundations of cuisine had begun to form. Although nationalization of many of today's European nations had not occurred in early modern Europe, many of the characteristics that establish a national cuisine began to emerge. These attributes included attributes such as the emergence of professional chefs, professional kitchens, the printing of codified culinary texts, and educated diners.
 
 Italy [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Italian cuisine 
   Beans were among the most important staples for the early modern Tuscans;  The Beaneater  by  Annibale Carracci , 1580–90. 
 In Italy, a didactic switch occurred during the early modern era which changed the cuisine from one of high court cuisine, to a regional local cuisine by the end of the era. In the beginning of the era the courts of  Florence ,  Rome ,  Venice , and  Ferrara  were an integral component to the creation of fine cooking in Italy with the court of Estes in Ferrara a central figure to the creation of this high-cuisine. A number of chefs were integral to this process, including  Cristoforo di Messisbugo , steward to Ippolito d'Este, published  Banchetti Composizioni di Vivande  in 1549, which detailed banquets in the first half of the book, while the second half of the book featured a multitude of recipes for items such as pies and tarts (containing 124 recipes with various fillings). [14] 
 In 1570,  Opera dell'arte del cucinare  was written by  Bartolomeo Scappi , personal chef to  Pope Pius V , a five-volume work which to that date encompassed the most comprehensive example of Italian cooking. The work contained over 1,000 recipes, with information on banquets including displays and menus as well as illustrations of kitchen and table utensils.  Opera  was an important text as it is seen as one of the first integral works which shed game meats in favor of domesticated animals. Additionally "alternative" cuts of animals such as tongue, head, and shoulder appear in recipes. Seasonality to fish and seafood dishes was also featured along with emphasis on  Lenten  cookery. Opera also featured an early version of the  Neapolitan   pizza , however, it was a sweet concoction unlike today's savory dish. Turkey and maize also appear for a first time in Italy in this book. [15] 
 Unlike France's continued path toward high-cuisine, Italy began to show a change toward regionalism and simple cooking in the late 17th century. In 1662 the last cookbook on Italian high-cuisine was published by  Bartolomeo Stefani  chef to  Gonzagas .  L'Arte di Ben Cucinare  introduced  vitto ordinario  ("ordinary food") to Italian cookery. [16]  In turn, at the beginning of the 18th century, the cookery books of Italy began to show the regionalism of Italian cuisine in order for Italian chefs to better show the pride of their regions instead of the high cuisine of France. These books were no longer addressed to professional chefs but to  bourgeois  housewives who could address their home cook. [17]  Originating in booklet form, periodicals such as  La cuoca cremonese  ( The cook of Cremona ) written in 1794 give a sequence of ingredients according to season along with chapters on meat, fish, and vegetables. As the century progressed these books increased in size, popularity, and frequency, while the price to attain them dropped well within the reach of the general populace. [18] 
 
 France [ edit ] 
 Main article:  French cuisine 
 In France, shift came from the specialization of culinary skills by-way-of  guilds . The two major separations of guilds were between those who supplied raw products and those who prepared them. Guilds specialized in specific forms of cookery included  bakers ,  pastrycooks ,  saucemakers , poulterers, and  caterers . It was through this specialization that many of the well-known French dishes of today began to take hold, but it was not until the 17th century that France's  haute cuisine  would begin codification with  La Varenne  the author of works such as  Cvisinier françois  and  Le Parfait confitvrier , he is credited with publishing the first true French  cookbook . His  recipes  marked a change from the style of cookery known in the Middle Ages, to new techniques aimed at creating somewhat lighter dishes, and more modest presentations of pies as individual pastries and turnovers. [19] 
 During the 15th and 16th centuries, French cuisine assimilated many new food items from the New World. Although they were slow to be adopted, records of banquets show  Catherine de' Medici  serving sixty-six turkeys at one dinner. [20]  The dish called  cassoulet  has its roots in the New World discovery of  haricot beans , which are central to the dish's creation but had not existed outside of the New World until its exploration by Christopher Columbus. [21] 
 It was during this era that  coulis  and  roux  first became part of the standard repertoire of French cooking techniques.
 
 Legacy [ edit ] 
 The end of the 18th century (and with it the Early Modern era) saw and coincided with several major advancements that would change European foodways as it entered the modern industrial era. First was the introduction of the first modern public  restaurant  in Paris in the 1780s. Following the  French Revolution , the dissolution of the  Ancien Régime  led the former cooks for the aristocracy to turn to new clients, either elsewhere in Europe or with the general public in France, accelerating the growth of restaurant culture. Second, around 1800,  Count Rumford  developed early designs for a new form of efficient  kitchen stove , distinct from the traditional simple kitchen fireplace; which later in the 19th century would be mass-produced in cast-iron and become the new center of the kitchen and cooking.
 Through the influence of colonization and emigration, early modern European cuisine would be foundational to the cuisines of the early United States and Canada, and play a significant role in the foodways of Mexico, Central America, South America, and the West Indies. At the same time, the influence of indigenous ingredients and foodways more suited to the local environment, together with the impact of foodways brought by enslaved Africans, and growing national identities as a result of the  decolonization of the Americas  from the 1780s to the 1830s would lead to culinary traditions that diverged from their respective European roots, and from subsequent developments there.
 
 See also [ edit ] 
 Tudor food and drink 
 Category:Early Modern cookbooks 
 Notes [ edit ] 
 
 Food portal Europe portal History portal 
 
 
 ^   Grendler, Paul F. (2004).  The Renaissance : an encyclopedia for student . New York: Charles Scribner's Sons. p.  90 .  ISBN   978-0684312835 . 
 
 ^   Romoli,  La singolar dottrina , Venice, 1560. 
 
 ^   Day, Ivan (2009).  Cooking in Europe: 1650-1850 . Greenwood Press. 
 
 ^   Albala (2002), pp. 231–232 
 
 ^   The word "breakfast" is a  calque  of  Medieval Latin   disjejunare , literally "to un-fast", and rendered  disnare  or  disner  in  Old French . The word was later borrowed into  Old English  as "dinner" and referred to the first (accepted) meal of the day. 
 
 ^   Chen, Yong (2016). "Cuisine and Empire: Cooking in World History by Rachel Laudan".  Journal of World History .  26  (1): 187–189.  doi : 10.1353/jwh.2016.0020 .  ISSN   1527-8050 .  S2CID   163943113 . 
 
 ^   Braudel, pp. 105–129 
 
 ^   Braudel, p. 109 
 
 ^   Braudel, pp. 110–111 
 
 ^   Braudel, pp. 112–114 
 
 ^   Braudel pp. 190-199 
 
 ^   Braudel, pp. 224–227 
 
 ^   
 "History" .  About the House of Bols . Lucas Bols, B.V . Retrieved  2007-09-17 .  ...the Bols family founded the company in 1575 and began by making liqueurs... The production of genever came 100 years later. 
 
 ^   Del Conte, p. 13. 
 
 ^   Del Conte, pp. 14,15. 
 
 ^   Del Conte, 15. 
 
 ^   De Conte, p. 16 
 
 ^   Capatti, 158–159. 
 
 ^   Wheaton, pp. 114–120. 
 
 ^   Wheaton, 81. 
 
 ^   Wheaton, 85. 
 
 
 References [ edit ] 
 Albala, Ken.  Food in Early Modern Europe, 1500–1800.  Greenwood Press. Westport, CT, 2003  ISBN   0313319626 
 Braudel, Fernand .  Civilization & Capitalism, 15–18th Centuries, Vol 1: The Structures of Everyday Life.  William Collins & Sons, London. 1981. 
 Capatti, Alberto and Montanari, Massimo.  Italian Cuisine: a Cultural History.  Columbia University Press, New York. 2003.  ISBN   0231122322 
 Del Conte, Anna.  The Concise Gastronomy of Italy.  Barnes and Nobles Books. 2004.  ISBN   1862056625 
 Wheaton, Barbara Ketcham .  Savoring the Past: The French Kitchen and Table from 1300 to 1789.  First Touchstone, New York. 1996.  ISBN   978-0684818573 
 v t e Cuisines Continental 
 African 
 North 
 West 
 list 
 Americas 
 Caribbean 
 North 
 South 
 list 
 Asian 
 Caucasian 
 Central 
 Indian subcontinent 
 Levantine 
 list 
 European 
 Balkan 
 Central 
 Eastern 
 list 
 Oceanic 
 Intercontinental
 Global 
 Latin American 
 Mediterranean 
 Middle Eastern 
 National  and regional 
 Afghan 
 Albanian 
 Algerian 
 American 
 Californian 
 Floribbean 
 Hawaiian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Lowcountry (South Carolina) 
 New England 
 New Mexico 
 Pacific Northwest 
 Pennsylvania Dutch 
 Puerto Rican 
 Southern US 
 Southwest US 
 Texas 
 Angolan 
 Argentine 
 Armenian 
 Australian 
 Austrian 
 Azerbaijani 
 Bahraini 
 Bangladeshi 
 Barbadian 
 Belarusian 
 Belgian 
 Belizean 
 Beninese 
 Bhutanese 
 Bolivian 
 Bosnian-Herzegovinian 
 Botswana 
 Brazilian 
 British 
 Channel Islands 
 English 
 Gibraltarian 
 Northern Irish 
 Saint Helena 
 Scottish 
 Welsh 
 Bruneian 
 Bulgarian 
 Burkinabé 
 Burmese 
 Burundian 
 Cambodian 
 Cameroonian 
 Canadian 
 Acadian 
 Québécois 
 Central African Republic 
 Chadian 
 Chilean 
 Chinese 
 Cantonese 
 Hong Kong 
 Macanese 
 Tibetan 
 Xinjiang 
 Colombian 
 Congolese 
 Corsican 
 Croatian 
 Cuban 
 Cypriot 
 Czech 
 Danish 
 Faroese 
 Greenlandic 
 Djiboutian 
 Dominican 
 Dominican Republic 
 Dutch 
 East Timorese 
 Ecuadorian 
 Egyptian 
 Emirati 
 Equatorial Guinean 
 Eritrean 
 Estonian 
 Ethiopian 
 Fijian 
 Filipino 
 Finnish 
 French 
 Occitan 
 French Guianan 
 Gabonese 
 Gambian 
 Georgian 
 German 
 Ghanaian 
 Greek 
 Cretan 
 Epirotic 
 Greek Macedonian 
 Heptanesean 
 Guatemalan 
 Guinea-Bissauan 
 Guinean 
 Haitian 
 Honduran 
 Hungarian 
 Icelandic 
 Indian 
 Arunachalese 
 Assamese 
 Bengali 
 Bihari 
 Goan 
 Gujarati 
 Himachal Pradesh 
 Kashmiri 
 Jharkhandi 
 Karnataka 
 Kerala 
 Maharashtrian 
 Manipuri 
 Meghalayan 
 Mizo 
 Naga 
 Odia 
 Punjabi 
 Rajasthani 
 Sikkimese 
 Sindhi 
 Tamil 
 Telangana 
 Telugu 
 Indonesian 
 Acehnese 
 Balinese 
 Banjar 
 Batak 
 Betawi 
 Indo 
 Javanese 
 Madurese 
 Makassar 
 Minahasan 
 Minangkabau 
 Palembangese 
 Sundanese 
 Iranian 
 Iraqi 
 Irish 
 Israeli 
 Italian 
 Abruzzese 
 Ligurian 
 Lombard 
 Lucanian 
 Neapolitan 
 Roman 
 Sardinian 
 Sicilian 
 Venetian 
 Ivorian 
 Jamaican 
 Japanese 
 Okinawan 
 Jordanian 
 Kazakh 
 Kenyan 
 Korean 
 North Korean 
 South Korean 
 Kosovan 
 Kuwaiti 
 Kyrgyz 
 Lao 
 Latvian 
 Lebanese 
 Lesotho 
 Liberian 
 Libyan 
 Liechtensteiner 
 Lithuanian 
 Luxembourg 
 Macedonian 
 Malagasy 
 Malawian 
 Malaysian 
 Sabahan 
 Sarawakian 
 Maldivian 
 Malian 
 Maltese 
 Mauritanian 
 Mauritian 
 Mexican 
 Moldovan 
 Monégasque 
 Mongolian 
 Montenegrin 
 Moroccan 
 Mozambican 
 Namibian 
 Nauruan 
 Nepalese 
 New Zealand 
 Nicaraguan 
 Niger 
 Nigerian 
 Niuean 
 Norwegian 
 Omani 
 Pakistani 
 Palestinian 
 Panamanian 
 Peruvian 
 Polish 
 Portuguese 
 Qatari 
 Romanian  (incl.  Transylvanian Saxon ) 
 Russian 
 Bashkir 
 Chechen 
 Circassian 
 Komi 
 Mordovian 
 Sakha 
 Tatar 
 Udmurt 
 Yamal 
 Rwandan 
 Saint Lucian 
 Salvadoran 
 Sammarinese 
 São Tomé and Príncipe 
 Saudi Arabian 
 Senegalese 
 Serbian 
 Seychellois 
 Sierra Leonean 
 Singaporean 
 Slovak 
 Slovenian 
 Somali 
 South African 
 Spanish 
 Andalusian 
 Asturian 
 Balearic 
 Basque 
 Canarian 
 Cantabrian 
 Catalan 
 Extremaduran 
 Galician 
 Manchegan 
 Valencian 
 Sri Lankan 
 Sudanese 
 Swazi 
 Swedish 
 Swiss 
 Syrian 
 Taiwanese 
 Tajik 
 Tanzanian 
 Zanzibari 
 Thai 
 Togolese 
 Tunisian 
 Turkish 
 Turkmen 
 Trinidadian and Tobagonian 
 Ugandan 
 Ukrainian 
 Uruguayan 
 Uzbek 
 Venezuelan 
 Vietnamese 
 Western Saharan 
 Yemeni 
 Zambian 
 Zimbabwean 
 Ethnic 
 Ainu 
 Arab 
 Indonesian 
 Aromanian 
 Assyrian 
 Balochi 
 Berber 
 Cajun 
 Chinese 
 American 
 Canadian 
 Chifa 
 Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Crimean Tatar 
 Greek American 
 Hazaragi 
 Indian 
 Anglo-Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Indigenous American 
 Inuit 
 Italian American 
 Kurdish 
 Livonian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Malay 
 Ossetian 
 Parsi 
 Pashtun 
 Peranakan 
 Romani 
 Sámi 
 Soul food 
 Sylheti 
 Transylvanian Saxon 
 Yup'ik 
 Religious 
 Buddhist 
 Christian 
 Goan Catholic 
 Mangalorean Catholic 
 Mennonite 
 Hindu 
 Islamic 
 Chinese 
 Ital 
 Jain 
 Jewish 
 American 
 Ashkenazi 
 Bukharan 
 Ethiopian 
 Mizrahi 
 Sephardic 
 Syrian 
 Ritual slaughter 
 Sikh 
 Historical 
 Ancient Egyptian 
 Ancient Greek 
 Ancient Israelite 
 Ancient Roman 
 Antebellum America 
 Aztec 
 Byzantine 
 Early modern European 
 Historical Chinese 
 Historical Indian subcontinent 
 Historical North Indian and Pakistani 
 History of agriculture 
 History of alcoholic drinks 
 History of bread 
 History of seafood 
 History of vegetarianism 
 Historical Argentine 
 Historical Japanese 
 Inca 
 Mayan 
 Muisca 
 Mughal 
 Medieval 
 Ottoman 
 Peasant 
 Soviet 
 Thirteen Colonies 
 Styles 
 Classique 
 Fast food 
 Fusion 
 New American 
 Eurasian 
 Haute 
 Molecular gastronomy 
 Note by Note 
 Nouvelle 
 Lists 
 List of cuisines 
 List of historical cuisines 
 Lists of prepared foods 
 Related 
 Cookbook 
 Cooking 
 Culinary arts 
 Drink 
 Food 
 history 
 Diet 
 Meal preparation 
 
   Food portal 
   Drink portal 
   Category 
   Commons 
   Cookbook 
   WikiProject 
   Outline 
 
  
NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw2305
Cached time: 20230311124523
Cache expiry: 1814400
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc, no‐toc‐conversion]
CPU time usage: 0.381 seconds
Real time usage: 0.501 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1822/1000000
Post‐expand include size: 70158/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1212/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 12/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 33626/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.179/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 5360112/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/400
 
 
Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  341.629      1 -total
 28.16%   96.190      1 Template:Reflist
 25.08%   85.665      1 Template:Cuisines
 24.43%   83.452      1 Template:Navbox
 19.25%   65.757      2 Template:Cite_book
 15.85%   54.134      1 Template:Short_description
  8.73%   29.841      2 Template:Pagetype
  8.37%   28.579      3 Template:Main
  7.81%   26.673      4 Template:ISBN
  6.28%   21.439      1 Template:Portal
 
  Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:idhash:10928780-0!canonical and timestamp 20230311124522 and revision id 1143776507. Rendering was triggered because: page-view
  
 esi <esi:include src="/esitest-fa8a495983347898/content" />  
 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Early_modern_European_cuisine&oldid=1143776507 " 
 Categories :  European cuisine Historical foods Early Modern period Hidden categories:  Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  This page was last edited on 9 March 2023, at 20:36  (UTC) . 
 Text is available under the  Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0 ;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the  Terms of Use  and  Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the  Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. 
 
 
 Privacy policy 
 About Wikipedia 
 Disclaimers 
 Contact Wikipedia 
 Mobile view 
 Developers 
 Statistics 
 Cookie statement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
