
 
 
 Jump to content 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle sidebar 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Create account Log in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Personal tools 
 
 
 
 
   Create account   Log in 
 
 
 
 
		Pages for logged out editors  learn more 
 
 
 Contributions Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Navigation 
 
 
 Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate 
 
 
 
 
 Contribute 
 
 
 Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file 
 
 
 
 
 Tools 
 
 
 What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item 
 
 
 
 
 Print/export 
 
 
 Download as PDF Printable version 
 
 
 
 
 In other projects 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons Wikibooks 
 
 
 
 
 Languages 
 
 On this Wikipedia the language links are at the top of the page across from the article title.  Go to top . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CentralNotice  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Contents 
 move to sidebar 
 hide 
 
 
 
 
 (Top) 
 
 
 
 
 
 1 History 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 Features 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 Cheeses 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4 Bread 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5 Starters and salads 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6 Main courses 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 7 Desserts 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8 Cuisine and religious practice 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 9 Beverages 
 
 
				Toggle Beverages subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 9.1 Tea 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 9.2 Coffee 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 9.3 Juices 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 9.4 Alcoholic beverages 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 10 See also 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 11 References 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 12 External links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
						Toggle the table of contents
					 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle the table of contents 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Egyptian cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 27 languages 
 
 
 
 العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Български Català Čeština Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Jawa ქართული Lietuvių Македонски مصرى Bahasa Melayu 日本語 Polski Português Română Српски / srpski Türkçe Tiếng Việt 
 Edit links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Article Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 English 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 More 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
 
 
 National cuisine of Egypt 
 
 
   Molokheya  served with rice and chicken 
   Ful medames  served with hard-boiled eggs 
   Legumes, widely used in Egyptian cuisine, on display in  Alexandria 
 Egyptian cuisine  makes heavy use of poultry,  legumes ,  vegetables  and fruit from  Egypt 's rich  Nile Valley  and  Delta . 
Examples of Egyptian dishes include  rice-stuffed vegetables and grape leaves ,  hummus ,  falafel ,   shawarma ,  kebab  and  kofta .   ful medames , mashed  fava beans ;  kushari , lentils and pasta; and  molokhiya ,  bush okra  stew. 
A local type of  pita bread  known as  eish baladi [1]  ( Egyptian Arabic :  عيش بلدي ) is a staple of Egyptian cuisine, and cheesemaking in Egypt dates back to the  First Dynasty of Egypt , with  Domiati  being the most popular type of cheese consumed today.
 Egyptian cuisine relies heavily on vegetables and legumes, but can also feature meats, most commonly squab, chicken, and lamb. [2]  Lamb and beef are frequently used for grilling.  Offal  is a popular fast food in cities, and  foie gras  is a delicacy that has been prepared in the region since at least 2500 BCE. Fish and seafood are common in Egypt's coastal regions. A significant amount of Egyptian cuisine is vegetarian, due to both the historically high price of meat and the needs of the  Coptic Christian  community, whose religious restrictions require essentially vegan diets for much of the year.
 Tea  is the national drink of Egypt, and  beer  is the most popular alcoholic beverage. While  Islam  is the majority faith in Egypt and observant Muslims tend to avoid  alcohol , alcoholic drinks are still readily available in the country.
 Popular desserts in Egypt include  baqlawa ,  basbousa , and  kunafa . Common ingredients in desserts include  dates , honey, and almonds.
 
 
 History [ edit ] 
 This section  does not  cite  any  sources .  Please help  improve this section  by  adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and  removed .   ( July 2022 )  ( Learn how and when to remove this template message ) 
 Wheat ,  barley  and  rice  were part of the medieval Egyptian diet, but sources are conflicted about  millet . According to  Abd al-Latif al-Baghdadi , it was unknown outside a small area where it was cultivated in  Upper Egypt . This seems to be supported by chronicler  Muhammad ibn Iyas , who wrote that millet consumption was unusual, if not unheard of, in Cairo.  Shihab al-Umari , on the other hand, says it was among the most popular  cereal grains  consumed in Egypt in that time.
 Sorghum  was, like millet, cultivated in Upper Egypt, but was not considered a desirable crop by residents of Cairo. There, it was consumed only during famine or other times of scarcity during which sorghum was preferred to other wheat substitutes used to make emergency bread rations like millet, bran, or broad beans. [3] 
 In  The Tale of Judar and His Brothers , an Egyptian [4]  story from  Thousand and One Arabian Nights , the main character, a poverty-stricken fisherman named Judar, acquires a magic bag belonging to  necromancer  of Maghrebi origin. This bag supplies its owner with food like  aruzz mufalfal , a rice dish seasoned with cinnamon and mastic, sometimes colored with  saffron  and prepared stock and tail fat. [3] 
 Ancient Egyptian cuisine  accompanied not only of  bread  and  beer , but of  fruit ,  vegetables  and  fish  eaten by the poor. Many of its carvings showing cuisine date back to the  Old  and  New Kingdom  periods.
 
 Features [ edit ] 
   Spices commonly used in Egypt 
 Egyptian cuisine is notably conducive to vegetarian diets, as it relies heavily on legume and vegetable dishes. Though food in Alexandria and the coast of Egypt tends to use a great deal of fish and other seafood, for the most part Egyptian cuisine is based on foods that grow out of the ground.
 Egypt's  Red Sea  ports were the main points of entry for  spices to Europe . Easy access to various spices has, throughout the years, left its mark on Egyptian cuisine.  Cumin  is the most commonly used spice. Other common spices include  coriander ,  cardamom ,  chili ,  aniseed ,  bay leaves ,  dill ,  parsley ,  ginger ,  cinnamon ,  mint  and  cloves . [5] 
 Common meats featured in Egyptian cuisine are pigeon, [6]  chicken and duck. These are often boiled to make the broth for various stews and soups. Lamb and beef are the most common meats used for  grilling . Grilled meats such as  kofta  ( كفتة ),  kabab  ( كباب ) and grilled cutlets are categorically referred to as  mashwiyat  ( مشويات ).
 Offal , variety meats, is popular in Egypt. Liver sandwiches, a specialty of  Alexandria , are a popular fast-food in cities. Chopped-up pieces of liver fried with bell peppers, chili, garlic, cumin and other spices are served in a baguette-like bread called  eish fino .  Cow and sheep brain  are eaten in Egypt. [7] [8] 
 Foie gras , a well-known  delicacy , is still enjoyed today by Egyptians. Its flavor is described as rich, buttery, and delicate, unlike that of an ordinary duck or goose liver.  Foie gras  is sold whole, or is prepared into  mousse ,  parfait , or  pâté , and may also be served as an accompaniment to another food item, such as steak. The technique involves  gavage , cramming food into the throat of domesticated ducks and geese, and dates as far back as  2500 BC , when the  ancient Egyptians  began keeping birds for food. [9] [10] [11] 
 
 Cheeses [ edit ] 
   Rumi cheese 
 See also:  Egyptian cheese 
 Cheese is thought to have originated in the  Middle East . [12]  Two alabaster jars found at  Saqqara , dating from the  First Dynasty of Egypt , contained cheese. [13]  These were placed in the tomb about 3,000 BC. They were likely fresh cheeses coagulated with acid or a combination of acid and heat. An earlier tomb, that of King  Hor-Aha , may also have contained cheese which, based on the hieroglyphic inscriptions on the two jars, appears to be from Upper and Lower Egypt. [14]  The pots are similar to those used today when preparing  mish . [15] 
 Although many rural people still make their own cheese, notably the fermented  mish , mass-produced cheeses are becoming more common. Cheese is often served with breakfast, it is included in several traditional dishes, and even in some desserts. [ citation needed ]  Cheeses include  domiati  ( دمياطي ), the most widely-eaten in Egypt; [16] [17]   areesh  ( قريش ) made from  laban rayeb ; [17]   rumi  ( رومي );, [18]  a hard, salty, ripened variety of cheese that belongs to the same family as  Pecorino Romano  and  Manchego . [18] 
 
 Bread [ edit ] 
   Eish baladi 
   A rural breakfast in Upper Egypt, accompanied by  eish baladi  and  eish shamsi 
 Bread  made from a simple recipe forms the backbone of Egyptian cuisine. It is consumed at almost all Egyptian meals; a working-class or rural Egyptian meal might consist of little more than bread and beans. [19] 
 The local bread is a form of hearty, thick,  gluten -rich  pita bread  called  eish baladi [1]  ( Egyptian Arabic :  عيش   [ʕeːʃ ] ;  Modern Standard Arabic :  ʿayš ) rather than the Arabic  خبز   ḫubz . The word " [ʕeːʃ ] " comes from the  Semitic root   ع-ي-ش   ʕ - Ī - Š  with the meaning "to live, be alive." [20]  The word  ʿayš  itself has the meaning of "life, way of living...; livelihood, subsistence" in Modern Standard and  Classical Arabic ; folklore holds that this synonymity indicates the centrality of bread to Egyptian life. [20] 
 In modern Egypt, the government  subsidizes  bread, dating back to a  Nasser -era policy. In 2008, a  major food crisis  caused ever-longer  bread lines  at government-subsidized bakeries where there would normally be none; occasional fights broke out over bread, leading to 11 deaths in 2008. [21]  Egyptian dissidents and outside observers of the former  National Democratic Party  regime frequently criticized the bread subsidy as an attempt to buy off the Egyptian urban  working classes  in order to encourage acceptance of the authoritarian system; nevertheless, the subsidy continued after the  2011 revolution .
 On a culinary level, bread is commonly used as a  utensil , at the same time providing  carbohydrates  and  protein  to the Egyptian diet. Egyptians use bread to scoop up food, sauces, and dips and to wrap  kebabs ,  falafel , to keep the hands from becoming greasy. Most pita breads are baked at high temperatures (450 °F or 232 °C), causing the flattened rounds of dough to puff up dramatically. When removed from the oven, the layers of baked dough remain separated inside the deflated pita, which allows the bread to be opened into pockets, creating a space for use in various dishes. Common breads include:
 
 
 Bataw  ( بتاو ) 
 Eish baladi  ( عيش بلدي ) 
 Eish fino  ( عيش فينو ) 
 Eish merahrah  ( عيش مرحرح ) 
 Eish shamsi  ( عيش شمسي ) 
 Feteer meshaltet  ( فطير مشلتت ) 
 
 Starters and salads [ edit ] 
   Duqqa 
   Ta‘meya 
 In Egypt,  meze , commonly referred to as  muqabilat  ( مقبلات ), salads and cheeses are traditionally served at the start of a multi-course meal along with bread, before the main courses. [22]  Popular dishes include:
 
 
 Ta‘meya  ( طعمية‎ )—a breakfast dish of deep-fried fritters made out of  fava beans , in contrast to the Levantine version of  falafel  made with  chickpeas . Often eaten by themselves or in a pita bread sandwich with  tehina  and greens. 
 Baba ghannoug  ( بابا غنوج )—a dip made with  eggplants , lemon juice, salt, pepper,  parsley ,  cumin  and oil. 
 Duqqa  ( دقة )—a dry mixture of chopped nuts, seeds and spices. 
 Gollash  ( جلاش )—a  phyllo dough  pastry stuffed with minced meat or cheese. 
 Salata baladi  ( سلطة بلدي )— a salad made with tomatoes, cucumber, onion and chili topped with parsley, cumin,  coriander , vinegar and oil. 
 Tehina  ( طحينة )—a sesame paste dip or spread made of  sesame   tahini , lemon juice, and garlic. 
 Torshi  ( طرشي )—an assortment of pickled vegetables. 
 
 Main courses [ edit ] 
   Kushari 
   Molokhiya 
   Grilled fish with a side of  sayadiya  rice 
   A typical Egyptian lunch 
 Egyptian cuisine is characterized by dishes such as  ful medames , [23] [24] [25]  mashed  fava beans ;  kushari , a mixture of lentils, rice, pasta, and other ingredients;  molokhiya , chopped and cooked  jute  leaf with garlic and coriander sauce; and  feteer meshaltet .
 Egyptian cuisine shares similarities with food of the Eastern  Mediterranean  region, such as rice-stuffed vegetables, grape leaves,  shawerma ,  kebab  and  kofta , with some variation and differences in preparation.
 Some consider  kushari , a mixture of rice, lentils, and macaroni, to be the  national dish .  Ful medames  is also one of the most popular dishes. Fava bean is also used in making  falafel  (most commonly referred to as  ta‘ameya  in Egypt, and served with fresh tomatoes, tahina sauce and arugula). [26] [27] 
 Ancient Egyptians are known to have used a lot of garlic and onions in their everyday dishes. Fresh garlic mashed with other herbs is used in spicy tomato salad and also stuffed in boiled or baked eggplant. Garlic fried with coriander is added to  molokhiya , a popular green soup made from finely chopped  jute  leaves, sometimes with chicken or  rabbit . Fried onions can be also added to  kushari . [28]  The ingredients, in the okra and molokhiya dishes, are whipped and blended with a tool called the  wīka , used in ancient times and today, in Egypt and Sudan. [29] 
 
 
 
 English
 
 Arabic
 
 Definition
 
 
 Bamia 
 
 بامية 
 
 A stew prepared using lamb, okra and tomatoes as primary ingredients. [30] 
 
 
 Besarah 
 
 بصارة 
 
 A dip made from peeled fava beans and leafy greens. It is served cold and is normally topped with fried onion. [30] 
 
 
 ‘ Eggah 
 
 عجة 
 
 A type of omelette made with parsley and flour, similar to a  frittata . It is baked in the oven in a deep skillet. [30] 
 
 
 Fattah 
 
 فتة 
 
 A traditional dish eaten on festive occasions, particularly  Eid al-Adha . A mixture of rice, chunks of lamb meat,  eish baladi  cut up into pieces and prebaked in the oven, all covered in a tomato or vinegar-based sauce. [30] 
 
 
 Fesikh 
 
 فسيخ 
 
 Salted or fermented  mullet , generally eaten on the spring festival of  Sham Ennessim , which falls on  Eastern   Easter Monday . [30] 
 
 
 Feteer 
 
 فطير 
 
 Pies made of thin dough with liberal quantities of  samnah . The fillings may be either savory or sweet. [30] 
 
 
 Ful medames 
 
 فول مدمس 
 
 Cooked fava beans served with olive oil and topped with cumin. It is always eaten with bread, in a sandwich or the bread is used as a utensil, to scoop up the beans. A staple in Egypt, it is often considered the national dish. [30] 
 
 
 Hamam mahshi 
 
 حمام محشي 
 
 Pigeon  stuffed with rice or green wheat and herbs. First it is boiled until cooked, then roasted or grilled. [31] 
 
 
 Hawawshi 
 
 حواوشى 
 
 A  turnover  pastry filled with minced meat marinated in onions, pepper, parsley and sometimes hot peppers or chilies. [30] 
 
 
 Kabab 
 
 كباب 
 
 Usually chopped and minced lamb meat on skewers grilled over charcoal.
 
 
 Kamounia 
 
 كمونية 
 
 A beef and cumin stew. It is sometimes made with  offal , like bull genitals.
 
 
 Kaware‘ 
 
 كوارع 
 
 Cow's trotters , it is often eaten with  fattah . It is also common to boil the trotters into a broth, the tendons from the trotters and the resulting broth are enjoyed as a soup. It is believed to be an aphrodisiac in Egypt. [30] 
 
 
 Kersha 
 
 كرشة 
 
 Tripe  cooked into a stew.
 
 
 Keshk 
 
 کشک 
 
 A yogurt-based savory  pudding , made with flour, sometimes seasoned with fried onions, chicken broth or boiled chicken.
 
 
 Kofta 
 
 كفتة 
 
 Minced meat prepared with spices and parsley, rolled into a finger-shape and grilled over charcoal. [30] 
 
 
 Kushari 
 
 كشري 
 
 An Egyptian dish originally made in the 19th century, made of rice, macaroni and lentils mixed together, topped with a spiced tomato sauce, and garlic vinegar; garnished with chickpeas and crispy fried onions. A sprinkling of garlic juice, or garlic vinegar, and hot sauce are optional. It is a popular street food. [30] 
 
 
 Macarona bil-béchamel 
 
 مكرونة بالبشاميل 
 
 An Egyptian variant of the Italian lasagna, without the cheese. Typically consists of penne slathered in bechamel sauce with a layer of slowly fried ground beef, onions and tomato paste, topped with some more penne in bechamel sauce, topped again with a thin layer of bechamel sauce and brushed with an egg wash, then baked to perfection. Some prepare it as a variant of the  Greek   pastitsio , incorporating  gebna rūmī , an Egyptian cheese similar to  Sardo  or  Pecorino  cheese, along with a mixture of  penne  macaroni and  béchamel sauce , and usually two layers of cooked spiced meat with onions. [30] 
 
 
 Mahshi 
 
 محشي 
 
 A stuffing of rice, seasoned with crushed red tomatoes, onion, parsley,  dill , salt, pepper and spices, put into vegetables like green peppers,  eggplants ,  courgettes ,  tomatoes ,  grape  or  cabbage  leaves. They're then placed in a pot and topped with chicken broth or beef broth. [30] 
 
 
 Mesaqa‘ah 
 
 مسقعة 
 
 Sliced eggplants lightly grilled and placed in a flat pan with sliced onions, green peppers, and chili peppers. The dish is then covered with a red sauce made of tomato paste and spices then baked in the oven. [30] 
 
 
 Molokhiya 
 
 ملوخية 
 
 Green soup prepared in various styles, wherein the  mallow  leaves are very finely chopped, with ingredients such as  garlic  and  coriander  added for a characteristic aromatic taste, then cooked with chicken broth. [30]  Other kinds of broths can be used such as rabbit, shrimp, which is popular in Alexandria, and fish in Port Said. It is often considered the country's national dish. [32] 
 
 
 Mombar 
 
 ممبار 
 
 Sheep intestines stuffed with a rice mixture and deep fried in oil.
 
 
 Rozz me‘ammar 
 
 رز معمر 
 
 A rice dish made by adding milk (and frequently  butter  or  cream ) and chicken stock or broth to cooked rice, then baking it in an oven. It is frequently substituted for plain white rice at festive occasions and large family meals. It is normally served in a special casserole made out of clay called  bram .
 
 
 Sabanekh 
 
 سبانخ 
 
 A spinach stew, usually served with rice. It is commonly, but not necessarily, made with small chunks of beef.
 
 
 Sayadiya 
 
 صيادية 
 
 A coastal dish. Rice with onion cooked in tomato paste, usually served with fried fish. [30] 
 
 
 Shakshouka 
 
 شكشوكة 
 
 Eggs with tomato sauce and vegetables. [30] 
 
 
 Shawerma 
 
 شاورما 
 
 A popular sandwich of shredded beef, lamb or chicken meat, usually rolled in pita bread with tahini (sesame seed) sauce.
 
 
 Torly 
 
 تورلي 
 
 A tray of baked squash, potatoes, carrots, onions, and tomato sauce. [30] 
 
 
 Qolqas 
 
 قلقاس 
 
 Taro  root, generally peeled and prepared either with  chard  or tomato. Unpeeled  qolqas  and eggplant make the  ṭabkha sawda , or "black dish," served to and despised by  conscripts  in the  Egyptian Armed Forces . [30] 
 
 Desserts [ edit ] 
   Basbousa  topped with  walnuts 
   Umm Ali  prepared in the oven 
   Feteer meshaltet , a pastry often eaten as a dessert by dipping in honey and  eshta  or with various sweet fillings. 
 Egyptian desserts resemble other  Eastern Mediterranean  desserts.  Basbousa  ( بسبوسة ) is a dessert made from  semolina  and soaked in syrup. It is usually topped with almonds and traditionally cut vertically into pieces so that each piece has a diamond shape.  Baqlawa  ( بقلاوة ) is a sweet dish made from many layers of  phyllo pastry , an assortment of nuts, and soaked in a sweet syrup.  Ghorayiba  ( غريبة ) is a sweet biscuit made with sugar, flour and liberal quantities of butter, similar to  shortbread . It can be topped with roasted almonds or black cardamom pods.
 Kahk  ( كحك ) is a sweet biscuit served most commonly during  Eid al-Fitr  in Egypt. It is covered with  icing sugar , and can also be stuffed with dates, walnuts, or ' agameya  ( عجمية ) which is similar in texture to  Turkish delight , or just served plain.  Kunafa  ( كنافة ) is a shredded pastry sandwiching a layer of cream (قشطة) or desalted ' akkawi  cheese soaked in a sweet syrup.  Luqmet el qadi  ( لقمة القاضي ) are small, round donuts that are crunchy on the outside and soft and syrupy on the inside. They are often served with dusted cinnamon and powdered sugar. The name literally translates to "The Judge's Bite".  Atayef  ( قطايف ) is a dessert served exclusively during the month of  Ramadan , a sort of sweet mini  pancake  (made without eggs) filled with cream and nuts or raisins.  Rozz be laban  ( ارز باللبن ) is a rice pudding made with short grain white rice, full-cream milk, sugar, and vanilla. It can be served dusted with  cinnamon , nuts and ice cream.  Umm Ali  or  Om Ali   ( ام على ), is a type of bread pudding served hot made puff pastry or rice, milk, coconut, and raisins. [33] [34] 
 Other desserts include:
 
 
 Couscous  ( كسكسي )—Egyptian style, with butter or  eshta  as well as sugar, nuts and dried fruit. 
 Halawa  ( حلاوة ) 
 Ladida  ( لديدة ) 
 Malban  ( ملبن ) 
 Mehalabeya  ( مهلبية ) 
 Melabbes  ( ملبس ) 
 Mifattah  ( مفتاة )—a thick paste of sesame and molasses. 
 
 Cuisine and religious practice [ edit ] 
 Although  Ramadan  is a month of  fasting  for Muslims in Egypt, it is usually a time when Egyptians pay a lot of attention to food variety and richness, since  breaking the fast  is a family affair, often with entire extended families meeting at the table just after sunset. There are several desserts served almost exclusively during Ramadan, such as  kunafa  ( كنافة ) and  qatayef  ( قطايف ). In this month, many Egyptians prepare a special table for the poor or passers-by, usually in a tent in the street, called  Ma'edet Rahman  ( Egyptian Arabic :  مائدة رحمن ,  [mæˈʔedet ɾɑħˈmɑːn] ), which literally translates to "Table of the Merciful", referring to one of  the 99 names of God in Islam . These may be fairly simple or quite lavish, depending on the wealth and ostentation of the provider.
 Observant  Christians in Egypt  adhere to  fasting  periods according to the  Coptic calendar ; these may practically extend to more than two-thirds of the year for the most extreme and observant. The more secular Coptic population mainly fasts only for  Easter  and  Christmas .  The  Coptic diet  for fasting is essentially  vegan . During this fasting, Copts usually eat vegetables and legumes fried in oil and avoid meat, chicken, and dairy products, including butter and cream.
 
 Beverages [ edit ] 
 Tea [ edit ] 
   Egyptian mint tea 
   A glass of black tea served in Cairo 
 Tea  ( شاى ,  shai   [ʃæːj] ) is the national drink in Egypt, followed only distantly by  coffee . Egyptian tea is uniformly  black  and sour and is generally served in a glass, sometimes with milk. Tea packed and sold in Egypt is almost exclusively imported from  Kenya  and  Sri Lanka . Egyptian tea comes in two varieties,  kushari  and  sa‘idi .
 Kushari  tea ( شاى كشرى ), popular in  Lower Egypt , is prepared using the traditional method of steeping black tea in boiled water and letting it sit for a few minutes. It is almost always sweetened with cane sugar and often flavored with fresh  mint  leaves.  Kushari  tea is usually light in color and flavor, with less than a half teaspoonful of tea per cup considered to be near the high end.
 Sa‘idi  tea ( شاى صعيدى ) is common in  Upper Egypt . It is prepared by boiling black tea with water for as long as five minutes over a strong flame.  Sa‘idi  tea is extremely strong and dark ("heavy" in Egyptian parlance), with two teaspoonfuls of tea per cup being the norm. It is sweetened with copious amounts of cane sugar (a necessity since the formula and method yield a very bitter tea).  Sa‘idi  tea is often black even in liquid form.
 Tea is a vital part of daily life and folk etiquette in Egypt. It typically accompanies  breakfast  in most households, and drinking tea after  lunch  is a common practice. Visiting another person's household, regardless of socioeconomic level or the purpose of the visit, entails a compulsory cup of tea; similar hospitality might be required for a business visit to the private office of someone wealthy enough to maintain one, depending on the nature of the business. A common nickname for tea in Egypt is "duty" (pronounced in Arabic as "wa-jeb" or "wa-geb"), as serving tea to a visitor is considered a duty, while anything beyond is a nicety.
 
   Hibiscus  and other herbs in  Hurghada 
 Besides true tea,  herbal teas  are also often served at Egyptian teahouses.  Karkadeh  ( كركديه ), a tea of dried  hibiscus   sepals , is particularly popular, as it is in other parts of  North Africa . It is generally served extremely sweet and cold but may also be served hot. [31]  This drink is said to have been a preferred drink of the pharaohs. In Egypt and  Sudan , wedding celebrations are traditionally toasted with a glass of hibiscus tea. On a typical street in downtown  Cairo , one can find many vendors and open-air cafés selling the drink. In Egypt,  karkadeh  is used as a means to lower blood pressure when consumed in high amounts.  Infusions  of  mint ,  cinnamon , dried  ginger , and  anise  are also common, as is  sahlab . Most of these herbal teas are considered to have medicinal properties as well; particularly common is an infusion of hot  lemonade  in which mint leaves have been steeped and sweetened with  honey  and used to combat mild  sore throat .
 
 Coffee [ edit ] 
   Coffee  served in Cairo 
 Coffee  ( قهوة ,  ahwa   Egyptian Arabic:  [ˈʔæhwæ] ) is considered a part of the traditional welcome in Egypt. It is usually prepared in a similar fashion to  Turkish coffee  in a small coffee pot, which is called  dalla  (دلة) or  kanakah  ( كنكة ) and served in a small coffee cup called a  fengan  ( فنجان ). The coffee is usually strong and sweetened with sugar to various degrees; ' al riha (عالريحة) ,  mazbout  (مظبوط) and  ziyada  (زيادة) respectively. Unsweetened coffee is known as  sada (سادة),  or plain. [35] 
 
 Juices [ edit ] 
 In Egypt,  sugar cane  juice is called ' aseer asab  ( عصير قصب ) and is an incredibly popular drink served by almost all fruit juice vendors, who can be found abundantly in most cities. [31] 
 Licorice  teas and  carob  juice drinks are traditionally enjoyed during the Islamic month of Ramadan, as is  amar al-din , a thick drink made by reconstituting sheets of dried  apricot  with water. [36]  The sheets themselves are often consumed as  candy .  Sobia  ( سوبيا ) is another beverage traditionally served during Ramadan. It is a sweet  coconut  milk drink, usually sold by street vendors. [37] 
 A sour, chilled drink made from  tamarind  is popular during the summer called  tamr Hindi  ( تمر هندي ). It literally translates to "Indian dates", which is the  Arabic  name for tamarind. [38] 
 
 Alcoholic beverages [ edit ] 
   A bottle of Luxor Weizen, a  wheat beer  from the Luxor brand brewed by  Egybev , and a bottle of Sakara Gold 
 See also:  Egyptian wine  and  Beer in Egypt 
 Islam is the majority religion in Egypt, and while observant Muslims tend to avoid the consumption of alcohol, it is readily available in the country.  Beer  is by far the most popular alcoholic beverage in the country, accounting for 54 percent of all alcohol consumed. [39] 
 A beer type known as  bouza   ( Egyptian Arabic :  بوظة ), based on  barley  and bread, [40]  has been drunk in Egypt since beer first made its appearance in the country, possibly as early as the  Predynastic era . [41]  It is not the same as  boza , an alcoholic beverage found in  Turkey  and the  Balkans .
 Egypt has a small but nascent  wine  industry. Egyptian wines have received some recognition in recent years, having won several international awards. [42]  In 2013 Egypt produced 4,500 tonnes of wine, ranking  54th globally , ahead of  Belgium  and the  United Kingdom . [43]  Most Egyptian wines are made with grapes sourced from vineyards in  Alexandria  and  Middle Egypt , most notably Gianaclis Vineyards and Koroum of the Nile.
 
 See also [ edit ] 
 
 Egypt portal Africa portal Asia portal Food portal 
 Ancient Egyptian cuisine 
 Arab cuisine 
 North African cuisine 
 Mediterranean cuisine 
 List of African cuisines 
 List of Asian cuisines 
 References [ edit ] 
 
 
 ^  a   b   Ghillie Basan (2007).  Middle Eastern Kitchen . Hippocrene Books. pp. 33–.  ISBN   978-0-7818-1190-3 . 
 
 ^   Planet, Lonely.  "Eating in Egypt" .  Lonely Planet . 
 
 ^  a   b   Lewicka, Paulina (2011).  Food and Foodways of Medieval Cairenes . Brill. 
 
 ^   Lady Isabel Burton (1887).  Lady Burton's edition of her husband's Arabian nights . Waterlow & sons, limited. 
 
 ^   "Spices of the Egyptian Cuisine" .  Nile Valley Hotel . Retrieved  5 June  2017 . 
 
 ^   Perreault, Abbey (4 September 2018).  "Exploring a 'Treasure Trove' of Medieval Egyptian Recipes" .  Atlas Obscura . Retrieved  6 September  2018 . 
 
 ^   John Metcalfe (19 January 2012).  "Why Do Cow Brains Keep Getting Seized at the Cairo Airport?" .  Bloomberg.com . CityLab . Retrieved  8 January  2016 . 
 
 ^   "Meat | Egyptian Cuisine and Recipes" .  Egyptian-cuisine-recipes.com . Retrieved  8 January  2016 . 
 
 ^   "Ancient Egypt: Farmed and domesticated animals" . Archived from  the original  on 16 December 2017 . Retrieved  7 December  2017 . 
 
 ^   "A Global Taste Test of Foie Gras and Truffles" .  NPR . 
 
 ^   Myhrvold, Nathan.  "Cooking" .  Britannica . Britannica . Retrieved  7 December  2017 . 
 
 ^   Davidson, Alan  (2014).  Jaine, Tom (ed.).  The Oxford Companion to Food  (3rd ed.). Oxford:  Oxford University Press . pp. 163–165.  ISBN   978-0-19-967733-7 . 
 
 ^   A. Lucas; J. Harris (30 April 2012).  Ancient Egyptian Materials and Industries . Courier Corporation.  ISBN   978-0-486-14494-8 . 
 
 ^   Kindstedt, Paul (1 April 2012).  Cheese and Culture: A History of Cheese and its Place in Western Civilization . Chelsea Green Publishing. pp. 34–35.  ISBN   978-1-60358-412-8 . 
 
 ^   Paula Lambert (9 January 2001).  The Cheese Lover's Cookbook & Guide: Over 100 Recipes, with Instructions on How to Buy, Store, and Serve All Your Favorite Cheeses . Simon and Schuster. pp. 20–.  ISBN   978-0-7432-1328-8 . 
 
 ^   The Oxford Companion to Cheese . Oxford University Press. 25 October 2016. pp. 248–.  ISBN   978-0-19-933089-8 . 
 
 ^  a   b   Robinson, R. K.; Tamime, A. Y. (12 May 1996).  Feta & Related Cheeses . CRC Press. pp. 160, 183.  ISBN   978-0-7476-0077-0 . 
 
 ^  a   b   Fox, Patrick F.; McSweeney, Paul L. H.; Cogan, Timothy M. (4 August 2004).  Cheese: Chemistry, Physics and Microbiology: General Aspects . Academi c Press. pp. 11, 20.  ISBN   978-0-08-050093-5 . 
 
 ^   Alderman, Harold; Braun, Joachim Von (1984).  The Effects of the Egyptian Food Ration and Subsidy System on Income Distribution and Consumption . Intl Food Policy Res Inst.  ISBN   9780896290464 . 
 
 ^  a   b   Wehr, Hans  (1994) [1979].  J. Milton Cowan (ed.).  Dictionary of Modern Written Arabic .  Urbana ,  Illinois : Spoken Language Services, Inc.  ISBN   0-87950-003-4 . 
 
 ^   Slackman, Michael (14 April 2008).  "A City Where You Can't Hear Yourself Scream" .  The New York Times .  Archived  from the original on 23 July 2016 . Retrieved  7 May  2008 . 
 
 ^   Riolo, Amy (15 June 2013).  Nile Style: Egyptian Cuisine and Culture: Expanded Edition . Hippocrene Books, Inc. New York. 
 
 ^   "21 Traditional Egyptian Foods You Must Try!" .  Travel Food Atlas . 16 February 2018 . Retrieved  29 December  2020 . 
 
 ^   "Egyptian Cooking" .  Egypt Best Trip . Retrieved  19 May  2020 . 
 
 ^   "Egyptian Breakfast Ful Medames" .  Ribbons to Pastas . 4 September 2014 . Retrieved  24 May  2020 . 
 
 ^   Salem, Gamila.  "Ta'ameya (Egyptian Falafel)" .  Allrecipes . allrecipes . Retrieved  6 December  2017 . 
 
 ^   Bruce Kraig; Colleen Taylor Sen (9 September 2013).  Street Food Around the World: An Encyclopedia of Food and Culture . ABC-CLIO. pp. 128–.  ISBN   978-1-59884-955-4 . 
 
 ^   Abdelall, Brenda.  "Flavors: Kushari" .  Aramco World  (March / April 2018) . Retrieved  7 March  2018 . 
 
 ^   Nasrallah, Nawal (30 July 2018).  "14th-Century Cookbook 'Profoundly Rich Resource for Egyptian Culinary Heritage' " .  Arablit . Retrieved  6 September  2018 . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   e   f   g   h   i   j   k   l   m   n   o   p   q   r   s   "Top 33 Delicious Egyptian Foods You Must Try on Your Next Trip" .  Doctorfithealth . 14 November 2018 . Retrieved  14 November  2018 . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   DK Travel (1 September 2013).  Top 10 Cairo and the Nile . DK Publishing. pp. 59–.  ISBN   978-1-4654-1790-9 . 
 
 ^   Amos (14 October 2013).  "Recipe: Muhammad's Molokhia" .  SBS . Retrieved  9 May  2018 . 
 
 ^   Berlitz Guides (January 1980).  Egypt . Berlitz. p. 97.  ISBN   978-0-02-969710-8 . 
 
 ^   "Umm Ali" .  allrecipes.com . allrecipes . Retrieved  6 December  2017 . 
 
 ^   Goldschmidt Jr. (10 October 2013).  Historical Dictionary of Egypt . Scarecrow Press. pp. 78–.  ISBN   978-0-8108-8025-2 . 
 
 ^   Samia Abdennour (15 October 2010).  Egyptian Cooking: And Other Middle Eastern Recipes . American University in Cairo Press. p. 231.  ISBN   978-1-61797-515-8 . 
 
 ^   Ganeshram, Ramin (2017).  "Cracking Coconut's History" .  Saudi Aramco World . Vol. 68, no. 1 . Retrieved  11 December  2018 . 
 
 ^   "Tamarindus indica (tamarind) | Plants & Fungi at Kew" .  Kew.org . Archived from  the original  on 20 October 2013 . Retrieved  8 January  2016 . 
 
 ^   Rios, Lorena.  "Drinking Alcohol Is Always an Open Secret in Egypt" . Munchies . Retrieved  13 December  2016 . 
 
 ^   Jensen, Jon.  "Poor of Cairo drown their sorrows in moonshine" . jonjensen . Retrieved  14 December  2016 . 
 
 ^   Caballero, Benjamin; Finglas, Paul; Toldrá, Fidel.  Encyclopedia of Food and Health . Academic Press. p. 348. 
 
 ^   Furer, David.  "Egyptian wine on the way up – Hot climate viticulture is spreading" . BKWineMagazine . Retrieved  12 November  2016 . 
 
 ^   "Wine production (tons)" .  Food and Agriculture Organization . 6 October 2015. p. 1.  Archived  from the original on 10 October 2016 . Retrieved  12 October  2016 . 
 
 
 External links [ edit ] 
 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons has media related to  Cuisine of Egypt . 
 
 Egyptian food from cooks.com 
 List of over 100 Egyptian foods 
 v t e Egyptian cuisine Beverages Non-alcoholic beverages 
 Amar eddin 
 Aseer asab 
 Black tea 
 Kushari 
 Sa‘idi 
 Karkadeh 
 Kharob 
 Sahlab 
 Sharbat 
 Tamr hindi 
 Sobia 
 Turkish coffee 
 Alcoholic beverages 
 Beer in Egypt  (main article) 
 Bouza 
 Stella 
 Egyptian wine  (main article) 
 
 Egypt portal Breads 
 Bataw 
 Eish baladi 
 Eish fino 
 Eish merahrah 
 Eish shamsi 
 Appetizers and salads 
 Baba ghanoug 
 Duqqa 
 Hummus 
 Salata baladi 
 Tehina 
 Torshi 
 Cheeses 
 Egyptian cheese  (main article) 
 Areesh 
 Domiati 
 Mish 
 Rumi 
 Soups 
 Molokhiya 
 Shorbet ‘‍‍ads 
 Shorbet khodar 
 Dishes 
 Bamia 
 Besarah 
 Eggah 
 Falafel 
 Fatteh 
 Fesikh 
 Feteer 
 Ful medames 
 Hawawshi 
 Kamounia 
 Kushari 
 Macaroni béchamel 
 Mahshi 
 Mesaqa‘ah 
 Molokhiya 
 Mombar 
 Sayadiya 
 Shakshouka 
 Torly 
 Qolqas 
 Grilled meats 
 Kebab 
 Kofta 
 Shawarma 
 Desserts 
 Baqlawa 
 Basbousa 
 Eish essaraya 
 Feteer meshaltet 
 Ghorayiba 
 Halawa 
 Kahk 
 Kunafa 
 Luqmet el qadi 
 Malban 
 Om Ali 
 Qatayef 
 Rozz belaban 
 Common ingredients Vegetables 
 Bean 
 Bell pepper 
 Lentil 
 Spinach 
 Tomato 
 Herbs & spices 
 Cumin 
 Coriander 
 Cardamom 
 Chili 
 Aniseed 
 Bay leaves 
 Dill 
 Parsley 
 Ginger 
 Cinnamon 
 Mint 
 Cloves 
 Related cuisines 
 Arab 
 Ancient Egyptian 
 North African 
 Mediterranean 
 Middle Eastern 
 
 v t e African cuisine National cuisines 
 Algeria 
 Angola 
 Benin 
 Botswana 
 Burkina Faso 
 Burundi 
 Cameroon 
 Cape Verde 
 Central African Republic 
 Chad 
 Comoros 
 Democratic Republic of the Congo 
 Djibouti 
 Egypt 
 Equatorial Guinea 
 Eritrea 
 Eswatini (Swaziland) 
 Ethiopia 
 Gabon 
 Gambia 
 Ghana 
 Guinea 
 Guinea-Bissau 
 Ivory Coast 
 Kenya 
 Lesotho 
 Liberia 
 Libya 
 Madagascar 
 Malawi 
 Mali 
 Mauritania 
 Mauritius 
 Morocco 
 Mozambique 
 Namibia 
 Niger 
 Nigeria 
 Republic of the Congo 
 Rwanda 
 Saint Helena 
 São Tomé and Príncipe 
 Senegal 
 Seychelles 
 Sierra Leone 
 Somalia 
 South Africa 
 South Sudan 
 Sudan 
 Tanzania 
 Togo 
 Tunisia 
 Uganda 
 Western Sahara 
 Zambia 
 Zimbabwe 
 Ethnic and regional cuisines 
 Arab 
 Berber 
 Jewish 
 Ethiopian 
 Mizrahi 
 Sephardi 
 Mediterranean 
 North African 
 West African 
 Zanzibar 
 Lists 
 List of African cuisines 
 List of African dishes 
 
   Category 
 
 v t e Mediterranean cuisine Regions Southern Maghrebi 
 Algerian 
 Chakhchoukha 
 Berber 
 Libyan 
 Bazin 
 Moroccan 
 Méchoui 
 Tajine 
 Tunisian 
 Shakshouka 
 Regional
 Couscous 
 Egyptian 
 Duqqa 
 Ful medames 
 Kushari 
 Mulukhiyah 
 Levant 
 Israeli 
 Hamin 
 Lebanese 
 Kibbeh 
 Palestinian 
 Musakhan 
 Syrian 
 Regional 
 Baba ghanoush 
 Hummus 
 Northern Turkish 
 Cheeses 
 Desserts 
 Kebabs 
 Rakı 
 Turkish tea 
 Greek 
 Gyros 
 Greek salad 
 Stifado 
 Feta 
 Skordalia 
 Loukaniko 
 Melomakarono 
 Ionian Islands 
 Bourdeto 
 Pastitsada 
 Crete 
 Dakos 
 Paximadi 
 Other Balkan 
 Albanian 
 Aromanian 
 Bosnia and Herzegovina 
 Croatian 
 Montenegrin 
 Slovenian 
 Regional
 Pita 
 Shish kebab 
 Yogurt 
 Baklava 
 Moussaka 
 Italian 
 Regional
 Pasta 
 Pizza 
 Abruzzese 
 Arrosticini 
 Mortadella di Campotosto 
 Maccheroni alla chitarra 
 Pizzelle 
 Timballo 
 Bocconotto 
 Parrozzo 
 Apulian 
 Arbëreshë 
 Ligurian 
 Ciuppin 
 Focaccia 
 Pesto 
 Ravioli 
 Lombard 
 Mantuan 
 Lucanian 
 Neapolitan 
 Neapolitan ragù 
 Pasta e fagioli 
 Roman 
 Carbonara 
 Sardinian 
 Pane carasau 
 Malloreddus 
 Mirto (liqueur) 
 Abbamele 
 Pecorino sardo 
 Culurgiònes 
 Bottarga 
 Seada 
 Sicilian 
 Cannoli 
 Caponata 
 Pasta alla Norma 
 Scaccia 
 Tuscan 
 Ribollita 
 Venetian 
 Carpaccio 
 Polenta 
 Risotto 
 French 
 Corsican 
 Brocciu 
 Occitan 
 Cassoulet 
 Brandade 
 Provencal 
 Bouillabaisse 
 Ratatouille 
 Salade niçoise 
 Spanish 
 Andalusian 
 Gazpacho 
 Sherry 
 Balearic 
 Caldereta 
 Tombet 
 Catalan 
 Escalivada 
 Escudella 
 Ollada 
 Valencian 
 Paella 
 Other 
 Gibraltarian 
 Monégasque 
 Islands 
 Cypriot 
 Afelia 
 Halloumi 
 Maltese 
 Staples 
 Wheat 
 Bread 
 Couscous 
 Pasta 
 Pizza 
 Semolina 
 Olive 
 Olive oil 
 Grape 
 Wine 
 Shared 
 Anise spirits 
 Bottarga 
 Lamb 
 Exemplars 
 Elizabeth David 
 A Book of Mediterranean Food 
 
 Category 
 
 v t e Cuisines Continental 
 African 
 North 
 West 
 list 
 Americas 
 Caribbean 
 North 
 South 
 list 
 Asian 
 Caucasian 
 Central 
 Indian subcontinent 
 Levantine 
 list 
 European 
 Balkan 
 Central 
 Eastern 
 list 
 Oceanic 
 Intercontinental
 Global 
 Latin American 
 Mediterranean 
 Middle Eastern 
 National  and regional 
 Afghan 
 Albanian 
 Algerian 
 American 
 Californian 
 Floribbean 
 Hawaiian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Lowcountry (South Carolina) 
 New England 
 New Mexico 
 Pacific Northwest 
 Pennsylvania Dutch 
 Puerto Rican 
 Southern US 
 Southwest US 
 Texas 
 Angolan 
 Argentine 
 Armenian 
 Australian 
 Austrian 
 Azerbaijani 
 Bahraini 
 Bangladeshi 
 Barbadian 
 Belarusian 
 Belgian 
 Belizean 
 Beninese 
 Bhutanese 
 Bolivian 
 Bosnian-Herzegovinian 
 Botswana 
 Brazilian 
 British 
 Channel Islands 
 English 
 Gibraltarian 
 Northern Irish 
 Saint Helena 
 Scottish 
 Welsh 
 Bruneian 
 Bulgarian 
 Burkinabé 
 Burmese 
 Burundian 
 Cambodian 
 Cameroonian 
 Canadian 
 Acadian 
 Québécois 
 Central African Republic 
 Chadian 
 Chilean 
 Chinese 
 Cantonese 
 Hong Kong 
 Macanese 
 Tibetan 
 Xinjiang 
 Colombian 
 Congolese 
 Corsican 
 Croatian 
 Cuban 
 Cypriot 
 Czech 
 Danish 
 Faroese 
 Greenlandic 
 Djiboutian 
 Dominican 
 Dominican Republic 
 Dutch 
 East Timorese 
 Ecuadorian 
 Egyptian 
 Emirati 
 Equatorial Guinean 
 Eritrean 
 Estonian 
 Ethiopian 
 Fijian 
 Filipino 
 Finnish 
 French 
 Occitan 
 French Guianan 
 Gabonese 
 Gambian 
 Georgian 
 German 
 Ghanaian 
 Greek 
 Cretan 
 Epirotic 
 Greek Macedonian 
 Heptanesean 
 Guatemalan 
 Guinea-Bissauan 
 Guinean 
 Haitian 
 Honduran 
 Hungarian 
 Icelandic 
 Indian 
 Arunachalese 
 Assamese 
 Bengali 
 Bihari 
 Goan 
 Gujarati 
 Himachal Pradesh 
 Kashmiri 
 Jharkhandi 
 Karnataka 
 Kerala 
 Maharashtrian 
 Manipuri 
 Meghalayan 
 Mizo 
 Naga 
 Odia 
 Punjabi 
 Rajasthani 
 Sikkimese 
 Sindhi 
 Tamil 
 Telangana 
 Telugu 
 Indonesian 
 Acehnese 
 Balinese 
 Banjar 
 Batak 
 Betawi 
 Indo 
 Javanese 
 Madurese 
 Makassar 
 Minahasan 
 Minangkabau 
 Palembangese 
 Sundanese 
 Iranian 
 Iraqi 
 Irish 
 Israeli 
 Italian 
 Abruzzese 
 Ligurian 
 Lombard 
 Lucanian 
 Neapolitan 
 Roman 
 Sardinian 
 Sicilian 
 Venetian 
 Ivorian 
 Jamaican 
 Japanese 
 Okinawan 
 Jordanian 
 Kazakh 
 Kenyan 
 Korean 
 North Korean 
 South Korean 
 Kosovan 
 Kuwaiti 
 Kyrgyz 
 Lao 
 Latvian 
 Lebanese 
 Lesotho 
 Liberian 
 Libyan 
 Liechtensteiner 
 Lithuanian 
 Luxembourg 
 Macedonian 
 Malagasy 
 Malawian 
 Malaysian 
 Sabahan 
 Sarawakian 
 Maldivian 
 Malian 
 Maltese 
 Mauritanian 
 Mauritian 
 Mexican 
 Moldovan 
 Monégasque 
 Mongolian 
 Montenegrin 
 Moroccan 
 Mozambican 
 Namibian 
 Nauruan 
 Nepalese 
 New Zealand 
 Nicaraguan 
 Niger 
 Nigerian 
 Niuean 
 Norwegian 
 Omani 
 Pakistani 
 Palestinian 
 Panamanian 
 Peruvian 
 Polish 
 Portuguese 
 Qatari 
 Romanian  (incl.  Transylvanian Saxon ) 
 Russian 
 Bashkir 
 Chechen 
 Circassian 
 Komi 
 Mordovian 
 Sakha 
 Tatar 
 Udmurt 
 Yamal 
 Rwandan 
 Saint Lucian 
 Salvadoran 
 Sammarinese 
 São Tomé and Príncipe 
 Saudi Arabian 
 Senegalese 
 Serbian 
 Seychellois 
 Sierra Leonean 
 Singaporean 
 Slovak 
 Slovenian 
 Somali 
 South African 
 Spanish 
 Andalusian 
 Asturian 
 Balearic 
 Basque 
 Canarian 
 Cantabrian 
 Catalan 
 Extremaduran 
 Galician 
 Manchegan 
 Valencian 
 Sri Lankan 
 Sudanese 
 Swazi 
 Swedish 
 Swiss 
 Syrian 
 Taiwanese 
 Tajik 
 Tanzanian 
 Zanzibari 
 Thai 
 Togolese 
 Tunisian 
 Turkish 
 Turkmen 
 Trinidadian and Tobagonian 
 Ugandan 
 Ukrainian 
 Uruguayan 
 Uzbek 
 Venezuelan 
 Vietnamese 
 Western Saharan 
 Yemeni 
 Zambian 
 Zimbabwean 
 Ethnic 
 Ainu 
 Arab 
 Indonesian 
 Aromanian 
 Assyrian 
 Balochi 
 Berber 
 Cajun 
 Chinese 
 American 
 Canadian 
 Chifa 
 Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Crimean Tatar 
 Greek American 
 Hazaragi 
 Indian 
 Anglo-Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Indigenous American 
 Inuit 
 Italian American 
 Kurdish 
 Livonian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Malay 
 Ossetian 
 Parsi 
 Pashtun 
 Peranakan 
 Romani 
 Sámi 
 Soul food 
 Sylheti 
 Transylvanian Saxon 
 Yup'ik 
 Religious 
 Buddhist 
 Christian 
 Goan Catholic 
 Mangalorean Catholic 
 Mennonite 
 Hindu 
 Islamic 
 Chinese 
 Ital 
 Jain 
 Jewish 
 American 
 Ashkenazi 
 Bukharan 
 Ethiopian 
 Mizrahi 
 Sephardic 
 Syrian 
 Ritual slaughter 
 Sikh 
 Historical 
 Ancient Egyptian 
 Ancient Greek 
 Ancient Israelite 
 Ancient Roman 
 Antebellum America 
 Aztec 
 Byzantine 
 Early modern European 
 Historical Chinese 
 Historical Indian subcontinent 
 Historical North Indian and Pakistani 
 History of agriculture 
 History of alcoholic drinks 
 History of bread 
 History of seafood 
 History of vegetarianism 
 Historical Argentine 
 Historical Japanese 
 Inca 
 Mayan 
 Muisca 
 Mughal 
 Medieval 
 Ottoman 
 Peasant 
 Soviet 
 Thirteen Colonies 
 Styles 
 Classique 
 Fast food 
 Fusion 
 New American 
 Eurasian 
 Haute 
 Molecular gastronomy 
 Note by Note 
 Nouvelle 
 Lists 
 List of cuisines 
 List of historical cuisines 
 Lists of prepared foods 
 Related 
 Cookbook 
 Cooking 
 Culinary arts 
 Drink 
 Food 
 history 
 Diet 
 Meal preparation 
 
   Food portal 
   Drink portal 
   Category 
   Commons 
   Cookbook 
   WikiProject 
   Outline 
 
 v t e Egypt  topics History Chronology 
 Prehistoric 
 Ancient 
 topics 
 Achaemenid
 27th Dynasty 
 31st Dynasty 
 Ptolemaic 
 Battle of Actium 
 Lighthouse of Alexandria 
 Roman 
 Diocese of Egypt 
 Library of Alexandria 
 Christian 
 Sassanid 
 Muslim 
 Muslim conquest 
 Islamization 
 Fustat 
 Tulunid dynasty 
 Ikhshidid dynasty 
 Fatimid Caliphate 
 Crusader invasions 
 Ayyubid dynasty 
 Mamluk Sultanate 
 Mamluk 
 Ottoman 
 Egypt Eyalet 
 Muhammad Ali dynasty 
 Nahda 
 Khedivate 
 Ethiopian–Egyptian War 
 ʻUrabi revolt 
 Modern 
 French occupation 
 Revolt of Cairo 
 British occupation 
 1919 revolution 
 World War II 
 Sultanate 
 Kingdom 
 1948 Arab–Israeli War 
 Republic 
 Nasser era 
 1952 coup d'état 
 Land reform 
 Suez Crisis 
 United Arab Republic 
 Six-Day War 
 Sadat era 
 Yom Kippur War 
 Egyptian–Libyan War 
 Assassination of Anwar Sadat 
 Mubarak era 
 2010s Crisis 
 2013 Rabaa massacre 
 By topic 
 Anarchism 
 Capital 
 Cigarette industry 
 Constitution 
 Copts 
 Genetic 
 Healthcare 
 Jews 
 Muslim Brotherhood 
 1928–1938 
 1939–1954 
 1954–present 
 Parliament 
 Population 
 Postal 
 Saladin 
 Timekeeping devices 
 By city 
 Alexandria 
 Cairo 
 Port Said 
 Geography 
 Biota 
 Borders 
 Cities 
 Climate 
 Deserts 
 Earthquakes 
 Environmental issues 
 Fossils 
 Geology 
 Halfaya Pass 
 Islands 
 Lakes 
 Mountains 
 Mount Sinai 
 Nile Delta 
 Northern coast 
 Oases 
 Qattara Depression 
 Red Sea Riviera 
 Rivers 
 Nile 
 Sinai Peninsula 
 Suez Canal 
 Towns and villages 
 Wadis 
 Wildlife 
 Politics 
 Administrative divisions 
 Governorates 
 Postal codes 
 Civil Code 
 Conflicts 
 Corruption 
 Conscription 
 Constitution 
 Elections 
 Foreign relations 
 Missions 
 Islamic extremism 
 Judiciary 
 Law enforcement 
 Massacres 
 Military 
 Supreme Council 
 Nationality law 
 Parliament 
 Passport 
 Political parties 
 President 
 list 
 Prime Minister 
 list 
 Proposed new capital 
 Refugees of the Syrian civil war 
 Terrorism 
 Terrorism and tourism 
 Twin towns and sister cities 
 Economy 
 Agriculture 
 Banking 
 National Bank 
 Companies 
 Economic regions 
 Egyptian stock exchange 
 Egyptian pound 
 Energy 
 Entrepreneurship policies 
 Fishing 
 Impact on the environment 
 Lighthouses 
 Military industry 
 Mining 
 Mines 
 Nuclear program 
 Power stations 
 Aswan Dam 
 Role of the Egyptian Armed Forces 
 Tallest buildings 
 Telecommunications 
 Internet 
 Tourism 
 Cultural tourism 
 Transport 
 Airlines 
 Airports 
 Railway stations 
 Water supply and sanitation 
 Water resources management 
 Society General 
 Abortion 
 Animal welfare 
 Billionaires 
 Cannabis 
 Capital punishment 
 Censuses 
 Corruption 
 Crime 
 Human trafficking 
 Mass sexual assault 
 Rape 
 Demographics 
 Diaspora 
 Education 
 Academic grading 
 Law schools 
 Medical schools 
 Schools 
 Universities 
 Families 
 Abaza family 
 Feminism 
 Gender inequality 
 Health 
 Healthcare 
 Hospitals 
 Homelessness 
 Human rights 
 Freedom of religion 
 LGBT rights 
 International rankings 
 Languages 
 Egyptian Arabic 
 Saʽidi Arabic 
 Sign Language 
 Liberalism 
 Literature 
 Prostitution 
 Religion 
 Baháʼí 
 Blasphemy law 
 Christianity 
 Catholic dioceses 
 Coptic Churches 
 Hinduism 
 Identification card controversy 
 Irreligion 
 Islam 
 Ahmadiyya 
 Mosques 
 Niqāb 
 Judaism 
 Synagogues 
 Scientology 
 Smoking 
 Units of measurement 
 Vehicle registration plates 
 Women 
 Culture 
 Architecture 
 Art 
 Botanical gardens 
 Castles 
 Cinema 
 Coat of arms 
 Cuisine 
 Beer 
 Wine 
 Films 
 Flag 
 list 
 regions 
 Football 
 Football clubs 
 Football stadiums 
 Egyptians 
 Mass media 
 Magazines 
 Newspapers 
 Radio 
 TV 
 Museums 
 Music 
 National anthem 
 Olympics 
 Public holidays 
 World Heritage Sites 
 
   Category 
   Portal 
   WikiProject 
   Commons 
 
 Authority control   National libraries 
 Spain 
 France 
 BnF data 
 Israel 
 United States 
 Japan 
 Other 
 IdRef 
 
  
NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw2378
Cached time: 20230310220801
Cache expiry: 1814400
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc, no‐toc‐conversion]
CPU time usage: 1.060 seconds
Real time usage: 1.291 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 4929/1000000
Post‐expand include size: 326584/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2032/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 17/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 173434/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.570/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 26845600/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/400
 
 
Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  906.495      1 -total
 29.17%  264.425      1 Template:Reflist
 15.32%  138.872     19 Template:Cite_book
 14.23%  128.991     11 Template:Navbox
 11.39%  103.225     15 Template:Transliteration
 10.63%   96.388     80 Template:Lang
  8.82%   79.998      1 Template:Egyptian_cuisine
  6.43%   58.304     17 Template:Cite_web
  6.03%   54.703      1 Template:Short_description
  4.78%   43.313      1 Template:Commons_category
 
  Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:idhash:8559295-0!canonical and timestamp 20230310220800 and revision id 1139709343. Rendering was triggered because: page-view
  
 esi <esi:include src="/esitest-fa8a495983347898/content" />  
 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Egyptian_cuisine&oldid=1139709343 " 
 Categories :  Egyptian cuisine Egyptian culture African cuisine North African cuisine Mediterranean cuisine Middle Eastern cuisine Arab cuisine Hidden categories:  Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from July 2020 Articles containing Egyptian Arabic-language text Articles needing additional references from July 2022 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from October 2017 Articles containing Arabic-language text Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with BNE identifiers Articles with BNF identifiers Articles with J9U identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers Articles with NDL identifiers Articles with SUDOC identifiers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  This page was last edited on 16 February 2023, at 14:10  (UTC) . 
 Text is available under the  Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0 ;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the  Terms of Use  and  Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the  Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. 
 
 
 Privacy policy 
 About Wikipedia 
 Disclaimers 
 Contact Wikipedia 
 Mobile view 
 Developers 
 Statistics 
 Cookie statement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
