
 
 
 Jump to content 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle sidebar 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Create account Log in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Personal tools 
 
 
 
 
   Create account   Log in 
 
 
 
 
		Pages for logged out editors  learn more 
 
 
 Contributions Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Navigation 
 
 
 Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate 
 
 
 
 
 Contribute 
 
 
 Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file 
 
 
 
 
 Tools 
 
 
 What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item 
 
 
 
 
 Print/export 
 
 
 Download as PDF Printable version 
 
 
 
 
 In other projects 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons Wikibooks 
 
 
 
 
 Languages 
 
 On this Wikipedia the language links are at the top of the page across from the article title.  Go to top . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CentralNotice  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Contents 
 move to sidebar 
 hide 
 
 
 
 
 (Top) 
 
 
 
 
 
 1 Overview 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 Restrictions of certain meats 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 Traditional ingredients 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4 Dishes 
 
 
				Toggle Dishes subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 4.1 Wat 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.2 Tibs 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.3 Kinche (Qinch'e) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.4 Oromo dishes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.5 Gurage dishes 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.5.1 Kitfo 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.5.2 Ayibe 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.5.3 Gomen kitfo 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.6 Sidama dishes 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.6.1 Wassa 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.6.2 Gomen ba siga 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.6.3 Maize 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.7 Breakfast 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5 Snacks 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6 Beverages 
 
 
				Toggle Beverages subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 6.1 Traditional alcoholic beverages 
 
 
 
 
 
 6.1.1 Tella 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6.1.2 Tej (honey wine) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6.1.3 Areki (katikala) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6.2 Non-alcoholic beverages 
 
 
 
 
 
 6.2.1 Kenetto (keribo) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6.2.2 Borde 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6.3 Manufactured drinks 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6.4 Non-alcoholic brews (hot drinks) 
 
 
 
 
 
 6.4.1 Atmet 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6.4.2 Coffee 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6.4.3 Tea (chai) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6.4.4 Boiled coffee leaves 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 7 See also 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8 References 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 9 External links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
						Toggle the table of contents
					 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle the table of contents 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ethiopian cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 21 languages 
 
 
 
 Беларуская Català Čeština Deutsch Español Français 한국어 Հայերեն Italiano עברית Jawa ქართული Kiswahili Lietuvių Nederlands 日本語 Português Русский Svenska Українська 中文 
 Edit links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Article Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 English 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 More 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
 
 
 Culinary traditions of Ethiopia 
 
 
 
 
 
 This article contains  Ethiopic text .  Without proper  rendering support , you may see  question marks, boxes, or other symbols  instead of Ethiopic characters. 
 
   This meal consisting of  injera  and several kinds of  wat  (stew) is typical of  Ethiopian  cuisine. 
   Location of  Ethiopia 
 Part of  a series  on the Culture of Ethiopia 
 History 
 People 
 Languages 
 Cuisine 
 Religion 
 Art 
 Literature 
 Music 
 Media 
 Radio 
 Television 
 Cinema 
 
 Sport 
 Monuments 
 World Heritage Sites 
 
 Symbols 
 Flag 
 Coat of arms 
 National anthem 
 v t e 
 Ethiopian cuisine  ( Amharic :  የኢትዮጵያ ምግብ  "Ye-Ītyōṗṗyā məgəb") characteristically consists of vegetable and often very spicy meat dishes. This is usually in the form of  wat ,  a thick stew, served on top of  injera  ( Amharic :  እንጀራ ), a large  sourdough   flatbread , [1]  which is about 50 centimeters (20 inches) in diameter and made out of  fermented   teff  flour. [1]   Ethiopians  eat most of the time with their right hands, using pieces of  injera  to pick up bites of entrées and side dishes. [1] 
 The  Ethiopian Orthodox Tewahedo Church prescribes a number of fasting periods  known as  tsom  ( Ge'ez :  ጾም   ṣōm ),  including all Wednesdays and Fridays and the whole  Lenten  season (including fifteen days outside Lent proper). Per  Oriental Orthodox  tradition, the faithful may not consume any kind of animal products (including  dairy  products and  eggs ) during fasts; Ethiopian cuisine therefore contains many dishes that are  vegan . [2] 
 
 
 Overview [ edit ] 
   Ethiopian  kita  herb bread 
 A typical dish consists of  injera  accompanied by a spicy stew, which frequently includes beef, lamb, vegetables and various types of legumes, such as lentils. The cuisines of the  Southern Nations, Nationalities and People's Region  and the  Sidama region  also make use of the  false banana  plant ( enset , Ge'ez: እንሰት  ïnset ), a type of  ensete . The plant is  pulverized  and fermented to make various foods, including a bread-like food called  kocho  (Ge'ez: ቆጮ  ḳōč̣ō ), which is eaten with  kitfo . [3]  The root of this plant may be powdered and prepared as a hot drink called  bulla  (Ge'ez: ቡላ  būlā ), which is often given to those who are tired or ill. Another typical Gurage preparation is coffee with butter ( kebbeh ).  Kita  herb bread is also baked.
 Due in part to the brief  Italian occupation ,  pasta  is popular and frequently available throughout Ethiopia, including  rural  areas. [1]  Coffee is also a large part of Ethiopian culture and cuisine. After every meal, a  coffee ceremony  is enacted and  coffee  is served.
 
 Restrictions of certain meats [ edit ] 
 Ethiopian Orthodox Christians ,  Ethiopian Jews  and  Ethiopian Muslims  avoid eating  pork  or  shellfish , for religious reasons. Pork is considered unclean in Ethiopian Orthodox Christianity,  Judaism  and  Islam . Many Ethiopians abstain from eating certain meats, and mostly eat vegetarian and vegan foods.
 
 Traditional ingredients [ edit ] 
   Ajwain  or  radhuni ,  korarima ,  nigella  and  fenugreek  (clockwise, from top) are used with chilis and salt to make  berbere  ( Amharic :  በርበሬ ) , a basic ingredient in many Ethiopian dishes. 
 Berbere , a combination of powdered  chili pepper  and other spices ( cardamom ,  fenugreek ,  coriander ,  cloves ,  ginger ,  nutmeg ,  cumin  and  allspice ) [4]  is an important ingredient used  to add flavor to many varied dishes like chicken stews and baked fish dishes. Also essential is  niter kibbeh , a  clarified butter  infused with ginger, garlic, and several spices. [5] [6] 
 Mitmita  ( Amharic :  ሚጥሚጣ ,  IPA:  [mitʼmitʼa] ) is a powdered  seasoning mix  used in Ethiopian cuisine. It is orange-red in color and contains ground birdseye chili peppers ( piri piri ),  cardamom  seed,  cloves  and salt. [7]  It occasionally has other spices including  cinnamon ,  cumin  and  ginger .
 In their adherence to strict  fasting , Ethiopian cooks have developed a rich array of cooking oil sources—besides  sesame  and  safflower —for use as a substitute for animal fats which are forbidden during fasting periods. Ethiopian cuisine also uses  nug  (also spelled  noog , also known as "niger seed"). [2] 
 
 Dishes [ edit ] 
 Wat [ edit ] 
 See also:  List of Ethiopian dishes and foods 
   Doro wat , consisting of stewed chicken and boiled eggs, is one of the most popular dishes for breaking religious fasts in Ethiopia. 
   A typical serving of  wat 
   Ethiopian food merged with American barbeque influence 
 Wat  begins with a large amount of chopped red  onion , which is simmered or sauteed in a pot. Once the onions have softened,  niter kebbeh  (or, in the case of vegan dishes,  vegetable oil ) is added. Following this,  berbere  is added to make a spicy  keiy wat  or  keyyih tsebhi .  Turmeric  is used instead of  berbere  for a milder  alicha wat  or both spices are omitted when making vegetable stews, such as  atkilt wat . Meat such as  beef  ( ሥጋ , [8]   səga ),  chicken  ( ዶሮ , [9]   doro  or  derho ),  fish  ( ዓሣ , [10]   asa ),  goat  or  lamb  ( በግ , [11]   beg  or  beggi ) is also added.  Legumes  such as  split peas  ( ክክ , [12]   kək   or  kikki ) and  lentils  ( ምስር , [13]   məsər  or  birsin ); or  vegetables  such as  potatoes  ( ድንች , [14]   Dənəch ),  carrots  and  chard  (ቆስጣ) are also used instead in vegan dishes.
 Each variation is named by appending the main ingredient to the type of  wat  (e.g.  kek alicha wat ). However, the word  keiy  is usually not necessary, as the spicy variety is assumed when it is omitted (e.g.  doro wat ). The term  atkilt wat  is sometimes used to refer to all vegetable dishes, but a more specific name can also be used (as in  dinich'na caroht wat , which translates to "potatoes and carrots stew"; but the word  atkilt  is usually omitted when using the more specific term).
 
 Tibs [ edit ] 
 "Tibs" redirects here. For other uses, see  Tibs (disambiguation) . 
 Meat along with vegetables are  sautéed  to make  tibs  (also  tebs ,  t'ibs ,  tibbs , etc., Ge'ez: ጥብስ  ṭïbs ).  Tibs  is served in a variety of manners, and can range from hot to mild or contain little to no vegetables. There are many variations of the delicacy, depending on type, size or shape of the cuts of meat used. Beef, mutton, and goat are the most common meats used in the preparation of  tibs .
 The mid-18th-century European visitor to Ethiopia  Remedius Prutky  [ cs ]  describes  tibs  as a portion of grilled meat served "to pay a particular compliment or show especial respect to someone." [15]  It may still be seen this way; today the dish is prepared to commemorate special events and holidays.
 
 Kinche (Qinch'e) [ edit ] 
 Kinche  ( Qinch’e ), a  porridge , is a very common Ethiopian breakfast or supper.  It is incredibly simple, inexpensive, and nutritious.  It is made from cracked wheat, Ethiopian oats, barley or a mixture of those. It can be boiled in either milk or water with a little salt. The flavor of  kinche  comes from the  nit'ir qibe , which is a spiced butter. [16] 
 
 Oromo dishes [ edit ] 
 The  neutrality  of this section is  disputed .  Relevant discussion may be found on the  talk page . Please do not remove this message until  conditions to do so are met .   ( July 2022 )  ( Learn how and when to remove this template message ) 
 The  Oromos ' cuisine consists of various vegetable or meat side dishes and entrées. as part of a long-established custom, practice, or belief;  People do not eat  pork  in  Oromia . [17] [ unreliable source? ] 
 
 Foon Waaddii  – minced roasted meat; specially seasoned 
 Anchotte  – a common dish in the western part of  Oromia 
 Baduu  – liquid remaining after milk has been curdled and strained (cheese) 
 Maarqaa  – porridge like substance made from wheat, milk, chili and spices 
 Chechebsaa  – shredded  biddena  stir-fried with chili powder and cheese 
 Qoocco  – also known as  kocho , it is not the Gurage type of kocho but a different kind; a common dish in the western part of Oromia 
 Itto  –  comprises all sorts of vegetables (tomato, potato, ginger, garlic), meat (lamb) 
 chukkoo  – also known as  Micira ; a sweet flavor of whole grain, seasoned with butter and spices [18] 
 Chororsaa  – a common dish in the western part of Oromia 
 Hulbata - slow cooked thick stew, made up of organic fenugreek seed powder, potato, lamb rib or loin chops seasoned with chili, garlic and tomato spices served on top of  Biddena ; mostly cooked in  East Hararghe Zone  and  West Hararghe Zone  of Oromia 
 Dokkee  – a common dish throughout  Oromia state 
 Qince  – similar to Marqaa but made from shredded grains as opposed to flour 
 Qorso (Akayi)  – as snacks  Oromia state 
 Dadhii  –  a drink made from honey 
 Hanida/Haneed – slow-roasted lamb dish usually served with rice 
 Shitney/Shatta sauce – a mixture of herbs and peppers used as a side for hanida 
 Farsho  – Beer like, made from barley 
 Buna  –  a lot of Coffee [19] 
 Gurage dishes [ edit ] 
 Kitfo [ edit ] 
   Kitfo  served rare 
 Another distinctively Ethiopian dish is  kitfo  (frequently spelled  ketfo ). It consists of raw (or rare) beef mince marinated in  mitmita  (Ge'ez: ሚጥሚጣ  mīṭmīṭā  a very spicy chili powder similar to  berbere ) and  niter kibbeh .  Gored gored  is very similar to  kitfo , but uses cubed rather than ground beef.
 
 Ayibe [ edit ] 
 Ayibe  is a Local cheese that is mild and crumbly. It is much closer in texture to crumbled  feta . Although not quite pressed, the whey has been drained and squeezed out. It is often served as a side dish to soften the effect of very spicy food. It has little to no distinct taste of its own. However, when served separately,  ayibe  is often mixed with a variety of mild or hot spices typical of Gurage cuisine. [20] 
 
 Gomen kitfo [ edit ] 
 Gomen kitfo  is another typical Gurage dish.  Collard greens  (ጎመን  gōmen ) are boiled, dried and then finely chopped and served with butter, chili and spices. It is a dish specially prepared for the occasion of  Meskel , a very popular holiday marking the discovery of the  True Cross . It is served along with  ayibe  or sometimes even  kitfo  in this tradition called  dengesa .
 
 Sidama dishes [ edit ] 
 Wassa [ edit ] 
 The  enset  plant (called  wesse  in the  Sidamo language ) is central to Sidama cuisine and after grinding and fermenting the root to produce  wassa , it is used in the preparation of several foods.
 Amulcho  is an enset flatbread used similarly to  injera  to eat wats made from beef, mushrooms, beans, gomen, or pumpkin.
 Borasaame  is a cooked mixture of  wassa  and butter sometimes eaten with  Ethiopian mustard  greens and/or beans. It is traditionally eaten by hand using a  false banana leaf  and is served in a ' shafeta , a vase-like ceramic vessel. A common variant of  borasaame  uses  maize  flour instead of  wassa  and is called  badela borasaame .
 Borasaame  is typically paired with a seasoned yogurt drink called  wätät . Both are common foods for funerals and the celebration of  Fichee Chambalaalla , the Sidama new year.
 
 Gomen ba siga [ edit ] 
 Gomen ba siga (ጎመን በስጋ, Amharic: "cabbage with meat") is a stewed mixture of beef and Ethiopian mustard served under a layer of  amulcho .
 
 Maize [ edit ] 
 A commonly grown crop in Sidama, maize ( badela  in Sidaamu; also known as "corn" in North America) is often eaten as a snack with coffee. It can be ground into flour to make bread, roasted on the cob, or the kernels can be picked off to make  bokolo , which is served either boiled or roasted.
 
 Breakfast [ edit ] 
   Fit-fit , or  chechebsa , made with  kitcha  (unleavened bread),  niter kibbeh  (seasoned clarified butter) and  berbere  (spice), is a typical breakfast food. 
 Fit-fit  or  fir-fir  is a common breakfast dish. It is made from shredded  injera  or  kitcha  stir-fried with spices or  wat . Another popular breakfast food is  fatira . The delicacy consists of a large fried pancake made with flour, often with a layer of egg. It is eaten with honey.
 Chechebsa  (or  kita firfir ) resembles a  pancake  covered with  berbere  and  niter kibbeh , or other spices, and may be eaten with a spoon.  Genfo  is a kind of  porridge , which is another common breakfast dish. It is usually served in a large bowl with a dug-out made in the middle of the genfo and filled with spiced  niter kibbeh .
 A variation of  ful , a fava bean stew with condiments, served with baked rolls instead of  injera , is also common for breakfast.
 
 Snacks [ edit ] 
 Typical Ethiopian snacks are  dabo kolo  (small pieces of baked bread that are similar to  pretzels ), or  kolo  (roasted  barley  sometimes mixed with other local grains).  Kolo  made from roasted and spiced barley, safflower kernels, chickpeas and/or peanuts are often sold by kiosks and street vendors, wrapped in a paper cone. Snacking on  popcorn  and traditional  lentil   samosa  is also common. [1] 
 
 Beverages [ edit ] 
 Traditional alcoholic beverages [ edit ] 
 There are many different traditional alcoholic drinks which are home made and of natural ingredients.
 
 Tella [ edit ] 
 Tella  is a home-brewed beer served in  tella bet  ("tella houses") which specialize in serving only  tella .  Tella  is the most common beverage made and served in households during holidays.
 It is an alcoholic drink which is prepared from  bikil  (barley) as main ingredient and  gesho  ( Rhamnus prinoides ) for fermentation purpose.
 In  Oromiffaa  the drink is called  farso  and in Tigrinya  siwa .
 
 Tej (honey wine) [ edit ] 
 Tej  is a potent honey wine. [1]  It is similar to  mead , and is frequently served in bars, particularly in a  tej bet  or " tej  house".
 It is prepared from honey and gesho. It has a sweet taste and the alcoholic content is relatively higher than  tella . This drink can be stored for a long time; the longer it is stored, the higher the alcohol content, and the stronger the taste.
 
 Areki (katikala) [ edit ] 
 Areki , also known as  katikala , is probably the strongest alcoholic drink of Ethiopia. [21]  It is a home distilled spirit that is often filtered through charcoal to remove off tastes or flavored by smoking or infusion with garlic.
 
 Non-alcoholic beverages [ edit ] 
 Ethiopians have diverse traditional non-alcoholic drinks which include natural and healthy ingredients.
 
 Kenetto (keribo) [ edit ] 
 Kenetto , also known as  keribo , is a non-alcoholic traditional drink. It is mostly used as substitute for  tella  for those who don't drink alcohol. [22] 
 
 Borde [ edit ] 
 Borde  is a cereal-based traditional  fermented beverage  famous in southern Ethiopia. [21] 
 
 Manufactured drinks [ edit ] 
Just like the rest of the world, Ethiopians also enjoy several  locally manufactured beers , wine and non-alcoholic products like Coca-Cola and other similar products.   A  Coca-Cola  bottle in Ethiopia, with the distinct logo in the  Ethiopic script 
 Ambo Mineral Water  or  Ambo wuha  is a bottled carbonated  mineral water , sourced from the springs in Ambo Senkele near the town of  Ambo . [1] [23] 
 
 Non-alcoholic brews (hot drinks) [ edit ] 
 Atmet [ edit ] 
 Atmet  is a barley- and oat-flour based drink that is cooked with water, sugar and  kibe  (Ethiopian clarified butter) until the ingredients have combined to create a consistency slightly thicker than  egg-nog . Though this drink is often given to women who are nursing, the sweetness and smooth texture make it a comfort drink for anyone who enjoys its flavor.
 
 Coffee [ edit ] 
   An Ethiopian woman roasting coffee at a traditional  coffee ceremony 
 According to some sources, drinking of  coffee  ( buna ) is likely to have originated in Ethiopia. [1]  A key national beverage, it is an important part of local commerce. [24] 
 The  coffee ceremony  is the traditional serving of coffee, usually after a big meal. It often involves the use of a  jebena  (ጀበና), a clay coffee pot in which the coffee is boiled. The preparer roasts the coffee beans in front of guests, then walks around wafting the smoke throughout the room so participants may sample the scent of coffee. Then the preparer grinds the coffee beans in a traditional tool called a  mokecha . The coffee is put into the  jebena , boiled with water, and then served in small cups called  si'ni . Coffee is usually served with sugar, but is also served with salt in many parts of Ethiopia. In some parts of the country,  niter kibbeh  is added instead of sugar or salt.
 Snacks, such as popcorn or toasted barley (or  kolo ), are often served with the coffee. In most homes, a dedicated coffee area is surrounded by fresh grass, with special furniture for the coffee maker. A complete ceremony has three rounds of coffee ( abol ,  tona  and  bereka ) and is accompanied by the burning of  frankincense .
 
 Tea (chai) [ edit ] 
 Tea  will most likely be served if coffee is declined. Tea is grown in Ethiopia at Gumaro and Wushwush.
 
 Boiled coffee leaves [ edit ] 
 Across southern Ethiopia, many groups drink boiled coffee leaves, called  kuti  among the  Harari  in the east and  kaari  among the  Majang  in the west. This is often made with widely varying seasonings and spices, such as sugar, salt, rue, hot peppers,  ginger. The Ethiopian Food Safety Authority has registered the safety of coffee leaf infusions with the European Union. [25] 
 
 See also [ edit ] 
 List of African cuisines 
 Ethiopian Jewish cuisine 
 Portals :   Africa   Food 
 References [ edit ] 
 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   e   f   g   h   Javins, Marie.  "Eating and Drinking in Ethiopia."   Archived  31 January 2013 at the  Wayback Machine   Gonomad.com . Accessed July 2011. 
 
 ^  a   b   Paul B. Henze,  Layers of Time: A history of Ethiopia  (New York: Palgrave, 2000), p. 12 and note 
 
 ^   "Uses of Enset" .  The 'Tree Against Hunger': Enset-Based Agricultural Systems in Ethiopia .  American Association for the Advancement of Science . 1997. Archived from  the original  on 19 August 2007 . Retrieved  13 August  2007 . 
 
 ^   Peter, K.V. (2012).  Handbook of herbs and spices Volume 2 . p. 124. 
 
 ^   Debrawork Abate (c. 2003) [c. 2001].  የባህላዌ መግቦች አዘገጃጀት  [ Traditional Food Preparation ] (in Amharic) (2nd ed.).  Addis Ababa : Mega Asatame Derjet (Mega Publisher Enterprise). pp. 22–23. 
 
 ^   Gall, Alevtina; Zerihun Shenkute (3 November 2009).  "Ethiopian Traditional and Herbal Medications and their Interactions with Conventional Drugs" .  EthnoMed .  University of Washington . Retrieved  27 January  2011 . 
 
 ^   Mesfin, D.J.  Exotic Ethiopian Cooking  (2006): 20.  Falls Church, VA: Ethiopian Cookbooks Enterprises 
 
 ^   Selam Soft,  "ሥጋ" ,  Amharic-English Dictionary , 4/30/13 
 
 ^   Selam Soft,  "ዶሮ" ,  Amharic-English Dictionary , 4/30/13 
 
 ^   Selam Soft,  "ዓሣ" ,  Amharic-English Dictionary , 4/30/13 
 
 ^   Selam Soft,  "'በግ ,  Amharic-English Dictionary', 4/30/13 
 
 ^   Selam Soft,  "ክክ" ,  Amharic-English Dictionary , 4/30/13 
 
 ^   Selam Soft,  "ምስር" ,  Amharic-English Dictionary , 4/30/13 
 
 ^   Selam Soft,  "ድንች" ,  Amharic-English Dictionary , 4/30/13 
 
 ^   J.H. Arrowsmith-Brown (trans.),  Prutky's Travels in Ethiopia and other Countries  with notes by Richard Pankhurst (London: Hakluyt Society, 1991), p. 286 
 
 ^   slow food foundation for biodiversity 
 
 ^   Let Us Talk About Food: Oromo vs. Ethiopian , 7 June 2009 , retrieved  7 June  2009 
 
 ^   Ethiopia: Special Cuisines As a Symbol of Oromo Lifestyle , 15 September 2020 , retrieved  15 September  2020 
 
 ^   "Let Us Talk About Food: Oromo vs. Ethiopian" . 7 June 2009 . Retrieved  7 June  2009 . 
 
 ^   Tara (6 September 2019).  "Ayib (Homemade Fresh Cheese) and Ethiopia Cookbook Review" .  Tara's Multicultural Table . Retrieved  10 December  2022 . 
 
 ^  a   b   Tafere, G. (2015).  "A review on Traditional Fermented Beverages of Ethiopian" .  S2CID   9535830 . Retrieved  25 October  2020 .   {{ cite journal }} :  Cite journal requires  |journal=  ( help ) 
 
 ^   Dibaba, Kumela; Tilahun, Lelise; Satheesh, Neela; Geremu, Melkayo (1 April 2018).  "Acrylamide occurrence in Keribo: Ethiopian traditional fermented beverage" .  Food Control .  86 : 77–82.  doi : 10.1016/j.foodcont.2017.11.016 .  ISSN   0956-7135 .  S2CID   103268712 . 
 
 ^   "About us" . Ambo Mineral Water. Archived from  the original  on 4 November 2012 . Retrieved  4 January  2013 . 
 
 ^   "Ethiopia" .  The World Factbook .  Central Intelligence Agency . 12 January 2011 . Retrieved  31 January  2011 . 
 
 ^   "Technical Report on the notification of infusion from coffee leaves (Coffea arabica L. And/Or Coffea canephora Pierre ex A. Froehner) as a traditional food from a third country pursuant to Article 14 of Regulation (EU) 2015/2283" .  EFSA Supporting Publications .  17  (2). 2020.  doi : 10.2903/sp.efsa.2020.EN-1783 .  S2CID   243369943 . 
 
 
 External links [ edit ] 
 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons has media related to  Cuisine of Ethiopia . 
 
 
 Mesob Across America: Ethiopian Food in the U.S.A.  A book about the history and culture of Ethiopian cuisine 
 Ethiopian Restaurant Guide  A guide to Ethiopian restaurants in the USA. Includes video visits to some restaurants 
 All About Tej  An extensive website about the Ethiopian honey wine 
 Raw Meat, a Manly Ethiopian Dish  The Los Angeles Times, 14 July 2011 
 Ethiopian Spices   by Fassica - Authentic Ethiopian Food and Spices 
 
 v t e Ethiopia   articles History 
 Kingdom of Dʿmt 
 Kingdom of Aksum 
 Kingdom of Wolaita 
 Ethiopian Empire 
 Emperor 
 list 
 legendary 
 Solomonic dynasty 
 Zagwe dynasty 
 Kingdom of Kaffa 
 Ethiopian–Adal War 
 Gondarine period 
 Zemene Mesafint 
 Menelik's Expansions 
 Italo-Ethiopian wars
 1887–89 
 First 
 Second 
 World War I 
 Italian occupation 
 World War II 
 Revolution 
 1974 coup d'état 
 Derg 
 Civil War 
 Ogaden War 
 Eritrean–Ethiopian War 
 Border conflict 
 2018 peace summit 
 War in Somalia (2006–09) 
 Civil conflict 
 Tigray War 
 Historiography 
 Territorial evolution 
 Geography Geology 
 Mountains 
 Rivers 
 Lakes 
 Volcanoes 
 Earthquakes 
 Flora 
 Fauna 
 Administrative 
 Regions 
 Governors 
 Zones 
 Woredas 
 Cities 
 Kebele 
 Politics 
 Constitution 
 history 
 Government 
 President 
 list 
 Prime Minister 
 list 
 Council 
 Parliament 
 Political parties 
 Elections 
 Foreign relations 
 Foreign aid 
 Military 
 National Defense Force 
 Ground Forces 
 Air Force 
 Military history 
 Army of the Empire 
 Navy 
 Economy 
 Agriculture 
 Banks 
 Birr  (currency) 
 Companies 
 Energy 
 Foreign aid 
 Industrial development 
 Land reform 
 Manufacturing 
 Taxation 
 Telecommunications 
 Tourism 
 Trade unions 
 Transport 
 Society 
 Architecture 
 Child marriage 
 Demographics 
 Education 
 Ethnic groups 
 Famines 
 Flag 
 Health 
 Human rights 
 Human trafficking 
 Languages 
 Law enforcement 
 People 
 Polygamy 
 Public holidays 
 Water and sanitation 
 Culture 
 Art 
 Cuisine 
 Literature 
 Media 
 Music 
 Religion 
 Sports 
 World Heritage Sites 
 Outline Index 
 Category 
 v t e African cuisine National cuisines 
 Algeria 
 Angola 
 Benin 
 Botswana 
 Burkina Faso 
 Burundi 
 Cameroon 
 Cape Verde 
 Central African Republic 
 Chad 
 Comoros 
 Democratic Republic of the Congo 
 Djibouti 
 Egypt 
 Equatorial Guinea 
 Eritrea 
 Eswatini (Swaziland) 
 Ethiopia 
 Gabon 
 Gambia 
 Ghana 
 Guinea 
 Guinea-Bissau 
 Ivory Coast 
 Kenya 
 Lesotho 
 Liberia 
 Libya 
 Madagascar 
 Malawi 
 Mali 
 Mauritania 
 Mauritius 
 Morocco 
 Mozambique 
 Namibia 
 Niger 
 Nigeria 
 Republic of the Congo 
 Rwanda 
 Saint Helena 
 São Tomé and Príncipe 
 Senegal 
 Seychelles 
 Sierra Leone 
 Somalia 
 South Africa 
 South Sudan 
 Sudan 
 Tanzania 
 Togo 
 Tunisia 
 Uganda 
 Western Sahara 
 Zambia 
 Zimbabwe 
 Ethnic and regional cuisines 
 Arab 
 Berber 
 Jewish 
 Ethiopian 
 Mizrahi 
 Sephardi 
 Mediterranean 
 North African 
 West African 
 Zanzibar 
 Lists 
 List of African cuisines 
 List of African dishes 
 
   Category 
 
 v t e Cuisines Continental 
 African 
 North 
 West 
 list 
 Americas 
 Caribbean 
 North 
 South 
 list 
 Asian 
 Caucasian 
 Central 
 Indian subcontinent 
 Levantine 
 list 
 European 
 Balkan 
 Central 
 Eastern 
 list 
 Oceanic 
 Intercontinental
 Global 
 Latin American 
 Mediterranean 
 Middle Eastern 
 National  and regional 
 Afghan 
 Albanian 
 Algerian 
 American 
 Californian 
 Floribbean 
 Hawaiian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Lowcountry (South Carolina) 
 New England 
 New Mexico 
 Pacific Northwest 
 Pennsylvania Dutch 
 Puerto Rican 
 Southern US 
 Southwest US 
 Texas 
 Angolan 
 Argentine 
 Armenian 
 Australian 
 Austrian 
 Azerbaijani 
 Bahraini 
 Bangladeshi 
 Barbadian 
 Belarusian 
 Belgian 
 Belizean 
 Beninese 
 Bhutanese 
 Bolivian 
 Bosnian-Herzegovinian 
 Botswana 
 Brazilian 
 British 
 Channel Islands 
 English 
 Gibraltarian 
 Northern Irish 
 Saint Helena 
 Scottish 
 Welsh 
 Bruneian 
 Bulgarian 
 Burkinabé 
 Burmese 
 Burundian 
 Cambodian 
 Cameroonian 
 Canadian 
 Acadian 
 Québécois 
 Central African Republic 
 Chadian 
 Chilean 
 Chinese 
 Cantonese 
 Hong Kong 
 Macanese 
 Tibetan 
 Xinjiang 
 Colombian 
 Congolese 
 Corsican 
 Croatian 
 Cuban 
 Cypriot 
 Czech 
 Danish 
 Faroese 
 Greenlandic 
 Djiboutian 
 Dominican 
 Dominican Republic 
 Dutch 
 East Timorese 
 Ecuadorian 
 Egyptian 
 Emirati 
 Equatorial Guinean 
 Eritrean 
 Estonian 
 Ethiopian 
 Fijian 
 Filipino 
 Finnish 
 French 
 Occitan 
 French Guianan 
 Gabonese 
 Gambian 
 Georgian 
 German 
 Ghanaian 
 Greek 
 Cretan 
 Epirotic 
 Greek Macedonian 
 Heptanesean 
 Guatemalan 
 Guinea-Bissauan 
 Guinean 
 Haitian 
 Honduran 
 Hungarian 
 Icelandic 
 Indian 
 Arunachalese 
 Assamese 
 Bengali 
 Bihari 
 Goan 
 Gujarati 
 Himachal Pradesh 
 Kashmiri 
 Jharkhandi 
 Karnataka 
 Kerala 
 Maharashtrian 
 Manipuri 
 Meghalayan 
 Mizo 
 Naga 
 Odia 
 Punjabi 
 Rajasthani 
 Sikkimese 
 Sindhi 
 Tamil 
 Telangana 
 Telugu 
 Indonesian 
 Acehnese 
 Balinese 
 Banjar 
 Batak 
 Betawi 
 Indo 
 Javanese 
 Madurese 
 Makassar 
 Minahasan 
 Minangkabau 
 Palembangese 
 Sundanese 
 Iranian 
 Iraqi 
 Irish 
 Israeli 
 Italian 
 Abruzzese 
 Ligurian 
 Lombard 
 Lucanian 
 Neapolitan 
 Roman 
 Sardinian 
 Sicilian 
 Venetian 
 Ivorian 
 Jamaican 
 Japanese 
 Okinawan 
 Jordanian 
 Kazakh 
 Kenyan 
 Korean 
 North Korean 
 South Korean 
 Kosovan 
 Kuwaiti 
 Kyrgyz 
 Lao 
 Latvian 
 Lebanese 
 Lesotho 
 Liberian 
 Libyan 
 Liechtensteiner 
 Lithuanian 
 Luxembourg 
 Macedonian 
 Malagasy 
 Malawian 
 Malaysian 
 Sabahan 
 Sarawakian 
 Maldivian 
 Malian 
 Maltese 
 Mauritanian 
 Mauritian 
 Mexican 
 Moldovan 
 Monégasque 
 Mongolian 
 Montenegrin 
 Moroccan 
 Mozambican 
 Namibian 
 Nauruan 
 Nepalese 
 New Zealand 
 Nicaraguan 
 Niger 
 Nigerian 
 Niuean 
 Norwegian 
 Omani 
 Pakistani 
 Palestinian 
 Panamanian 
 Peruvian 
 Polish 
 Portuguese 
 Qatari 
 Romanian  (incl.  Transylvanian Saxon ) 
 Russian 
 Bashkir 
 Chechen 
 Circassian 
 Komi 
 Mordovian 
 Sakha 
 Tatar 
 Udmurt 
 Yamal 
 Rwandan 
 Saint Lucian 
 Salvadoran 
 Sammarinese 
 São Tomé and Príncipe 
 Saudi Arabian 
 Senegalese 
 Serbian 
 Seychellois 
 Sierra Leonean 
 Singaporean 
 Slovak 
 Slovenian 
 Somali 
 South African 
 Spanish 
 Andalusian 
 Asturian 
 Balearic 
 Basque 
 Canarian 
 Cantabrian 
 Catalan 
 Extremaduran 
 Galician 
 Manchegan 
 Valencian 
 Sri Lankan 
 Sudanese 
 Swazi 
 Swedish 
 Swiss 
 Syrian 
 Taiwanese 
 Tajik 
 Tanzanian 
 Zanzibari 
 Thai 
 Togolese 
 Tunisian 
 Turkish 
 Turkmen 
 Trinidadian and Tobagonian 
 Ugandan 
 Ukrainian 
 Uruguayan 
 Uzbek 
 Venezuelan 
 Vietnamese 
 Western Saharan 
 Yemeni 
 Zambian 
 Zimbabwean 
 Ethnic 
 Ainu 
 Arab 
 Indonesian 
 Aromanian 
 Assyrian 
 Balochi 
 Berber 
 Cajun 
 Chinese 
 American 
 Canadian 
 Chifa 
 Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Crimean Tatar 
 Greek American 
 Hazaragi 
 Indian 
 Anglo-Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Indigenous American 
 Inuit 
 Italian American 
 Kurdish 
 Livonian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Malay 
 Ossetian 
 Parsi 
 Pashtun 
 Peranakan 
 Romani 
 Sámi 
 Soul food 
 Sylheti 
 Transylvanian Saxon 
 Yup'ik 
 Religious 
 Buddhist 
 Christian 
 Goan Catholic 
 Mangalorean Catholic 
 Mennonite 
 Hindu 
 Islamic 
 Chinese 
 Ital 
 Jain 
 Jewish 
 American 
 Ashkenazi 
 Bukharan 
 Ethiopian 
 Mizrahi 
 Sephardic 
 Syrian 
 Ritual slaughter 
 Sikh 
 Historical 
 Ancient Egyptian 
 Ancient Greek 
 Ancient Israelite 
 Ancient Roman 
 Antebellum America 
 Aztec 
 Byzantine 
 Early modern European 
 Historical Chinese 
 Historical Indian subcontinent 
 Historical North Indian and Pakistani 
 History of agriculture 
 History of alcoholic drinks 
 History of bread 
 History of seafood 
 History of vegetarianism 
 Historical Argentine 
 Historical Japanese 
 Inca 
 Mayan 
 Muisca 
 Mughal 
 Medieval 
 Ottoman 
 Peasant 
 Soviet 
 Thirteen Colonies 
 Styles 
 Classique 
 Fast food 
 Fusion 
 New American 
 Eurasian 
 Haute 
 Molecular gastronomy 
 Note by Note 
 Nouvelle 
 Lists 
 List of cuisines 
 List of historical cuisines 
 Lists of prepared foods 
 Related 
 Cookbook 
 Cooking 
 Culinary arts 
 Drink 
 Food 
 history 
 Diet 
 Meal preparation 
 
   Food portal 
   Drink portal 
   Category 
   Commons 
   Cookbook 
   WikiProject 
   Outline 
 
 Authority control : National libraries  
 Israel 
 United States 
 
  
NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw2406
Cached time: 20230311110720
Cache expiry: 1814400
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc, no‐toc‐conversion]
CPU time usage: 0.810 seconds
Real time usage: 1.076 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 4090/1000000
Post‐expand include size: 176204/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 13937/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 55/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 87536/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.439/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 20541473/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/400
 
 
Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  826.736      1 -total
 16.75%  138.448      1 Template:Reflist
 13.09%  108.252      1 Template:Culture_of_Ethiopia
 12.87%  106.437      1 Template:Culture_of_region
 12.51%  103.460      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 11.81%   97.618      1 Template:Ethiopia_topics
 11.61%   96.012      1 Template:Country_topics
 10.97%   90.675      4 Template:Lang-am
  9.36%   77.391      6 Template:Cite_web
  7.22%   59.689      2 Template:Side_box
 
  Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:idhash:9686-0!canonical and timestamp 20230311110719 and revision id 1140474954. Rendering was triggered because: page-view
  
 esi <esi:include src="/esitest-fa8a495983347898/content" />  
 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ethiopian_cuisine&oldid=1140474954 " 
 Categories :  Ethiopian cuisine East African cuisine Hidden categories:  Webarchive template wayback links CS1 Amharic-language sources (am) CS1 errors: missing periodical Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from September 2020 Articles containing Amharic-language text Articles containing Ge'ez-language text Wikipedia neutral point of view disputes from July 2022 All Wikipedia neutral point of view disputes All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from July 2022 Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with J9U identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  This page was last edited on 20 February 2023, at 06:29  (UTC) . 
 Text is available under the  Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0 ;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the  Terms of Use  and  Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the  Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. 
 
 
 Privacy policy 
 About Wikipedia 
 Disclaimers 
 Contact Wikipedia 
 Mobile view 
 Developers 
 Statistics 
 Cookie statement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
