
 
 
 Jump to content 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle sidebar 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Create account Log in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Personal tools 
 
 
 
 
   Create account   Log in 
 
 
 
 
		Pages for logged out editors  learn more 
 
 
 Contributions Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Navigation 
 
 
 Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate 
 
 
 
 
 Contribute 
 
 
 Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file 
 
 
 
 
 Tools 
 
 
 What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item 
 
 
 
 
 Print/export 
 
 
 Download as PDF Printable version 
 
 
 
 
 In other projects 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons 
 
 
 
 
 Languages 
 
 On this Wikipedia the language links are at the top of the page across from the article title.  Go to top . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CentralNotice  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Contents 
 move to sidebar 
 hide 
 
 
 
 
 (Top) 
 
 
 
 
 
 1 Representative dishes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 Embutidos  and pork products 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 Cheeses 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4 Desserts and sweets 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5 References 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6 External links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
						Toggle the table of contents
					 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle the table of contents 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Extremaduran cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 6 languages 
 
 
 
 Català Čeština Español Estremeñu Français Jawa 
 Edit links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Article Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 English 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 More 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
 
 
 Cuisine of the Extremadura community of Spain 
   Iberian pigs live mostly in semi-wild conditions. The flesh of these pigs is essential in most Extremaduran dishes. 
 Extremadura ,  Spain  is known for its different ways of preparing the Iberian  pork  and  mutton . The main characteristics of the traditional  Extremaduran cuisine  are its simplicity, its lack of clutter and its low cost. It is also a cuisine reflecting a generous spirit, for many of its preparations used to be cooked in large pots to share with visitors, friends, and neighbors. The resulting dishes are eaten with local  bread .
 The preferred spices in Extremaduran cuisine are  paprika  ( pimentón ),  garlic ,  bay leaves ,  pennyroyal , and  anise . The Northeastern  comarca  of  La Vera  produces  pimentón de la Vera , smoked paprika highly valued all over Spain and extensively used in Extremaduran cuisine.  Olive oil  is used for frying and as an ingredient in many dishes. Maybe due to Portuguese influence, some limited use of coriander leaves (unusual for other regions of mainland Spain outside the  Canary Islands ) can be found for some specific dishes such as  repápalos  or pickled cod ( escabeche de bacalao ), though often with the possibility of using parsley as an alternative and not with the same extensive use as in Portugal. [1] [2] [3] [4] 
 Wine is produced mainly in the territory of the  Ribera del Guadiana   denominación de origen . The region is also known for its  vino de pitarra  tradition, home-made wine made in small earthenware vessels. [5] 
 The  Jerte Valley  is known for its cherry production, especially in the local  picota del Jerte  variety, highly regarded all over Spain and with a  denominación de origen . [6] 
 
 
 Representative dishes [ edit ] 
   The  chickpea  is an important Extremaduran staple. Traditionally Extremaduran children loved to eat green chick peas straight out of the pods. 
 Among the pork or mutton-based dishes, some well-known ones are the  callos con manos de cerdo  ( tripe  with  pig's feet ),  caldereta de cordero  (mutton stew),  cabrito en  cuchifrito ,  frite de cordero  (mutton fry) and the  cabrito a la hortelana  (kid and vegetable stew). [7] 
 The  chanfaina  in Extremadura has nothing to do with similarly named dishes in the  Iberian Peninsula , like the  Catalan   Xanfaina , which is a Spanish version of the Occitan  Ratatouille , and which would be considered a kind of  pisto  in Extremadura. The Extremaduran  chanfaina  is a rich stew of mutton liver, brain, heart, and kidneys cooked with a mixture of bay leaves, garlic, bread crumbs and boiled eggs.
 Traditional Extremaduran gastronomy includes other meats, like  hen   (gallina) , which is one of the main ingredients of the emblematic  cocido extremeño  stew,  arroz con liebre  (rice with  hare ) and  ancas de ranas fritas  (fried  frog legs ). It also includes local fishes like  tencas fritas   (fried  tench ) and  truchas con  jamón  ( trout  with ham), and even a certain  large lizard  usually prepared in  guisado , made by frying slices of lizard in  olive oil , after which they were stewed over a slow fire. [8] [9] [10]  In spite of being eaten in a variety of preparations and even served at restaurants in the past, also including  entomatá de lagarto  (lizard in tomato sauce)  [11]  or  lagarto en salsa verde  (lizard in green sauce), [12]  currently lizards are a protected species and trapping them is prohibited. [13] 
 Concerning fish, some cod preparations are known, and  tench  is among the most traditional freshwater fish, including fish and vegetable dishes such as  moje de peces  or  escarapuche .
 Among the basic popular dishes the ones based on  chick peas  are dominant. Other main ingredients are  habichuelas  ( beans ),  potatoes ,  pumpkin ,  chestnuts ,  onions  and  bell peppers . Some famous dishes of Extremadura are  cocido extremeño ,  potaje de garbanzos y judías blancas  (chick pea and bean soup),  sopa blanca de ajos  (white garlic soup),  potaje de castañas secas  (chestnut soup),  olla con asaura  (a stew with offal and blood), and  gazpacho extremeño  (variants of  gazpacho , sometimes with ham or pennyroyal mint).
 Soups often have a stale bread base and include a variety of both hot and cold ones, such as  sopa de ajo ,  sopa de tomate  (bread-based soup with tomato, peppers and egg),  sopa de poleo  (pennyroyal mint soup),  sopa de pan con aceitunas  (bread soup with olives),  sopa de espárragos trigueros  (wild asparagus soup),  sopa de antruejo  (bread-based soup with a lot of pork),  sopa de habas  (broadbean soup) and others. It is traditional to eat such soups having figs at the same time as a side dish, or even grapes. [14] [15]   Sopas canas  include at least milk, bread and garlic as a base.  Pennyroyal mint  is sometimes used to season gazpachos or soups such as  sopa de poleo . [16] [17] [18]  Extremaduran  ajoblanco  ( ajoblanco extremeño ) is a cold soup different from Andalusian  ajoblanco  since it contains egg yolk in the emulsion and it may contain vegetables such as tomatoes but no almonds. [19] 
 Though rice is not as common as in some other Spanish regions, rice dishes with rabbit meat or pork are common, [20] [21]  including  arroz a la cacereña  from  Cáceres , which, after being cooked, is then covered in a crust of egg and cheese and then baked, in a way similar to Valencian  arroz con costra . [22] 
 Vegetables are found in many dishes, even if there is very little in the way of actual vegetarian dishes in the traditional cuisine. Still, apart from  gazpachos , salads similar to Andalusian  pipirrana  (with a variety of local names such as  picadillo ,  cojondongo  or  rinrán   [23] [24] [25] [26] ) are popular, as well as  zorongollo , a salad made with tomato and roast peppers reminiscent of Catalan  escalivada . As in  La Mancha  and  Murcia ,  pisto  is a traditional dish. Local tomato sauce is often known as  tomatá  or  entomatá  and it can be an accompaniment to many dishes. [27] [28] [29] 
 Desert truffles , locally named  criadillas  or  criadillas de tierra , are eaten with scrambled eggs ( revuelto de criadillas   [30] ), fried with other ingredients  [31]  or as an accompaniment in other dishes. Even if many other mushroom species grow in Extremadura and they have some culinary use nowadays, only a few other mushroom species apart from desert truffles were actually traditionally consumed, such as  Amanita ponderosa  (called  gurumelo , especially popular in Southern Extremadura), or  Macrolepiota procera .
 Some of the ancestral dishes of Extremadura are today less commonly eaten, like  migas  (such as  migas con  torreznos ) and  gachas . [32]  Vegetables like  cardoon  and  borage  were traditionally widely used in soups.
 Certain dishes of the Extremaduran cuisine show the influence of neighboring  Portugal , like  lentejas estofadas  (stewed  lentils ) and  sopa de perdices  ( partridge  soup).
 
 Embutidos  and pork products [ edit ] 
 Extremadura's  Black Iberian pigs  are usually left to roam in relative freedom and their main diet are the  acorns  falling from the local  oak  trees. This breed of pig is found exclusively in Southwestern Iberia, both in Spain and Portugal. Their meat is highly valued throughout Spain, especially their  ham .
 Extremaduran cuisine is abundant in pork; it is said that the region is one of the best for breeding pigs in Spain, thanks to the acorns that grow in its  dehesas .
 Some Extremaduran  embutidos  (pork preserves and sausages) have a local flavor, like the  morcilla  «Felisa»  (based on blood and onion),  morcillas de cabezá  (head innards morcillas),  morcillas patateras  (sausage containing mashed potato and pork fat and meat seasoned with paprika and garlic), as well as sausages prepared with pumpkin ( morcilla de calabaza ). Dry-cured pork products include  chacinas  and the local  ham ,  longaniza ,  chorizo ,  salchichón ,  morcón  and  caña de lomo . Pork  embutidos  and other pieces of pork meat are often added to local stews, such as  cocido .
 Cachuela  (sometimes also known as  caldillo ) is a fatty pork liver pâté seasoned with paprika, garlic and other spices. [33] [34] [35] 
 Buche  is a kind of  embutido  similar to  Leonese   botillo  made from different pieces left over from the butchering of a  pig , including the ribs, tail, and bones with a little meat left on them, which are chopped, seasoned and then stuffed into the  cecum  of the pig. Once cured, it's usually boiled and then it is opened to extract its content in order to eat it, usually as  coles con buche , accompanied by other pork products and separate dishes of rice and cabbage cooked in the same broth produced by boiling the  buche . [36] [37] [38] 
 
 Cheeses [ edit ] 
 The region is home to a variety of cheeses, those most well known being  Torta del Casar , produced in  Casar de Cáceres  and surrounding area, and  Torta de la Serena , produced in the  comarca  of  la Serena . Both have a  denominación de origen  and both are sheep milk cheeses that are curdled using a coagulant found in the pistils of  cardoon  ( Cynara cardunculus ), which gives a creamy consistency and a rich taste with a light bitterness. These cheeses are traditionally eaten by slicing off the top and scooping out the inside with a spoon, then spreading it on bread. They're somewhat similar to  Serra da Estrela cheese  in  Portugal .
 Queso de los Ibores  is another cheese with a  denominación de origen , made in the  comarcas  of los Ibores, Villuercas, La Jara and Trujillo in the southeast of the Province of Cáceres. It is a fatty goat milk cheese made exclusively from the milk of Serrana, Verata, Retinta breeds and crosses between them and only from farms registered with the regulatory council.
 A variety of goat milk cheeses found along the border with Portugal are similar to goat milk cheeses found in neighboring Portuguese areas and have a compact consistency and a strong taste and smell, such as  Quesaílla  cheese, [39] [ unreliable source? ]   [40]  as well as  queso de Acehúche  [ es ]   [41]  and  queso de Gata-Hurdes . [42] [ unreliable source? ]   [43] 
 
 Desserts and sweets [ edit ] 
 Extremaduran  desserts  and sweets are mostly prepared using the local  wheat flour ,  honey , pork fat, milk, sugar and olive oil. Some of them are  buñuelos ,  magdalenas  (anise-scented  muffins ),  perrunillas  [ es ] ,  galletas ,  rosquillas de vino ,  roscas fritas  (fried doughnuts),  coquillos de miel ,  repápalos dulces ,  sopa de almendras  [ es ]  (sweet almond soup),   gañotes  [ es ] ,  hornazos dulces ,  roscas de muégado  (or  roscas de piñonate ),  hijuelas ,  gachas extremeñas  (or  puchas dulces ),  bollos fritos  (fried buns),   floretas ,  socochones hurdanos  and  jeringas 
. [44]  Some well known local specialties are  tecula mecula  from  Olivenza ,  bollo turco  from  Jerez de los Caballeros  and  roscas de alfajor  from  Casar de Cáceres .
 
 References [ edit ] 
 
 
 ^   "Cultivar Cilantro - Usos y recetas | SeedBox" .  seedboxhuertosurbanos.es . Archived from  the original  on 28 February 2019 . Retrieved  13 January  2022 . 
 
 ^   "Saboreando Cada Día: Repápalos Extremeños" . 
 
 ^   "ROMERO y algo más...: Repápalos de bacalao y cilantro al aroma de azafrán" . 23 May 2013. 
 
 ^   "Gazpacho en escabeche de semana santa (VALLE DE LA SERENA)" . 
 
 ^   "Pitarra Wines: Spanish Wines Made with Flor | Catavino" .  catavino.net . Archived from  the original  on 17 January 2013 . Retrieved  25 January  2022 . 
 
 ^   "Jerte Cherries" . 
 
 ^   Gastronomia de las Hurdes 
 
 ^   Lorenzo Díaz, (2001), Los sabores perdidos, Ed. Edaf. pag. 178 Gastronomia extremeña 
 
 ^   "Gastronomía tradicional extremeña" . Archived from  the original  on 2010-03-04 . Retrieved  2010-03-04 . 
 
 ^   Los hábitos culinarios en el pasado extremeño 
 
 ^   "Entomatá de lagartos | Madrigal de la Vera .net - Página no oficial del pueblo - (C) Kodro" . 29 December 2010. 
 
 ^   "Gastronomía de Plasencia" . 
 
 ^   "Gastronomía extremeña | Suite101" . Archived from  the original  on 2016-03-03 . Retrieved  2016-03-03 . 
 
 ^   "Gastronomía | Noticias de Gastronomía - el Periódico Extremadura" . 
 
 ^   "Gastronomía extremeña : Viajar por Extremadura" . 13 June 2022. 
 
 ^   "El poleo (Mentha pulegium L.)" . 
 
 ^   "Sopa de poleo" . 
 
 ^   "Sopa de poleos extremeña - Lo mejor de la gastronomía extremeña" . 27 February 2018. 
 
 ^   "Cocina la receta Ajoblanco extremeño de" . 
 
 ^   "Miajadas Culinae: Arroz Con Conejo" . 4 September 2012. 
 
 ^   "La Cocinita de Quirós: Arroz de Matanza" . 4 July 2007. 
 
 ^   "BiGoToN.es - Arroz a la cacereña" . 
 
 ^   "Picadillo al estilo de los gitanos de Badajoz | el Avisador de Badajoz" . 
 
 ^   "RINRAN de La Vera | Pimentón de la Vera Caballo de Oros" .  caballodeoros.com . Archived from  the original  on 2019-03-01. 
 
 ^   "Gastronomía. Todas las noticias de Gastronomía | Diario de Navarra" . 
 
 ^   "5 platos típicos de Mérida. Comida típica de Mérida" . 4 March 2018. 
 
 ^   "Miajadas Culinae: Tomatá de Patatas-Entomatá" . 3 April 2011. 
 
 ^   "Entomatá | Madrigal de la Vera .net - Página no oficial del pueblo - (C) Kodro" . 29 December 2010. 
 
 ^   "Entre Cacerolas: Entomatá" . 
 
 ^   "Revuelto de Criadillas de Tierra al Estilo de Alburquerque" . 6 August 2021. 
 
 ^   "BiGoToN.es - Criadillas de tierra en frite extremeño" . 
 
 ^   Saber Popular - Revista extremeña de folklore nº23 
 
 ^   "Receta de Cachuela con Pimentón de la Vera" . Archived from  the original  on 2019-02-03. 
 
 ^   "Cachuela extremeña - Descubre la auténtica receta tradicional" . November 2018. 
 
 ^   "Cachuela Extremeña" . 
 
 ^   "Coles con buche - Recetas que saben a gloria - Taejo Internacional" .  www.turismotajointernacional.com . Archived from  the original  on 2018-06-09. 
 
 ^   "Méndez Extremadura is under construction" .  www.mendezextremadura.com . Archived from  the original  on 15 May 2021 . Retrieved  15 May  2022 . 
 
 ^   "El buche de Salorino" . 26 December 2012. 
 
 ^   "Wiki information and photos of Quesaíllas cheese" . Cookipedia.co.uk . Retrieved  2022-04-12 . 
 
 ^   "Descubre los quesos de Extremadura" . 21 April 2022. 
 
 ^   "Acehuche cheese suppliers, pictures, product info" . 
 
 ^   "Gata-Hurdes cheese suppliers, pictures, product info" . 
 
 ^   "Descubre los quesos de Extremadura" . 21 April 2022. 
 
 ^   Gastronomia de Extremadura, Revista Alcántara. nº 56   Archived  2009-01-06 at the  Wayback Machine 
 
 
 External links [ edit ] 
 Extremadura Tourist Board Official Webpage in english   Archived  2021-04-21 at the  Wayback Machine 
 Extremadura Gastronomic 
 The cuisine of Extremadura 
 Extremadura gourmet pilgrimage 
 Cocina y gastronomia de Extremadura. Platos Típicos Extremeños   (in Spanish) 
 v t e Cuisines Continental 
 African 
 North 
 West 
 list 
 Americas 
 Caribbean 
 North 
 South 
 list 
 Asian 
 Caucasian 
 Central 
 Indian subcontinent 
 Levantine 
 list 
 European 
 Balkan 
 Central 
 Eastern 
 list 
 Oceanic 
 Intercontinental
 Global 
 Latin American 
 Mediterranean 
 Middle Eastern 
 National  and regional 
 Afghan 
 Albanian 
 Algerian 
 American 
 Californian 
 Floribbean 
 Hawaiian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Lowcountry (South Carolina) 
 New England 
 New Mexico 
 Pacific Northwest 
 Pennsylvania Dutch 
 Puerto Rican 
 Southern US 
 Southwest US 
 Texas 
 Angolan 
 Argentine 
 Armenian 
 Australian 
 Austrian 
 Azerbaijani 
 Bahraini 
 Bangladeshi 
 Barbadian 
 Belarusian 
 Belgian 
 Belizean 
 Beninese 
 Bhutanese 
 Bolivian 
 Bosnian-Herzegovinian 
 Botswana 
 Brazilian 
 British 
 Channel Islands 
 English 
 Gibraltarian 
 Northern Irish 
 Saint Helena 
 Scottish 
 Welsh 
 Bruneian 
 Bulgarian 
 Burkinabé 
 Burmese 
 Burundian 
 Cambodian 
 Cameroonian 
 Canadian 
 Acadian 
 Québécois 
 Central African Republic 
 Chadian 
 Chilean 
 Chinese 
 Cantonese 
 Hong Kong 
 Macanese 
 Tibetan 
 Xinjiang 
 Colombian 
 Congolese 
 Corsican 
 Croatian 
 Cuban 
 Cypriot 
 Czech 
 Danish 
 Faroese 
 Greenlandic 
 Djiboutian 
 Dominican 
 Dominican Republic 
 Dutch 
 East Timorese 
 Ecuadorian 
 Egyptian 
 Emirati 
 Equatorial Guinean 
 Eritrean 
 Estonian 
 Ethiopian 
 Fijian 
 Filipino 
 Finnish 
 French 
 Occitan 
 French Guianan 
 Gabonese 
 Gambian 
 Georgian 
 German 
 Ghanaian 
 Greek 
 Cretan 
 Epirotic 
 Greek Macedonian 
 Heptanesean 
 Guatemalan 
 Guinea-Bissauan 
 Guinean 
 Haitian 
 Honduran 
 Hungarian 
 Icelandic 
 Indian 
 Arunachalese 
 Assamese 
 Bengali 
 Bihari 
 Goan 
 Gujarati 
 Himachal Pradesh 
 Kashmiri 
 Jharkhandi 
 Karnataka 
 Kerala 
 Maharashtrian 
 Manipuri 
 Meghalayan 
 Mizo 
 Naga 
 Odia 
 Punjabi 
 Rajasthani 
 Sikkimese 
 Sindhi 
 Tamil 
 Telangana 
 Telugu 
 Indonesian 
 Acehnese 
 Balinese 
 Banjar 
 Batak 
 Betawi 
 Indo 
 Javanese 
 Madurese 
 Makassar 
 Minahasan 
 Minangkabau 
 Palembangese 
 Sundanese 
 Iranian 
 Iraqi 
 Irish 
 Israeli 
 Italian 
 Abruzzese 
 Ligurian 
 Lombard 
 Lucanian 
 Neapolitan 
 Roman 
 Sardinian 
 Sicilian 
 Venetian 
 Ivorian 
 Jamaican 
 Japanese 
 Okinawan 
 Jordanian 
 Kazakh 
 Kenyan 
 Korean 
 North Korean 
 South Korean 
 Kosovan 
 Kuwaiti 
 Kyrgyz 
 Lao 
 Latvian 
 Lebanese 
 Lesotho 
 Liberian 
 Libyan 
 Liechtensteiner 
 Lithuanian 
 Luxembourg 
 Macedonian 
 Malagasy 
 Malawian 
 Malaysian 
 Sabahan 
 Sarawakian 
 Maldivian 
 Malian 
 Maltese 
 Mauritanian 
 Mauritian 
 Mexican 
 Moldovan 
 Monégasque 
 Mongolian 
 Montenegrin 
 Moroccan 
 Mozambican 
 Namibian 
 Nauruan 
 Nepalese 
 New Zealand 
 Nicaraguan 
 Niger 
 Nigerian 
 Niuean 
 Norwegian 
 Omani 
 Pakistani 
 Palestinian 
 Panamanian 
 Peruvian 
 Polish 
 Portuguese 
 Qatari 
 Romanian  (incl.  Transylvanian Saxon ) 
 Russian 
 Bashkir 
 Chechen 
 Circassian 
 Komi 
 Mordovian 
 Sakha 
 Tatar 
 Udmurt 
 Yamal 
 Rwandan 
 Saint Lucian 
 Salvadoran 
 Sammarinese 
 São Tomé and Príncipe 
 Saudi Arabian 
 Senegalese 
 Serbian 
 Seychellois 
 Sierra Leonean 
 Singaporean 
 Slovak 
 Slovenian 
 Somali 
 South African 
 Spanish 
 Andalusian 
 Asturian 
 Balearic 
 Basque 
 Canarian 
 Cantabrian 
 Catalan 
 Extremaduran 
 Galician 
 Manchegan 
 Valencian 
 Sri Lankan 
 Sudanese 
 Swazi 
 Swedish 
 Swiss 
 Syrian 
 Taiwanese 
 Tajik 
 Tanzanian 
 Zanzibari 
 Thai 
 Togolese 
 Tunisian 
 Turkish 
 Turkmen 
 Trinidadian and Tobagonian 
 Ugandan 
 Ukrainian 
 Uruguayan 
 Uzbek 
 Venezuelan 
 Vietnamese 
 Western Saharan 
 Yemeni 
 Zambian 
 Zimbabwean 
 Ethnic 
 Ainu 
 Arab 
 Indonesian 
 Aromanian 
 Assyrian 
 Balochi 
 Berber 
 Cajun 
 Chinese 
 American 
 Canadian 
 Chifa 
 Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Crimean Tatar 
 Greek American 
 Hazaragi 
 Indian 
 Anglo-Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Indigenous American 
 Inuit 
 Italian American 
 Kurdish 
 Livonian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Malay 
 Ossetian 
 Parsi 
 Pashtun 
 Peranakan 
 Romani 
 Sámi 
 Soul food 
 Sylheti 
 Transylvanian Saxon 
 Yup'ik 
 Religious 
 Buddhist 
 Christian 
 Goan Catholic 
 Mangalorean Catholic 
 Mennonite 
 Hindu 
 Islamic 
 Chinese 
 Ital 
 Jain 
 Jewish 
 American 
 Ashkenazi 
 Bukharan 
 Ethiopian 
 Mizrahi 
 Sephardic 
 Syrian 
 Ritual slaughter 
 Sikh 
 Historical 
 Ancient Egyptian 
 Ancient Greek 
 Ancient Israelite 
 Ancient Roman 
 Antebellum America 
 Aztec 
 Byzantine 
 Early modern European 
 Historical Chinese 
 Historical Indian subcontinent 
 Historical North Indian and Pakistani 
 History of agriculture 
 History of alcoholic drinks 
 History of bread 
 History of seafood 
 History of vegetarianism 
 Historical Argentine 
 Historical Japanese 
 Inca 
 Mayan 
 Muisca 
 Mughal 
 Medieval 
 Ottoman 
 Peasant 
 Soviet 
 Thirteen Colonies 
 Styles 
 Classique 
 Fast food 
 Fusion 
 New American 
 Eurasian 
 Haute 
 Molecular gastronomy 
 Note by Note 
 Nouvelle 
 Lists 
 List of cuisines 
 List of historical cuisines 
 Lists of prepared foods 
 Related 
 Cookbook 
 Cooking 
 Culinary arts 
 Drink 
 Food 
 history 
 Diet 
 Meal preparation 
 
   Food portal 
   Drink portal 
   Category 
   Commons 
   Cookbook 
   WikiProject 
   Outline 
 
 Authority control : National libraries  
 Israel 
 United States 
 
  
NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw2312
Cached time: 20230310203138
Cache expiry: 1814400
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc, no‐toc‐conversion]
CPU time usage: 0.667 seconds
Real time usage: 0.797 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2442/1000000
Post‐expand include size: 113691/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1798/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 9/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 114781/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.409/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 16803311/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/400
 
 
Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  636.518      1 -total
 38.38%  244.297      1 Template:Reflist
 30.76%  195.817     39 Template:Cite_web
 19.04%  121.196      1 Template:Cuisine
 18.52%  117.887      1 Template:Navbox
 14.78%   94.091      1 Template:In_lang
  9.34%   59.472      1 Template:Short_description
  6.08%   38.682      1 Template:Authority_control
  5.45%   34.679      2 Template:Unreliable_source?
  5.37%   34.166      2 Template:Pagetype
 
  Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:idhash:21309248-0!canonical and timestamp 20230310203137 and revision id 1125345969. Rendering was triggered because: page-view
  
 esi <esi:include src="/esitest-fa8a495983347898/content" />  
 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Extremaduran_cuisine&oldid=1125345969 " 
 Categories :  Extremaduran cuisine Extremaduran culture Spanish cuisine Hidden categories:  Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from April 2022 Articles with Spanish-language sources (es) Articles with J9U identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  This page was last edited on 3 December 2022, at 14:38  (UTC) . 
 Text is available under the  Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0 ;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the  Terms of Use  and  Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the  Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. 
 
 
 Privacy policy 
 About Wikipedia 
 Disclaimers 
 Contact Wikipedia 
 Mobile view 
 Developers 
 Statistics 
 Cookie statement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
