
 
 
 Jump to content 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle sidebar 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Create account Log in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Personal tools 
 
 
 
 
   Create account   Log in 
 
 
 
 
		Pages for logged out editors  learn more 
 
 
 Contributions Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Navigation 
 
 
 Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate 
 
 
 
 
 Contribute 
 
 
 Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file 
 
 
 
 
 Tools 
 
 
 What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item 
 
 
 
 
 Print/export 
 
 
 Download as PDF Printable version 
 
 
 
 
 In other projects 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons 
 
 
 
 
 Languages 
 
 On this Wikipedia the language links are at the top of the page across from the article title.  Go to top . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CentralNotice  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Contents 
 move to sidebar 
 hide 
 
 
 
 
 (Top) 
 
 
 
 
 
 1 History 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 Snacks 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 Ingredients 
 
 
				Toggle Ingredients subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 3.1 Staples 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.2 Vegetables 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.3 Coconut 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4 Dishes 
 
 
				Toggle Dishes subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 4.1 Main 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.2 Desserts 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5 Drinks 
 
 
				Toggle Drinks subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 5.1 Kava/Yaqona 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6 Changes in eating patterns over time 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 7 Fast food 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8 See also 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 9 References 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
						Toggle the table of contents
					 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle the table of contents 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fijian cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 3 languages 
 
 
 
 Čeština 한국어 ქართული 
 Edit links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Article Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 English 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 More 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
 
 
 Food culture of the Fijian Islands 
 This article has multiple issues.  Please help  improve it  or discuss these issues on the  talk page .  ( Learn how and when to remove these template messages ) 
 
 This article's  tone or style may not reflect the  encyclopedic tone  used on Wikipedia .  See Wikipedia's  guide to writing better articles  for suggestions.   ( October 2014 )  ( Learn how and when to remove this template message ) 
 This article may need to be  rewritten  to comply with Wikipedia's  quality standards .   You can help . The  talk page  may contain suggestions.   ( October 2014 ) 
 This article  needs additional citations for  verification .  Please help  improve this article  by  adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources:   "Fijian cuisine"  –  news   ·   newspapers   ·   books   ·   scholar   ·   JSTOR   ( July 2022 )  ( Learn how and when to remove this template message ) 
 
  ( Learn how and when to remove this template message ) 
 Forage and farm-based foods have long been combined in Fijian cuisine. Although rice, wheat, and tea have all been staples during the colonial era, the native Fijians still eat primarily tubers and coconuts in their diet. Native Americans have farmed higher calorie foods like cassava, taro, and yams for thousands of years. The cuisine of Fiji is renowned for its seafood and various green vegetables, including Ota, a young forest fern that is collected for consumption, and Bele, a plant that resembles spinach and is also known as slippery cabbage. 
 
   Kokoda, raw fish served in a coconut 
 Most Fijian houses often serve dishes from other cultures, most typically those that immigrants from India and China introduced to Fiji. Fiji's recent past as a colony of the British Empire has had a significant impact on its cuisine, as the British indentured servitude system brought many Indians to the islands and substantially shaped their present cuisines.
 In many homes, breakfast may also include regional dishes like roti and curry, boiled taro and fish soup, and cabin crackers with butter in addition to goods like bread, cereal, milk, tea, and coffee. The diet is comparable to that of neighbouring island countries like Samoa and Tonga. A wide range of food is available thanks to the old trade routes that span these nations.
 Meats like chicken and lamb are very popular, whereas cattle and pork are reared for special occasions like weddings and purchased young. Lamb and chicken sausages, as well as eggs, are frequently the least expensive sources of protein in homes. Many people get their protein mostly from seafood, and many kids enjoy going fishing for an entire meal. Due to numerous indigenous peoples living along the coast, freshwater and marine prawns, mussels, clams, sea urchins, sea cucumbers, oyster, lobster, fish, crabs, octopus, and squid have been the main source of nourishment for many years. 
 For many years, turtle was also eaten, however, due to changing habits and dwindling populations, the Fijian government has heavily restricted or forbidden the consumption of many endangered species. Sharks are never consumed as they are believed to represent the sea god  Dakuwaqa  and are therefore taboo. To kill or eat a shark is believed to bring great misfortune on the village. 
 Coconut milk, sea water, Indian spices, onions, carrots, garlic, ginger, limes, lemons, curry leaves and chili are also the primary flavorings, with Chinese influences from soy and oyster sauce being popular additions.
 Lunch in the villages consists of a steamed starchy item such as cassava or taro, a soup and tea, sweetened with cane sugar. Indo-Fijian families may stick to traditional rice, dhal and either a meat or vegetable curry accompanied by a salad or chutney. Masala tea is the main drink in many Indo-Fijian households. Many city people however are turning to easily available western fast foods which are now becoming a popular choice for the younger generation.
 Dinner  is usually something elaborate and meat based, such as stews, soups, curries, stir fries and even traditional earth oven food called lovo (similar to an umu or hangi) This is usually served with a simple salad and rice or root vegetable to bulk up the meals.
Fijian diets are also based on foraged items such as forest ferns and wild herbs which are now readily sold in food markets. Herbs such as coriander and mint are highly used to flavour both sweet and savoury dishes.
Tinned goods are pantry basics and include favourites such as tinned mackerel, sardines, tuna, baked beans, corned beef, corned mutton and condensed milk. 
Dessert dishes include a steamed coconut pudding, a dense cake similar to  spotted dick  but flavoured with cardamom, ginger, condensed milk, coconut milk and sugarcane syrup. This cake is a well loved classic with many families eating it either hot or cold, spread with butter. Another popular dessert is vakalolo made with grated cassava, ginger, sugar, cardamom and coconut milk. The mixture is shaped into small, flat pancakes, wrapped in banana leaves and steamed. A dense, chewy and sweet dish, vakalolo has incorporated many Indian spices to enhance the flavours.
 A very common feast is the lovo, where food is wrapped and cooked for several hours on hot stones covered with earth and sacks. Similar to the NZ hangi, the Fijian style of lovo uses soy sauce, garlic, chilli and ginger as flavourings for meat. Fish are usually steamed in taro leaves with onions, garlic, chilli and coconut milk called Fish-in-lolo.  Another common lovo item is palusami, of which a vegetarian and non vegetarian type are both popular additions. Consisting of young, tender taro leaves, coconut milk, ginger, garlic, chilli, lime juice, salt and may include corned beef/mutton or fish, palusami is also a staple menu item along with rourou, a similar taro leaf dish. Yams, cassava and taro are the main starches in a lovo and it takes many people to prepare hence its special significance.
 
 
 History [ edit ] 
 This section  needs expansion . You can help by  adding to it .   ( May 2021 ) 
   Fijians with coconut, taro and yams, preparing for a feast. 
 Snacks [ edit ] 
 Desserts  or snacks are common and are eaten in between meals-often for morning tea and afternoon teas. Some common ones include pies filled with custard or pumpkin or pineapple. Steamed puddings are also common but these are rich in sugars and fats. Most homes would use coconut cream, caramelized sugar to give the color, flour, baking powder as the main ingredients. The pudding mixture is poured into tins and steamed for 1–2 hours. To improve the flavour, sometimes cinnamon or raisins are added. Some nice desserts are also made with cassava.  Cassava  is first grated and then sugar is added. It is then wrapped in banana leaves and steamed. Burnt Sugar pudding ( purini   or pudini) is one of the most popular pudding in the Fijian cuisine. The historical existence is unknown, more than likely was introduced by the British, given their fondness for pastries and steamed puddings. Vakalolo is a traditional dessert made with cassava, coconut, ginger root, sugar, cloves, then steamed in a banana leaf.
 
 Ingredients [ edit ] 
 Staples [ edit ] 
   Taro and coconuts for sale in  Nadi 
 Taro  is the most important staple for special occasions. [1]  It is available in 70 different varieties; some turn pink or yellow or remain white after cooking. It can be grown in any soil conditions. Taro is a rich source of  fiber . [2] [3] 
 Cassava or  tavioka  has replaced yams and is now the most cultivated and consumed staple crop in Fiji. [1]   It is boiled in salt and water until soft and eaten with stews and curries.
 Kumala ( sweet potato ) was not traditionally the staple for native Fijian diet. It was brought from Papua New Guinea.  It is easy to grow and provides good yield now is the cheapest of all root crops and is eaten by most people their soups, stews or curries. [1] 
 Breadfruit is a seasonal staple. It is grown in most households in the villages.
 Rice  was brought by the Indian immigrants and was grown for domestic use around Fiji. [1] 
 
 Vegetables [ edit ] 
 Taro leaf, rourou, is the most important cash crop for Fijian communities. It is used in everyday meals and also used for ceremonial meals to make palusami.
 Bele  ( Abelmoschus manihot , also hibiscus bele/hibiscus spinach [Hibiscus manihot]) is one of the most nutritious traditional vegetables in Oceania. It is a highly nutritious green leafy vegetable grown in almost every household. The leaves are rich sources of vitamins and minerals such as iron and magnesium, pro Vit A and C, also have very high levels of folate, an important nutrient for pregnant and nursing women. [2] [3] [4] [5] 
 Amaranthus, tubua, is another vegetable commonly eaten in most homes. Other leaves which are eaten include pumpkin, cassava and sweet potato leaves
 
 Coconut [ edit ] 
 Coconut  is especially liked by Fijians. It is grown in most coastal areas. Coconut is used not only for food, it plays an important role in Fiji's economy.
 
 Dishes [ edit ] 
   Fijian lovo, a traditional method of cooking food on heated rock underground. 
 Main [ edit ] 
 Fish Suruwa  – a Fijian-style fish  curry . 
 Kokoda  – Raw fish marinated in freshly squeezed lemon or lime juice with coconut milk added after it is "cooked" together with finely diced tomatoes, chillies and salt. 
 Lovo  – A traditional Fijian method of cooking. Food such as meat, fish and vegetables are wrapped in leaves and placed on hot rocks, buried and cooked for several hours. 
 Palusami  – Parcels made with taro leaves, filled with thick coconut cream, onions, salt and canned meat. [6] 
 Rourou  – Taro leaf stew. 
 Desserts [ edit ] 
 Fijian mud cake 
 Fijian mud pie 
 Purini  – a Fijian-style British steamed pudding. 
 Tavioka 
 Vakalavalava 
 Vakalolo  – Cassava pudding flavoured with spices such as ginger and cardamom. 
 Drinks [ edit ] 
 Kava/Yaqona [ edit ] 
 Kava is a drink made from powdered roots of  yaqona plants.  The powder is placed in a muslin cloth and small amounts of water are added to extract the juice out of the powder. Kava is not unique to the Fijian culture, it is widely consumed in amongst other Pacific nations.  It has religious and tribal significance and is used as peace offering known as  sevusevu  during Fijian functions. Kava consumption can be habit forming. However, there is no evidence of kava causing physical addiction nor of long term risks due to its regular use. 
 Kava is used to calm anxiety, stress, and restlessness, and treat sleep problems. It is also used as a remedy to certain neurological and mental disorders, common colds and other respiratory tract infections, tuberculosis, muscle pain, and as cancer prevention. Some use the drink for urinary tract infections (UTIs), pain and swelling of the uterus, venereal disease, menstrual discomfort, and as an  aphrodisiac . Kava is applied to the skin for skin diseases including leprosy, to promote wound healing, and as a painkiller. It is also used as a mouthwash for canker sores and toothaches.
 
 Changes in eating patterns over time [ edit ] 
 With changes in eating patterns, there has been a shift towards consumption of more energy dense foods and decreased intake of fruit and vegetables. [7] [2] [3] [8] [9]  The processed foods are more readily available in shops and canteens and are cheaper. They contain high amounts of sugar and sodium which contribute to increasing rates of  obesity ,  diabetes  and cardiovascular diseases. However, traditional foods are still valued and used for special occasions. Nutrition research involving children show 90% of children consume sugar sweetened beverages on a daily basis and 74% consume less fruit and vegetables. [10] 
 
 Fast food [ edit ] 
 Both local and foreign fast food chains have started to enter the Fijian market since the late 1990s. There are  McDonald's  (locally called Maccas),  Burger King  and  Kentucky Fried Chicken  and  Eagle Boys Pizza  formerly operated in Fiji.
 
 See also [ edit ] 
 
 Food portal 
 Oceanic cuisine 
 References [ edit ] 
 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   Jansen, A. A. J.,  Parkinson, S , Robertson, A. F. S. (1990)  Food and Nutrition in Fiji: Food production, composition, and intake .  ISBN   9820200601 
 
 ^  a   b   c   Dignan C, Burlingame B, Kumar S, Aalbersberg W. (2004)  The Pacific Islands food composition tables  2nd Ed. 
 
 ^  a   b   c   Saito S. (1995)  1993 National Nutrition Survey. Main Report . National Food and Nutrition Committee: Suva, Fiji 
 
 ^   Thaman, R.R. Rural Fiji. Institute of Pacific Studies, University of the South Pacific 1988, p. 41. 
 
 ^   Food and Nutrition in Fiji: Food production, composition, and intake , p. 35, at  Google Books  edited by A. A. J. Jansen, Susan Parkinson, A. F. S. Robertson 
 
 ^   "Palusami Recipe: A Polynesian Delicacy" . 14 April 2020. 
 
 ^   Schultz JT, Vatucawaqa P, Tuivaga J. (2005)  2004 Fiji National Nutrition Survey . Suva: Fiji Ministry of Health; 
 
 ^   Wilkins R. (1963)  Dietary Survey in a Fijian village, Naduri . South Pacific Health Service: Nadroga 
 
 ^   Willmott JV (1971). "Food consumption trends".  Fiji School Med J .  10  (5): 10. 
 
 ^   Wate, J. T. (2013).  "Adolescent dietary patterns in Fiji and their relationships with standardized body mass index" .  International Journal of Behavioral Nutrition and Physical Activity .  10 : 45.  doi : 10.1186/1479-5868-10-45 .  PMC   3637506 .  PMID   23570554 . 
 
 
 v t e Oceanian cuisine Sovereign states 
 Australia 
 Federated States of Micronesia 
 Fiji 
 Kiribati 
 Marshall Islands 
 Nauru 
 New Zealand 
 Palau 
 Papua New Guinea 
 Samoa 
 Solomon Islands 
 Tonga 
 Tuvalu 
 Vanuatu 
 Associated states 
 Cook Islands 
 Niue 
 Dependencies  and other territories 
 American Samoa 
 Christmas Island 
 Cocos (Keeling) Islands 
 Easter Island 
 French Polynesia 
 Guam 
 Hawaii 
 New Caledonia 
 Norfolk Island 
 Northern Mariana Islands 
 Pitcairn Islands 
 Tokelau 
 Wallis and Futuna 
 
 v t e Cuisines Continental 
 African 
 North 
 West 
 list 
 Americas 
 Caribbean 
 North 
 South 
 list 
 Asian 
 Caucasian 
 Central 
 Indian subcontinent 
 Levantine 
 list 
 European 
 Balkan 
 Central 
 Eastern 
 list 
 Oceanic 
 Intercontinental
 Global 
 Latin American 
 Mediterranean 
 Middle Eastern 
 National  and regional 
 Afghan 
 Albanian 
 Algerian 
 American 
 Californian 
 Floribbean 
 Hawaiian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Lowcountry (South Carolina) 
 New England 
 New Mexico 
 Pacific Northwest 
 Pennsylvania Dutch 
 Puerto Rican 
 Southern US 
 Southwest US 
 Texas 
 Angolan 
 Argentine 
 Armenian 
 Australian 
 Austrian 
 Azerbaijani 
 Bahraini 
 Bangladeshi 
 Barbadian 
 Belarusian 
 Belgian 
 Belizean 
 Beninese 
 Bhutanese 
 Bolivian 
 Bosnian-Herzegovinian 
 Botswana 
 Brazilian 
 British 
 Channel Islands 
 English 
 Gibraltarian 
 Northern Irish 
 Saint Helena 
 Scottish 
 Welsh 
 Bruneian 
 Bulgarian 
 Burkinabé 
 Burmese 
 Burundian 
 Cambodian 
 Cameroonian 
 Canadian 
 Acadian 
 Québécois 
 Central African Republic 
 Chadian 
 Chilean 
 Chinese 
 Cantonese 
 Hong Kong 
 Macanese 
 Tibetan 
 Xinjiang 
 Colombian 
 Congolese 
 Corsican 
 Croatian 
 Cuban 
 Cypriot 
 Czech 
 Danish 
 Faroese 
 Greenlandic 
 Djiboutian 
 Dominican 
 Dominican Republic 
 Dutch 
 East Timorese 
 Ecuadorian 
 Egyptian 
 Emirati 
 Equatorial Guinean 
 Eritrean 
 Estonian 
 Ethiopian 
 Fijian 
 Filipino 
 Finnish 
 French 
 Occitan 
 French Guianan 
 Gabonese 
 Gambian 
 Georgian 
 German 
 Ghanaian 
 Greek 
 Cretan 
 Epirotic 
 Greek Macedonian 
 Heptanesean 
 Guatemalan 
 Guinea-Bissauan 
 Guinean 
 Haitian 
 Honduran 
 Hungarian 
 Icelandic 
 Indian 
 Arunachalese 
 Assamese 
 Bengali 
 Bihari 
 Goan 
 Gujarati 
 Himachal Pradesh 
 Kashmiri 
 Jharkhandi 
 Karnataka 
 Kerala 
 Maharashtrian 
 Manipuri 
 Meghalayan 
 Mizo 
 Naga 
 Odia 
 Punjabi 
 Rajasthani 
 Sikkimese 
 Sindhi 
 Tamil 
 Telangana 
 Telugu 
 Indonesian 
 Acehnese 
 Balinese 
 Banjar 
 Batak 
 Betawi 
 Indo 
 Javanese 
 Madurese 
 Makassar 
 Minahasan 
 Minangkabau 
 Palembangese 
 Sundanese 
 Iranian 
 Iraqi 
 Irish 
 Israeli 
 Italian 
 Abruzzese 
 Ligurian 
 Lombard 
 Lucanian 
 Neapolitan 
 Roman 
 Sardinian 
 Sicilian 
 Venetian 
 Ivorian 
 Jamaican 
 Japanese 
 Okinawan 
 Jordanian 
 Kazakh 
 Kenyan 
 Korean 
 North Korean 
 South Korean 
 Kosovan 
 Kuwaiti 
 Kyrgyz 
 Lao 
 Latvian 
 Lebanese 
 Lesotho 
 Liberian 
 Libyan 
 Liechtensteiner 
 Lithuanian 
 Luxembourg 
 Macedonian 
 Malagasy 
 Malawian 
 Malaysian 
 Sabahan 
 Sarawakian 
 Maldivian 
 Malian 
 Maltese 
 Mauritanian 
 Mauritian 
 Mexican 
 Moldovan 
 Monégasque 
 Mongolian 
 Montenegrin 
 Moroccan 
 Mozambican 
 Namibian 
 Nauruan 
 Nepalese 
 New Zealand 
 Nicaraguan 
 Niger 
 Nigerian 
 Niuean 
 Norwegian 
 Omani 
 Pakistani 
 Palestinian 
 Panamanian 
 Peruvian 
 Polish 
 Portuguese 
 Qatari 
 Romanian  (incl.  Transylvanian Saxon ) 
 Russian 
 Bashkir 
 Chechen 
 Circassian 
 Komi 
 Mordovian 
 Sakha 
 Tatar 
 Udmurt 
 Yamal 
 Rwandan 
 Saint Lucian 
 Salvadoran 
 Sammarinese 
 São Tomé and Príncipe 
 Saudi Arabian 
 Senegalese 
 Serbian 
 Seychellois 
 Sierra Leonean 
 Singaporean 
 Slovak 
 Slovenian 
 Somali 
 South African 
 Spanish 
 Andalusian 
 Asturian 
 Balearic 
 Basque 
 Canarian 
 Cantabrian 
 Catalan 
 Extremaduran 
 Galician 
 Manchegan 
 Valencian 
 Sri Lankan 
 Sudanese 
 Swazi 
 Swedish 
 Swiss 
 Syrian 
 Taiwanese 
 Tajik 
 Tanzanian 
 Zanzibari 
 Thai 
 Togolese 
 Tunisian 
 Turkish 
 Turkmen 
 Trinidadian and Tobagonian 
 Ugandan 
 Ukrainian 
 Uruguayan 
 Uzbek 
 Venezuelan 
 Vietnamese 
 Western Saharan 
 Yemeni 
 Zambian 
 Zimbabwean 
 Ethnic 
 Ainu 
 Arab 
 Indonesian 
 Aromanian 
 Assyrian 
 Balochi 
 Berber 
 Cajun 
 Chinese 
 American 
 Canadian 
 Chifa 
 Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Crimean Tatar 
 Greek American 
 Hazaragi 
 Indian 
 Anglo-Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Indigenous American 
 Inuit 
 Italian American 
 Kurdish 
 Livonian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Malay 
 Ossetian 
 Parsi 
 Pashtun 
 Peranakan 
 Romani 
 Sámi 
 Soul food 
 Sylheti 
 Transylvanian Saxon 
 Yup'ik 
 Religious 
 Buddhist 
 Christian 
 Goan Catholic 
 Mangalorean Catholic 
 Mennonite 
 Hindu 
 Islamic 
 Chinese 
 Ital 
 Jain 
 Jewish 
 American 
 Ashkenazi 
 Bukharan 
 Ethiopian 
 Mizrahi 
 Sephardic 
 Syrian 
 Ritual slaughter 
 Sikh 
 Historical 
 Ancient Egyptian 
 Ancient Greek 
 Ancient Israelite 
 Ancient Roman 
 Antebellum America 
 Aztec 
 Byzantine 
 Early modern European 
 Historical Chinese 
 Historical Indian subcontinent 
 Historical North Indian and Pakistani 
 History of agriculture 
 History of alcoholic drinks 
 History of bread 
 History of seafood 
 History of vegetarianism 
 Historical Argentine 
 Historical Japanese 
 Inca 
 Mayan 
 Muisca 
 Mughal 
 Medieval 
 Ottoman 
 Peasant 
 Soviet 
 Thirteen Colonies 
 Styles 
 Classique 
 Fast food 
 Fusion 
 New American 
 Eurasian 
 Haute 
 Molecular gastronomy 
 Note by Note 
 Nouvelle 
 Lists 
 List of cuisines 
 List of historical cuisines 
 Lists of prepared foods 
 Related 
 Cookbook 
 Cooking 
 Culinary arts 
 Drink 
 Food 
 history 
 Diet 
 Meal preparation 
 
   Food portal 
   Drink portal 
   Category 
   Commons 
   Cookbook 
   WikiProject 
   Outline 
 
  
NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw2372
Cached time: 20230310194356
Cache expiry: 1814400
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc, no‐toc‐conversion]
CPU time usage: 0.433 seconds
Real time usage: 0.557 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3876/1000000
Post‐expand include size: 118597/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 12078/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 18/100
Expensive parser function count: 7/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 40517/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.223/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 5207644/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/400
 
 
Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  423.745      1 -total
 41.49%  175.820      5 Template:Ambox
 30.10%  127.552      1 Template:Reflist
 26.46%  112.144      1 Template:Multiple_issues
 24.35%  103.172      2 Template:Navbox
 19.42%   82.272      1 Template:Oceanian_topic
 11.83%   50.124      1 Template:Short_description
 11.50%   48.741      1 Template:Tone
 10.55%   44.721      1 Template:Cite_web
 10.26%   43.485      1 Template:ISBN
 
  Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:idhash:19812040-0!canonical and timestamp 20230310194355 and revision id 1140066730. Rendering was triggered because: api-parse
  
 esi <esi:include src="/esitest-fa8a495983347898/content" />  
 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Fijian_cuisine&oldid=1140066730 " 
 Category :  Fijian cuisine Hidden categories:  Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Wikipedia articles with style issues from October 2014 All articles with style issues Wikipedia articles needing rewrite from October 2014 All articles needing rewrite Articles needing additional references from July 2022 All articles needing additional references Articles with multiple maintenance issues Articles to be expanded from May 2021 All articles to be expanded Articles using small message boxes Region topic template using suffix 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  This page was last edited on 18 February 2023, at 07:25  (UTC) . 
 Text is available under the  Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0 ;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the  Terms of Use  and  Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the  Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. 
 
 
 Privacy policy 
 About Wikipedia 
 Disclaimers 
 Contact Wikipedia 
 Mobile view 
 Developers 
 Statistics 
 Cookie statement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
