
 
 
 Jump to content 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle sidebar 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Create account Log in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Personal tools 
 
 
 
 
   Create account   Log in 
 
 
 
 
		Pages for logged out editors  learn more 
 
 
 Contributions Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Navigation 
 
 
 Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate 
 
 
 
 
 Contribute 
 
 
 Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file 
 
 
 
 
 Tools 
 
 
 What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item 
 
 
 
 
 Print/export 
 
 
 Download as PDF Printable version 
 
 
 
 
 In other projects 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons Wikivoyage 
 
 
 
 
 Languages 
 
 On this Wikipedia the language links are at the top of the page across from the article title.  Go to top . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CentralNotice  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Contents 
 move to sidebar 
 hide 
 
 
 
 
 (Top) 
 
 
 
 
 
 1 History 
 
 
				Toggle History subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 1.1 Spanish colonial period 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.2 American colonial period 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.3 Contemporary period 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 Characteristics 
 
 
				Toggle Characteristics subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 2.1 Native ingredients 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 Cooking, serving and consumption 
 
 
				Toggle Cooking, serving and consumption subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 3.1 Meals of the day 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.2 Merienda 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.3 Pulutan 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.4 Fiesta food 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4 Staples 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5 Main dishes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6 Side dishes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 7 Bread and pastries 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8 Cooking method 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 9 Beverages 
 
 
				Toggle Beverages subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 9.1 Chilled drinks and shakes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 9.2 Brewed beverages 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 9.3 Alcoholic beverages 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 10 Desserts 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 11 Regional dishes 
 
 
				Toggle Regional dishes subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 11.1 Luzon 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 11.2 Visayas 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 11.3 Mindanao 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 12 Street food and snacks 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 13 Exotic dishes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 14 Foreign influences 
 
 
				Toggle Foreign influences subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 14.1 Spanish influences 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 14.2 Chinese influences 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 14.3 American influences 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 14.4 Indian influences 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 14.5 Japanese influences 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 14.6 Arab influences 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 15 Outside the Philippines 
 
 
				Toggle Outside the Philippines subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 15.1 United States 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 16 See also 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 17 References 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 18 Further reading 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 19 External links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
						Toggle the table of contents
					 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle the table of contents 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Filipino cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 25 languages 
 
 
 
 Azərbaycanca Català Čeština Deutsch Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Italiano Jawa ქართული Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Polski Русский Tagalog ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 
 Edit links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Article Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 English 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 More 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
 
 
 Culinary traditions of the Philippines 
 
 
   A variety of Filipino dishes 
 This article is part of a series on the Culture of the  Philippines 
Society 
 History 
 Language 
 sign language 
 People 
 ethnic groups 
 indigenous peoples 
 Religion 
 Value system 
 
Arts and literature 
 Architecture 
 Arts 
 Dance 
 Fashion and clothing 
 Literature 
 Music 
 
Other 
 Cuisine 
 Cultural Properties 
 Folklore 
 Historical markers 
 Media 
 newspapers 
 radio 
 cinema 
 TV 
 Internet 
 Mythology 
 Public holidays 
 festivals 
 Sports 
 
 Symbols 
 Anthem 
 Bird 
 Coat of arms 
 Flag 
 Flower 
 Gem 
 Great Seal 
 Language 
 Motto 
 Sport and martial art 
 Tree 
 
 Philippines portal v t e 
 Filipino cuisine  ( Filipino :  lutong Pilipino/pagkaing Pilipino ) is composed of the cuisines of more than a hundred distinct  ethnolinguistic groups  found throughout the Philippine archipelago. A majority of mainstream Filipino dishes that compose Filipino cuisine are from the food traditions of various ethnolinguistic groups and tribes of the archipelago, including the  Ilocano ,  Pangasinan ,  Kapampangan ,  Tagalog ,  Bicolano ,  Visayan ,  Chavacano  and  Maranao  ethnolinguistic groups. The styles of preparation and dishes associated with them have evolved over many centuries from a largely indigenous (largely  Austronesian ) base shared with  maritime Southeast Asia  with varied influences from  Chinese ,  Spanish  and  American  cuisines, in line with the major waves of influence that had enriched the cultures of the archipelago, as well as others adapted to indigenous ingredients and the local palate. [1] 
 Dishes range from the very simple, like a meal of fried salted fish and rice, to curries, to complex  paellas  and  cozidos  of Iberian origin made for  fiestas . Popular dishes include  lechón [2]  (whole roasted pig),  longganisa  (Philippine sausage),  tapa  (cured beef),  torta  (omelette),  adobo  (vinegar and soy sauce-based stew ),  kaldereta  (meat stewed in tomato sauce and liver paste),  mechado  (larded beef in soy and tomato sauce),  pochero  (beef and bananas in tomato sauce),  afritada  (chicken or beef and vegetables simmered in tomato sauce),  kare-kare  ( oxtail  and vegetables cooked in  peanut sauce ),  pinakbet  (kabocha squash, eggplant, beans, okra, and tomato stew flavored with shrimp paste),  sinigang  (meat or seafood in sour broth),  pancit  (noodles), and  lumpia  (fresh or fried spring rolls).
 
 
 History [ edit ] 
 See also:  Domesticated plants and animals of Austronesia  and  spice trade 
   Austronesian  maritime  trade routes  (including the  Spice Trade  and  Maritime Silk Road ) which enabled the exchange of cuisine and ingredients between  Island Southeast Asia ,  South Asia , and  China . [3] 
 Negritos , the first peoples of the Philippine archipelago, were nomadic hunter-gatherers whose diet consisted of foraged wild tubers, seafood, and game meat.
 Around 6000 BP, subsequent migrations of seafaring  Austronesians , whom the majority of contemporary Filipinos descend from, brought new techniques in aquaculture and agriculture, and various domesticated foodstuffs and animals.
 The plains of central and southwestern  Luzon ,  Bicol peninsula , and eastern  Panay  were major producers of rice, exporting surplus elsewhere to the rest of the archipelago. Rice was a symbol of wealth, with many rice-based delicacies used as offerings in important ceremonies. [4] [5] 
 
 Spanish colonial period [ edit ] 
 See also:  Manila galleon 
 Spanish rule ushered several large changes to the cuisines of much of the archipelago, from the formation of the Manila galleon trade network to domestic agricultural reform.
 The galleon trade brought two significant culinary influences to the islands:  Chinese  and  Mexican .
 The massive inflow of New World silver into the Philippine colony began to attract thousands of Chinese merchants, particularly  Hoklo  from  Fujian , every year. Hokkien influence brought noodle dishes ( pancit  and various  noodle soupa ), soybean-based products like  soy sauce  ( toyo ) and  tofu  ( tokwa ), and other well known dishes like eggrolls ( lumpia ), stir-fried rice ( sinangag ), dumplings ( siopao  and  siomai ) and congee ( arroz caldo  and  goto ). [6]   Panciterias  serving noodle fare were formed and became public staples.
 
   Chinese  pancitero  serving  pancit 
 The galleon exchange was mainly between  Manila  and  Acapulco , mainland  New Spain  (present-day  Mexico ), hence influence from Mexican cuisine brought a vast array of both New World and Spanish foodstuffs and techniques. Directly from the Americas were primarily crops:  maize ,  chili peppers ,  bell peppers ,  tomatoes ,  potatoes ,  peanuts ,  chocolate ,  pineapples ,  jicama ,  chayote ,  annatto , and  avocados , among others. Mexicans also brought various Spanish cooking techniques, including  sofrito , sausage making ( longganisa , despite more akin to  chorizos ), and  bread baking . Likewise, from the Philippines brought rice, sugarcane, coconuts, limes, mangoes, and tamarind to the Americas, and Filipino influence on  Mexican cuisine , particularly in  Guerrero , includes  tuba  winemaking,  guinatan  coconut milk dishes, and probably  ceviche .
 
 American colonial period [ edit ] 
 After the  Spanish–American War  in 1899, the United States controlled the Philippines due to the  Treaty of Paris . US soldiers introduced Filipinos to  hot dogs ,  hamburgers ,  fried chicken , and  ice cream . They also introduced convenient foods such as  spam ,  corned beef ,  instant coffee , and  evaporated milk .
 
 Contemporary period [ edit ] 
 This section  needs expansion . You can help by  adding to it .   ( February 2023 ) 
 Today, Filipino cuisine continues to evolve as new techniques and styles of cooking, and ingredients find their way into the country. [7]  Traditional dishes both simple and elaborate, indigenous and foreign-influenced, are seen as are more current popular international dishes and  fast food  fare. However, the Filipino diet is higher in total fat, saturated fat, and cholesterol than other Asian diets. [8] 
 
 Characteristics [ edit ] 
   Pinakbet 
 Filipino cuisine centres around the combination of sweet ( tamis ), sour ( asim ), and salty ( alat ), [2]  although in  Bicol , the  Cordilleras  and among  Muslim Filipinos , spicy ( anghang ) is a base of cooking flavor.
 Counterpoint is a feature in Filipino cuisine which normally comes in a pairing of something sweet with something salty. Examples include:  champorado  (a sweet cocoa rice porridge), being paired with  tuyo  (salted, sun-dried fish);  dinuguan  (a savory stew made of pig's blood and innards), paired with  puto  (sweet, steamed rice cakes); unripe fruits such as green  mangoes  (which are only slightly sweet but very sour), are eaten dipped in salt or  bagoong ; the use of  cheese  (which is salty-sweet) in sweetcakes (such as  bibingka  and  puto ), as well as an  ice cream  flavoring.
 
 Native ingredients [ edit ] 
   Kalamansi 
   Ube halaya 
 Filipino cuisine has a variety of native ingredients used. The biota that developed yielded a particular landscape and in turn gave the place local ingredients that enhanced flavors to the dishes.  Kalamansi  is the more known of those ingredients, it is a fruit that belongs to the genus citrus. It is mostly used due to the sourness it gives to a dish. [9]  Another is the tabon-tabon, a tropical fruit which were used by pre-colonial Filipinos as anti-bacterial ingredient especially in  Kinilaw  dishes. [10] 
 The country also cultivates different type of nuts and one of them is the  pili nut , of which the Philippines is the only known exporter of edible varieties. It is usually made as a merienda or is incorporated in other desserts to enhance the flavor due to the milky texture it gives off as it melts in the mouth. [11] 
 Vinegar  is a common ingredient.  Adobo  is popular [2]  not solely for its simplicity and ease of preparation, but also for its ability to be stored for days without spoiling, and even improve in flavor with a day or two of storage.  Tinapa  is a smoke-cured fish while  tuyo ,  daing , and  dangit  are corned, sun-dried fish popular because they can last for weeks without spoiling, even without refrigeration.
 
 Cooking, serving and consumption [ edit ] 
 Some of this section's  listed sources   may not be  reliable .  Please help this article by looking for better, more reliable sources. Unreliable citations may be challenged or deleted.   ( June 2015 )  ( Learn how and when to remove this template message ) 
 Cooking and eating in the Philippines has traditionally been an informal and communal affair centered around the family kitchen. Food tends to be served all at once and not in courses.
 Like many of their Southeast Asian counterparts Filipinos do not eat with chopsticks. The traditional way of eating is with the hands, especially dry dishes such as  inihaw  or  prito . The diner will take a bite of the main dish, then eat rice pressed together with their fingers. This practice, known as  kamayan  (using the washed left hand for picking the centralized food and the right hand for bringing food to the mouth), is rarely seen in urbanized areas. However, Filipinos tend to feel the spirit of  kamayan  when eating amidst nature during out-of-town trips, beach vacations, and town fiestas. [12] 
 During the Spanish occupation, which yielded Western influences, Filipinos ate with the paired utensils of spoon and fork. The knife was not used as in other countries, because Spain prohibited them to have knives. Filipinos use the side of the spoon, to "cut" the food. Due to Western influence, food is often eaten using flatware—forks, knives, spoons—but the primary pairing of utensils used at a Filipino dining table is that of spoon and fork, not knife and fork. [12] 
 
   Boodle fight  in  Baler, Aurora 
 Kamayan  is also used in the " boodle fight " concept, a style of dining popularized by the  Philippine Army  which utilizes banana leaves spread out on the table as the main serving platter, upon which is laid out portions of rice and a variety of Filipino dishes for friendly, filial or communal feasting. The use of spoons and forks, however, is still the norm.
 
 Meals of the day [ edit ] 
   Tapsilog , a common breakfast meal 
 Filipinos traditionally eat three main meals a day:  almusal  or  agahan  (breakfast),  tanghalían  (lunch), and  hapunan  (dinner) plus morning and an afternoon snack called  meryenda  (also called  minandál  or  minindál ). [12] 
 A traditional Filipino breakfast ( almusal ) might include  pandesal  (small bread rolls),  kesong puti  (fresh, unripened, white Filipino cheese, traditionally made from carabao's milk)  champorado  (chocolate rice porridge),  silog  which is  sinangag  ( garlic fried rice ) or sinaing, with  fried egg  and meat—such as  tapa ,  longganisa ,  tocino ,  karne norte  (corned beef), or fish such as  daing na bangus   (salted and dried  milkfish )—or  itlog na pula  ( salted duck eggs ). Coffee is also commonly served particularly  kapeng barako , a variety of coffee produced in the mountains of Batangas noted for having a strong flavor.
 
   Fried tilapia 
 Certain  portmanteaus  in Filipino have come into use to describe popular combinations of items in a Filipino breakfast. An example of such a combination order is  kankamtuy : an order of  kan in  (rice),  kam atis  (tomatoes) and  tuy o  (dried fish). Another is  tapsi : an order of  tap a  and  si nangág  or  si naing . Other examples include variations using a  silog  suffix, usually some kind of meat served with  si nangág  or  si naing , and  it log  (egg). The three most commonly seen  silogs  are  tapsilog  (having  tapa  as the meat portion),  tocilog  (having tocino as the meat portion), and  longsilog  (having longganisa as the meat portion). Other  silogs  include  hotsilog  (with a  hot dog ),  bangsilog  (with  bangus  (milkfish) ),  dangsilog  (with  danggit  (rabbitfish) ),  spamsilog  (with  spam ),  adosilog  (with adobo),  chosilog  (with  chorizo ),  chiksilog  (with chicken),  cornsilog  (with  corned beef ), and  litsilog  (with  lechon/litson ).  Pankaplog  is slang for a breakfast consisting of  pandesal ,  kape  (coffee), and  itlog  (egg), it is also a double entendre meaning to fondle breasts. [13]  An establishment that specializes in such meals is called a  tapsihan  or  tapsilugan .
 A typical Filipino lunch ( tanghalian ) is composed of a food variant (or two for some) and rice, sometimes with soup. Whether grilled, stewed, or fried, rice is eaten with everything. Due to the tropical climate of the Philippines, the preference is to serve ice cold water, juices, or soft drinks with meals. [14] 
 Dinner, while still the main meal, is smaller than in other countries. [12]  Typical meals in a Filipino dinner are usually leftover meals from lunch. Filipino dinner is usually served in the time period between 6–8 pm, though dinner is served much more early in the countryside.
 
 Merienda [ edit ] 
   Puto  in banana leaf liners 
 Merienda  is taken from the Spanish, and is a light meal or snack especially in the afternoon, similar to the concept of afternoon  tea . [15]  If the meal is taken close to dinner, it is called  merienda cena , and may be served instead of dinner. [16] 
 Filipinos have a number of options to take with  kapé , which is the Filipino pronunciation of café ( coffee ): breads and pastries like  pandesal ,  ensaymada  (buttery  brioche  covered in grated cheese and sugar),  hopia  (pastries similar to  mooncakes  filled with  mung bean paste ) and  empanada  (savoury, meat-filled  pasties ). Also popular are  kakanín , or traditional pastries made from sticky rice like  kutsinta ,  sapin-sapin  (multicoloured, layered pastry),  palitaw ,  biko ,  suman ,  Bibingka , and  pitsi-pitsî  (served with desiccated coconut).
 
   Ube halaya ,  sapin-sapin ,  kalamay ,  suman , and various other  kakanin 
 Savoury dishes often eaten during  merienda  include  pancit  canton  (stir-fried noodles),  palabok  (rice noodles with a shrimp-based sauce),  tokwa't baboy  (fried tofu with boiled pork ears in a garlic-flavored soy sauce and vinegar dressing), and  dinuguan  (a spicy stew made of pork blood), which is often served with  puto  (steamed rice flour cakes).
 Dim sum  and dumplings, brought to the islands by  Fujianese migrants , have been given a Filipino touch and are also popular  merienda  fare. Street food, such as  squid  balls and fish balls, are often skewered on  bamboo  sticks and consumed with soy sauce and the sour juice of the  calamondin  as condiments.
 
 Pulutan [ edit ] 
   Kapampangan  sisig 
 Pulutan [17]  (from the Filipino word  pulot  which literally means "to pick up") is a term roughly analogous to the English term "finger food" or Spanish  Tapas . Originally, it was a snack accompanied with liquor or beer but has found its way into Filipino cuisine as  appetizers  or, in some cases, main dishes, as in the case of  sisig .
 Deep fried  pulutan  include  chicharon  (less commonly spelled  tsitsaron ),  pork rinds  that have been boiled and then twice fried, the second frying gives the crunchiness and golden color;  chicharong bituka , pig intestines that have been deep fried to a crisp;  chicharong bulaklak , similar to  chicharong bituka  it is made from  mesenteries  of pig intestines and has an appearance roughly resembling a flower, hence the  bulaklak  name; and  chicharong manok , chicken skin that has been deep  fried  until crisp. Other examples of deep fried pulutan are crispy crablets, crispy frog legs,  chicharong isda  or fish skin cracklings, and  tugnas  or deep fried pork fat (also known as  pinaigi ).
 
   Bagnet  from  Ilocos Norte 
 Examples of grilled foods include:  isaw,  or chicken or pig intestines  skewered  and then grilled;  Inihaw na tenga , pig ears that have been  skewered  and then grilled;  pork barbecue,  skewered pork  marinated  in a sweet soy-garlic blend and then grilled;  betamax , salted solidified pork or chicken blood which is then skewered and lightly grilled;  adidas  which is  grilled  or  sautéed  chicken feet. There is also  sisig , a popular  pulutan  made from the pig's cheek skin, ears, and liver that is initially boiled, then charcoal grilled and afterwards minced and cooked with chopped onions, chillies, and spices.
 
   Crispy crablets 
 Smaller snacks such as  mani  ( peanuts ) are often sold steamed in the shell, salted, spiced, or flavored with garlic by street vendors in the Philippines. Another snack is  kropeck , which is fish crackers.
 Tokwa't baboy  is fried  tofu  with boiled pork marinated in a garlic-flavored  soy sauce  or vinegar dip. It is also served as a side dish to  pancit luglog  or  pancit palabok .
 Also, " tuhog-tuhog" is  accompanied by  sweet  or  spicy sauce.  This includes  Fish balls , Kikiam, Squid balls, etc.,  these are commonly served during a small gathering or in local bars.
 
 Fiesta food [ edit ] 
   Lechón being roasted in  Cadiz, Negros Occidental 
 For festive occasions, people band together and prepare more sophisticated dishes. Tables are often laden with expensive and labor-intensive treats requiring hours of preparation. In Filipino celebrations,  lechon  (less commonly spelled  litson ) [18]  serves as the centerpiece of the dinner table. It is usually a whole roasted pig, but suckling pigs ( lechonillo , or  lechon de leche ) or cattle calves ( lechong baka ) can also be prepared in place of the popular adult pig. It is typically served with  lechon  sauce, which is traditionally made from the roasted pig's liver. Other dishes include  hamonado  (honey-cured beef, pork or chicken),  relleno  (stuffed chicken or milkfish),  mechado ,  afritada ,  caldereta ,  puchero ,  paella ,  menudo ,  morcon ,  embutido  (referring to a meatloaf dish, not a sausage as understood elsewhere),  suman  (a savory rice and  coconut milk  concoction steamed in leaves such as banana), and  pancit  canton . The table may also have various sweets and pastries such as  leche flan ,  ube ,  sapin-sapin ,  sorbetes  (ice creams),  totong  or  sinukmani  (a rice, coconut milk and mongo bean pudding),  ginataan  (a coconut milk pudding with various root vegetables and  tapioca pearls ), and  gulaman  (an  agar   jello-like ingredient or dessert ).
 Christmas Eve, known as  Noche Buena , is the most important feast. During this evening, the star of the table is the Christmas  ham  and  Edam cheese  ( queso de bola ). Supermarkets are laden with these treats during the Christmas season and are popular giveaways by Filipino companies in addition to red wine, brandy, groceries, or pastries. Available mostly during the Christmas season and sold in front of churches along with  bibingka ,  puto bumbong  is purple colored ground sticky rice steamed vertically in small bamboo tubes.
 More common at celebrations than in everyday home meals,  lumpiang sariwa , or  fresh lumpia , is a fresh spring roll that consists of a soft crepe wrapped around a filling that can include strips of  kamote  (sweet potato),  singkamas  ( jicama ), bean sprouts, green beans, cabbage, carrots and meat (often pork). It can be served warm or cold and typically with a sweet peanut and garlic sauce.  Ukoy  is shredded papaya combined with small shrimp (and occasionally bean sprouts) and fried to make shrimp patties. It is often eaten with vinegar seasoned with garlic, salt and pepper. Both  lumpiang sariwa  and  ukoy  are often served together in Filipino parties.  Lumpiang sariwa  has  Chinese  origins, having been derived from  popiah . [19] 
 
 Staples [ edit ] 
 Further information:  List of Philippine dishes 
   Rice  is a  staple food  in Filipino cuisine 
 As in most Asian countries, the staple food in the Philippines is  rice . [20]  It is most often steamed and always served with meat, fish and vegetable dishes. Leftover rice is often fried with garlic to make  sinangag , which is usually served at breakfast together with a fried egg and  cured meat  or sausages. Rice is often enjoyed with the sauce or broth from the main dishes. In some regions, rice is mixed with salt, condensed milk, cocoa, or coffee. Rice flour is used in making sweets, cakes and other pastries. Sticky rice with cocoa, also called  champorado  is also a common dish served with  daing  (dried herring).
 Rice and coconuts as staples throughout the archipelago as in the rest of Southeast Asia meant similar or adopted dishes and methods based on these crops. Some of these are evident in the infusion of  coconut milk  particularly in the renowned  laing  and  sinilihan  (popularized as  Bicol Express ) of Bikol. Other regional variants of stews or soups commonly tagged as  ginataan (g)  or "with coconut milk" also abound Filipino kitchens and food establishments. A dish from the  Visayas  simmered in coconut water, ideally in bamboo, is the  binakol  usually with chicken as the main ingredient.
 
   Philippine chicken curry with its popular coconut milk sauce 
 A variety of  fruits  and  vegetables  are often used in cooking.  Plantains  (also called  saba  in Filipino),  kalamansi ,  guavas  ( bayabas ),  mangoes ,  papayas , and  pineapples  lend a distinctly tropical flair in many dishes, but mainstay green leafy vegetables like water spinach ( kangkong ), Chinese cabbage ( petsay ), Napa cabbage ( petsay wombok ), cabbage ( repolyo ) and other vegetables like eggplants ( talong ) and yard-long beans ( sitaw ) are just as commonly used.  Coconuts  are ubiquitous. Coconut meat is often used in desserts,  coconut milk  ( kakang gata ) in sauces, and  coconut oil  for frying. Abundant harvests of root crops like potatoes, carrots,  taro  ( gabi ),  cassava  ( kamoteng kahoy ), purple yam ( ube ), and  sweet potato  ( kamote ) make them readily available. The combination of tomatoes ( kamatis ), garlic ( bawang ), and onions ( sibuyas ) is found in many dishes.
 
   Sisig 
 Meat staples include  chicken ,  pork ,  beef , and  fish .  Seafood  is popular as a result of the bodies of water surrounding the archipelago. Popular catches include  tilapia ,  catfish  ( hito ),  milkfish  ( bangus ),  grouper  ( lapu-lapu ),  shrimp  ( hipon ), prawns ( sugpo ),  mackerel  ( galunggong ,  hasa-hasa ), swordfish ( isdang-ispada ), oysters ( talaba ),  mussels  ( tahong ),  clams  ( halaan  and  tulya ), large and small  crabs  ( alimango  and  alimasag  respectively),  game fish , sablefish, tuna,  cod  ( bakalaw ),  blue marlin , and  squid / cuttlefish  (both called  pusit ). Also popular are  seaweeds  ( damong dagat ),  abalone , and  eel  ( igat ).
 
   Leche flan 
 The most common way of having fish is to have it salted, pan-fried or deep-fried, and then eaten as a simple meal with rice and vegetables. It may also be cooked in a sour broth of tomatoes or  tamarind  as in  pangat , prepared with vegetables and a souring agent to make  sinigang , simmered in vinegar and peppers to make  paksiw , or roasted over hot charcoal or wood ( inihaw ). Other preparations include  escabeche  (sweet and sour),  relleno  (deboned and stuffed), or " kinilaw " (similar to ceviche; marinated in vinegar or  kalamansi ). Fish can be preserved by being smoked ( tinapa ) or sun-dried ( tuyo  or  daing ).
 Food is often served with various  dipping sauces . Fried food is often dipped either in  vinegar  with onions,  soy sauce  with juice squeezed from  Kalamansi  (Philippine lime or  calamansi ).  Patis  ( fish sauce ) may be mixed with  kalamansi  as dipping sauce for most seafood or mixed with a stew called  nilaga .  Fish sauce , fish paste ( bagoong ),  shrimp paste  ( bagoong alamang ) and crushed  ginger  root ( luya ) are  condiments  that are often added to dishes during the cooking process or when served.
 
 Main dishes [ edit ] 
 This section  needs additional citations for  verification .  Please help  improve this article  by  adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.   ( April 2016 )  ( Learn how and when to remove this template message ) 
   Kare-kare 
 Adobo  is one of the most popular Filipino dishes and is considered unofficially by many as the national dish. It usually consists of pork or chicken, sometimes both, stewed or braised in a sauce usually made from vinegar, cooking oil, garlic, bay leaf, peppercorns, and soy sauce. It can also be prepared "dry" by cooking out the liquid and concentrating the flavor.  Bistek , also known as "Filipino beef steak," consists of thinly sliced beef marinated in  soy sauce  and calamansi and then fried in a skillet that is typically served with onions.
 Some well-known stews are  kare-kare  and  dinuguan . In  kare-kare , also known as "peanut stew",  oxtail  or ox  tripe  is the main ingredient and is cooked with vegetables in a peanut-based preparation. It is typically served with  bagoong  (fermented  shrimp paste ). In  dinuguan , pig's blood, entrails, and meat are cooked with vinegar and seasoned with chili peppers, usually  siling mahaba .
 
   Crispy pata 
   Pork  adobo 
 Paksiw  refers to different vinegar-based stews that differ greatly from one another based on the type of meat used.  Paksiw na isda  uses fish and usually includes the addition of ginger, fish sauce, and maybe  siling mahaba  and vegetables.  Paksiw na baboy  is a  paksiw  using pork, usually pork hocks, and often sees the addition of sugar, banana blossoms, and water so that the meat is stewed in a sweet sauce. A similar Visayan dish called  humba  adds fermented black beans. [ citation needed ]  Both dishes are probably related to  pata tim  which is of Chinese origin.  Paksiw na lechon  is made from  lechon  meat and features the addition of ground liver or liver spread. This adds flavor and thickens the sauce so that it starts to caramelize around the meat by the time dish is finished cooking. Although some versions of  paksiw  dishes are made using the same basic ingredients as  adobo , they are prepared differently, with other ingredients added and the proportions of ingredients and water being different.
 In  crispy pata ,  pork  knuckles (known as  pata ) are marinated in garlic-flavored vinegar then deep fried until crisp and golden brown, with other parts of the pork leg prepared in the same way.  Lechon manok  is the Filipino take on  rotisserie  chicken. Available in many hole-in-the-wall stands or restaurant chains (e.g. Andok's, Baliwag, Toto's, Sr. Pedro's, G.S. Pagtakhan's), it is typically a specially seasoned chicken roasted over a charcoal flame served with " sarsa " or  lechon  sauce made from mashed pork liver, starch, sugar, and spices.
 
   Dinuguan , a pork blood stew with  siling haba 
   Bistek Tagalog , strips of sirloin beef slowly cooked in soy sauce, calamansi juice, and onions 
   Sinigang na hipon  with  siling labuyo  (wild chili) 
   Tinola , a chicken soup notable as the dish mentioned in  José Rizal 's novel  Noli Me Tángere 
   Ensaladang Lato  or "Seaweed Salad" (also known as  Kinilaw na Guso  in  Cebuano ), a Filipino salad made from the edible green algae  Caulerpa lentillifera 
 Mechado ,  kaldereta , and  afritada  are Spanish influenced tomato sauce-based dishes that are somewhat similar to one another. In these dishes meat is cooked in tomato sauce, minced garlic, and onions.  Mechado  gets its name from the pork fat that is inserted in a slab of beef making it look like a wick ( mitsa ) coming out of a beef "candle". The larded meat is then cooked in a seasoned tomato sauce and later sliced and served with the sauce it was cooked in.  Kaldereta  can be beef but is also associated with goat. Chunks of meat are cooked in tomato sauce, minced garlic, chopped onions, peas, carrots, bell peppers and potatoes to make a stew with some recipes calling for the addition of soy sauce, fish sauce, vinegar, chilies, ground liver or some combination thereof.  Afritada  tends to be the name given to the dish when chicken and pork is used. Another similar dish said to originate from the Rizal area is  waknatoy . Pork or beef sirloin is combined with potatoes and cut sausages and cooked in a tomato-based sauce sweetened with pickles.  Puchero  is derived from the Spanish  cocido ; it is a sweeter stew that has beef and banana or plantain slices simmered in tomato sauce.
 Filipinos also eat  tocino  and  longganisa .  Tocino  is a sweetened cured meat made with either chicken or pork and is marinated and cured for a number of days before being fried.  Longganisa  is a sweet or spicy sausage, typically made from pork though other meats can also be used, and are often colored red traditionally through the use of the  annatto  seed but also artificial food coloring.
 Filipino soups tend to be very hearty and stew-like containing large chunks of meat and vegetables or noodles. They are usually intended to be filling and not meant to be a light preparatory introduction for the main course. They tend to be served with the rest of the meal and eaten with rice when they are not meals unto themselves. They are often referred to on local menus under the heading  sabaw  (broth).  Sinigang  is a popular dish in this category distinguished by its sourness that often vies with  adobo  for consideration as the national dish. It is typically made with either pork, beef, chicken or seafood and made sour with tamarind or other suitable souring ingredients. Some seafood variants for example can be made sour by the use of  guava  fruit or  miso . Another dish is  tinola . It has large chicken pieces and green  papaya / sayote  slices cooked with chili, spinach, and  moringa  leaves in a ginger-flavored broth.  Nilagang baka  is a beef stew made with cabbages and other vegetables.  Binacol  is a warm chicken soup cooked with coconut water and served with strips of coconut meat.  La Paz  batchoy  is a noodle soup garnished with pork innards, crushed pork  cracklings , chopped vegetables, and topped with a raw egg. Another dish with the same name uses  misua , beef heart, kidneys and intestines, but does not contain eggs or vegetables.  Mami  is a  noodle soup  made from chicken, beef, pork, wonton dumplings, or intestines (called  laman-loob ).  Ma Mon Luk  was known for it. Another  chicken noodle soup  is  sotanghon , consisting of  cellophane noodles [21]  (also called  sotanghon  and from whence the name of the dish is derived), chicken, and sometimes mushrooms.
 
   Pancit luglug  topped with hardboiled eggs, shrimp, and  chorizo 
 Noodle dishes are generally called  pancit .  Pancit  recipes primarily consist of noodles, vegetables, and slices of meat or shrimp with variations often distinguished by the type of noodles used. Some  pancit , such as  mami  and La Paz-styled  batchoy , are noodle soups while the "dry" varieties are comparable to  chow mein  in preparation. Then there is spaghetti or  ispageti  in the local parlance that is a modified version of  spaghetti bolognese . It is sometimes made with banana ketchup instead of tomato sauce, sweetened with sugar and topped with hot dog slices.
 There are several rice porridges that are popular in the Philippines. One is  arroz caldo , which is a rice porridge cooked with chicken, ginger and sometimes saffron, garnished with spring onions (chives), toasted garlic, and coconut milk to make a type of  gruel . Another variant is  goto  which is an  arroz caldo  made with ox  tripe . There is also another much different rice porridge called  champorado  which is sweet and flavored with chocolate and often served at breakfast paired with  tuyo  or  daing .
 Another rice-based dish is  arroz a la valenciana , [22]  a Spanish  paella  named after the Spanish region  Valencia  that has been incorporated into the local cuisine.  Bringhe  is a local rice dish with some similarities to paella but using glutinous rice, coconut milk, and turmeric.  Kiampong  a type of fried rice topped with pork pieces,  chives  and  peanuts . It can be found in Chinese restaurants in  Binondo  and  Manila .  Camaron rebosado con jamon  has been described as a classic dish in the Binondo district of Manila, the city's  Chinatown . [23] 
 For vegetarians, there is  dinengdeng , a dish consisting of  moringa  leaves ( malunggay ) and slices of  bittermelon . There is also  pinakbet , stewed vegetables heavily flavored with  bagoong . A type of seafood salad known as  kinilaw  is made up of raw seafood such as fish or shrimp cooked only by steeping in local vinegar, sometimes with coconut milk, onions, spices and other local ingredients. It is comparable to the Peruvian  ceviche .
 
 Side dishes [ edit ] 
   Atchara 
 Itlog na pula  (red eggs) are duck eggs that have been cured in brine or a mixture of clay-and-salt for a few weeks, making them salty. They are later hard boiled and dyed with red food coloring (hence the name) to distinguish them from chicken eggs before they are sold over the shelves. They are often served mixed in with diced tomatoes.  Atchara  is a side dish of pickled papaya strips similar to  sauerkraut . It's a frequent accompaniment to fried dishes like  tapa  or  daing .
 Nata de coco  is a chewy, translucent, jelly-like food product produced by the fermentation of coconut water [24]  can be served with  pandesal .  Kesong puti  is a soft white cheese made from  carabao  milk (although  cow  milk is also used in most commercial variants). Grated mature coconut ( niyog ), is normally served with sweet rice-based desserts.
 
 Bread and pastries [ edit ] 
   Sugar coated and cheese filled  ensaymada 
 In a typical Filipino bakery,  pandesal ,  monay  and  ensaymada  are often sold.  Pandesal  comes from the Spanish  pan de sal  (literally, bread of salt), and is a ubiquitous breakfast fare, normally eaten with (and sometimes even dipped in) coffee. [25]  It typically takes the form of a bread roll, and is usually baked covered in bread crumbs. Contrary to what its name implies,  pandesal  is not particularly salty as very little salt is used in baking it. [26]   Monay  is a firmer slightly denser heavier bread. [27]   Ensaymada , from the Spanish  ensaimada , is a pastry made using butter and often topped with sugar and shredded cheese that is especially popular during Christmas. [28] [29]  It is sometimes made with fillings such as  ube  (purple yam) and  macapuno  (a variety of coconut the meat of which is often cut into strings, sweetened, preserved, and served in desserts). Also commonly sold in Filipino bakeries is  pan de coco , a  sweet roll  filled with shredded coconut mixed with molasses. [30]   Putok  (also known in some localities as "star bread" or "pinagong"), which literally means "explode", refers to a small, hard bread roll whose cratered surface is glazed with sugar. [31]   Kababayan  (Filipino muffins) is a small, sweet gong-shaped muffin that has a moist consistency. [32]   Spanish bread  (nothing to do with the Spanish bread of Spain –  Pan de Horno ) refers to a rolled pastry which looks like a croissant prior to being given a crescent shape, and has a filling consisting of sugar and butter. [33] [34] 
 
   A large  bibingka  topped with grated coconut 
 There are also rolls like  pianono , which is a chiffon roll flavored with different fillings. [35]   Brazo de mercedes , a rolled cake or jelly roll, is made from a sheet of  meringue  rolled around a custard filling. [36]  Similar to the previous dessert, it takes on a layered presentation instead of being rolled and typically features caramelized sugar and nuts for  sans rival .  Silvañas  are large, oval-shaped, cookie-sized desserts, with a thin meringue on either side of a buttercream filling and dusted with crumbed cookies. [37] [38]  Not overly sweet, they are rich, crisp, chewy, and buttery all at the same time.  Barquillos  use sweet thin crunchy wafers rolled into tubes that can be sold hollow or filled with  polvoron  (sweetened and toasted flour mixed with ground nuts). [39] [40]   Meringues  are also present in the Philippines, due to the Spanish influence, but they are called  merengue  – with all the vowels pronounced.  Leche flan  is a type of caramel custard made with eggs and milk similar to the French  creme caramel .  Leche flan  (the local term for the original Spanish  flan de leche , literally "milk flan") is a heavier version of the Spanish flan made with condensed milk and more egg yolks.  Leche flan  is usually steamed over an open flame or stove top, although on rare occasions it can also be seen baked.  Leche flan  is a staple in celebratory feasts.
 A heavier version of  leche flan ,  tocino del cielo , is similar, but has significantly more egg yolks and sugar.
 
   Pandesal 
 The  egg pie  with a very rich egg custard filling is a mainstay in local bakeries. It is typically baked so that the exposed custard on top is browned.  Buko  pie  is made with a filling made from young coconut meat and dairy. Mini pastries like  turrones de casuy  are made up of cashew  marzipan  wrapped with a wafer made to resemble a candy wrapper but take on a miniature look of a pie in a size of about a  quarter . There is also  napoleones  – again with all the vowels pronounced – a  mille-feuille  pastry stuffed with a sweet milk-based filling.
 There are hard pastries like  biskotso  a crunchy, sweet, twice-baked bread. Another baked goody is  sinipit  which is a sweet pastry covered in a crunchy sugar glaze, made to resemble a length of rope. Similar to  sinipit  is a snack eaten on roadsides colloquially called  shingaling . It is hollow but crunchy with a salty flavor.
 
   An  icebox cake  version of  crema de fruta  made with cream, Graham crackers, condensed milk, and ripe mangoes 
 For a softer treat there is  mamon  a chiffon-type cake sprinkled with sugar, its name derived from a slang Spanish term for breast. There's also  crema de fruta , which is an elaborate sponge cake topped in succeeding layers of cream, custard, candied fruit, and gelatin. Similar to a sponge cake is  mamoncillo  which generally refers to slices taken from a large  mamon cake , but it is unrelated to the  fruit  of the same name. Sandwich pastries like  inipit  are made with two thin layers of chiffon sandwiching a filling of custard that is topped with butter and sugar. Another  mamon  variant is  mamon tostada , basically  mamoncillo  toasted to a crunchy texture.
 Stuffed pastries that reflect both Western and Eastern influence are common. One can find  empanadas , a turnover-type pastry filled with a savory-sweet meat filling. Typically filled with ground meat and raisins, it can be deep fried or baked.  Siopao  is the local version of Chinese  baozi .  Buchi  is another snack that is likely of Chinese origin. Bite-sized,  buchi  is made of deep-fried dough balls (often from rice flour) filled with a sweet mung bean paste, and coated on the outside with sesame seeds; some variants also have  ube  as the filling. There are also many varieties of the mooncake-like  hopia , which come in different shapes (from a flat, circular stuffed form, to cubes), and have different textures (predominantly using flaky pastry, but sometimes like the ones in  mooncakes ) and fillings.
 
 Cooking method [ edit ] 
   Tinapa ,  smoked fish 
 The  Filipino  words commonly used for cooking methods and terms are listed below: [41] 
 
 
 Adobo  ( inadobo ) − cooked in vinegar, oil, garlic and soy sauce. 
 Afritada  – braised in tomato sauce. 
 Babad  ( binabad ,  ibinabad ) − to marinate. 
 Banli  ( binanlian ,  pabanli ) − to blanch. 
 Bagoong  ( binagoongan ,  sa bagoong ) − fermented or cooked with fermented fish/shrimp paste ( bagoong ) 
 Bibingka  – baked cakes, traditionally  glutinous rice . 
 Binalot  – literally "wrapped". This generally refers to dishes wrapped in banana leaves, pandan leaves, or even aluminum foil. The wrapper is generally inedible (in contrast to  lumpia —see below). 
 Buro  ( binuro ) − fermented, pickled, or preserved in salt or vinegar. Synonymous with  tapay  in other Philippine languages when referring to fermented rice. 
 Daing  ( dinaing ,  padaing ) − salted and dried, usually fish or seafood. Synonymous with  tuyô ,  bulad  or  buwad  in other Philippine languages 
 Giniling  – ground meat. Sometimes used as a synonym for  picadillo , especially in  arroz a la cubana . 
 Guinataan  ( sa gata ) − cooked with coconut milk. 
 Guisa  ( guisado ,  ginuisa ) − sautéed with garlic and onions. Also spelled  gisa ,  gisado ,  ginisa . 
 Hamonado  ( endulsado ) – marinated or cooked in a sweet pineapple sauce. Sometimes synonymous with  pininyahan  or  minatamis 
 Halabos  ( hinalabos ) – mostly for shellfish. Steamed in their own juices and sometimes carbonated soda. 
 Halo-Halo  - made up of crushed ice, evaporated milk or condensed milk, and various ingredients including, ube, sweetened beans, coconut strips, sago (pearls), gulaman (gelatin), pinipig rice, boiled taro or soft yams in cubes, fruit slices, flan, and topped with a scoop of ube ice cream. 
 Hilaw  ( sariwa ) – unripe (for fruits and vegetables), raw (for meats). Also used for uncooked food in general (as in  lumpiang  sariwa ). 
 Hinurno  – baked in an oven ( pugon ) or roasted. 
 Ihaw  ( inihaw ) − grilled over coal. In Visayas, it is also known as  sinugba ;  inasal  refers to grilling meat on sticks. 
 Kinilaw  or  Kilawin  − fish or seafood marinated in  vinegar  or  calamansi  juice along with  garlic ,  onions ,  ginger ,  cucumber ,  peppers . Also means to eat raw or fresh, cognate of  Hilaw . 
 Lechon  ( nilechon ) − roasted on a spit. Also spelled  litson . 
 Lumpia  – savory food wrapped with an edible wrapper. 
 Minatamis  ( minatamisan ) − sweetened. Similar to  hamonado . 
 Nilaga  ( laga ,  palaga ) − boiled/braised. 
 Nilasing  − cooked with an alcoholic beverage like wine or beer. 
 Paksiw  ( pinaksiw ) − cooked in vinegar. 
 Pancit  ( pansit ,  fideo ) – noodle dishes, usually of  Chinese Filipino  origin. 
 Pangat  ( pinangat ) − boiled in salted water/brine with fruit such as tomatoes or ripe mangoes. 
 Palaman  ( pinalaman ,  pinalamanan ) − "filled" as in  siopao , though "palaman" also refers to the filling in a sandwich. 
 Pinakbet  ( pakbet ) − to cook with vegetables usually with  sitaw  ( yardlong beans ),  calabaza ,  talong  (eggplant), and  ampalaya  ( bitter melon ) among others and  bagoong . 
 Pinakuluan  – boiled. 
 Pininyahan  – marinated or cooked with pineapples. Sometimes synonymous with  hamonado . 
 Prito  ( pinirito ) − fried or deep fried. From the Spanish  frito . 
 Puto  – steamed cakes, traditionally glutinous rice. 
 Relleno  ( relyeno ) – stuffed. 
 Sarza  ( sarciado ) – cooked with a thick sauce. 
 Sinangag  – garlic fried rice. 
 Sisig  - is a traditional food of Filipino specially partnered with beer. It made by different parts of pig. 
 Sigang  ( sinigang ) − boiled in a sour broth usually with a  tamarind  base. Other common souring agents include  guava , raw  mangoes , calamansi also known as  calamondin . 
 Tapa  or  Tinapa  – dried and smoked.  Tapa  refers to meat treated in this manner, mostly marinated and then dried and fried afterwards.  Tinapa  meanwhile is almost exclusively associated with  smoked fish . 
 Tapay  – fermented with  yeast , usually rice, traditionally in  tapayan  jars. Synonymous with  buro  in early phases. Can also refer to various products of fermented rice, including  rice wines . A very briefly fermented glutinous rice version is known as  galapong , which is an essential ingredient in Filipino  kakanin  (rice cakes). Cognate of  tinapay  ( leavened   bread ). 
 Tosta  ( tinosta ,  tostado ) – toasted. 
 Torta  ( tinorta ,  patorta ) – in the northern Philippines, to cook with eggs in the manner of an  omelette . In the southern Philippines, a general term for a  small cake . 
 
 Beverages [ edit ] 
 Chilled drinks and shakes [ edit ] 
   A  taho  shake from  Quezon City 
   Calamansi  extract 
   Sago't gulaman  in Ilonggo style 
 Chilled drinks are popular due to the tropical climate. Stands selling cold fruit drinks and fruit shakes are common in many of the city areas, where some are based on  green mandarin orange  ( dalandan  or  dalanghita ),  pomelo  ( suha ),  pineapple  ( pinya ),  banana  ( saging ), and  soursop  ( guyabano ). The shakes usually contain crushed ice, evaporated or condensed milk, and fruits like  mango ,  avocado ,  cantaloupe ,  durian ,  papaya ,  strawberry  and  watermelon , to name a few.
 Other chilled drinks include  sago't gulaman,  a flavored ice drink of pre-Hispanic  Malay  origin (Malay:  gula melaka ) with  sago  and  agar   gelatin  with banana extract sometimes added to the accompanying syrup; fresh  buko  or  coconut juice , the water or juice straight out of a young  coconut  via an inserted straw, a less fresh variation of which is from bottled coconut juice, scraped coconut flesh, sugar, and water; and kalamansi juice, the juice of  kalamansi  or Philippine limes usually sweetened with honey, syrup or sugar.
 
 Brewed beverages [ edit ] 
 The Philippines is a predominantly coffee-drinking nation. One of the most popular variants of coffee coming from the mountains of  Batangas  is known as  kapeng barako . Another well-known variant of coffee is the  civet coffee . It is called  kape motit  in the Cordilleras,  kape alamid  in Tagalog region, and  kape musang  in Mindanao. The Kalinga coffee known for its organic production is also rapidly gaining popularity. Highlands coffee, or Benguet coffee, is a blend of Robusta and Excelsa beans. [42] 
 Even before the establishment of coffeehouses in the Philippines, coffee has been part of the Filipino meal. Carinderias would often serve them along with meals. The opening of  Starbucks  in 1997 paved the way for other  coffee shops . [43] 
 Tea  consumption in the Philippines is driven primarily by growing health consciousness amongst middle- to high-income consumers. [44]  Tea is commonly prepared using  Philippine wild tea  or  tea tree . [45]  There are several known variations of tea using different additives. Pandan iced tea is one of these, made with  pandan  leaves and  lemongrass  (locally known as  tanglad ).  Salabat , sometimes called ginger tea, is brewed from  ginger  root and usually served during the cold months, and when illnesses such as flu or sore throat strikes.
 The late 2010s saw the opening of teahouses in major cities, and with a glass of milk tea being more affordable than the usual cold designer coffee, it paved the way into making tea a well-known food trend. Notable teahouse chains in the Philippines are  Chatime  and  Serenitea . [46] 
 Tsokolate  is the Filipino style of hot chocolate. It is traditionally made with  tablea , which are pure cacao beans that are dried, roasted, ground and then formed into tablets. [47]  It is also popular during  Christmas season , particularly among children.
 
 Alcoholic beverages [ edit ] 
 Further information:  Beer in the Philippines  and  Philippine wine 
 There are a wide variety of alcoholic drinks in the Philippines manufactured by local breweries and distilleries.  Red Horse  is one of the most popular beer.
 
 Traditional drinks 
   A bubblegum-flavored  lambanog 
   A bottle of  tapuy  rice wine 
 Tuba  (toddy) is a type of hard liquor made from fresh drippings extracted from a cut young stem of palm. The cutting of the palm stem usually done early in the morning by a  mananguete , a person who climbs palm trees and extracts the  tuba  to supply to customers later in the day. The morning's accumulated palm juice or drippings are then harvested by noon, and brought to buyers then prepared for consumption. Sometimes this is done twice a day so that there are two harvests of  tuba  occurring first at noon-time and then in the late-afternoon. Normally,  tuba  has to be consumed right after the  mananguete  brings it over, or it becomes too sour to be consumed as a drink. Any remaining unconsumed  tuba  is then often stored in jars to ferment for several days and become palm vinegar.  Tuba  can be distilled to produce  lambanog  (arrack), a neutral liquor often noted for its relatively high alcohol content.
 Lambanog is an alcoholic beverage commonly described as coconut wine or coconut vodka. The drink is distilled from the sap of the unopened coconut flower, and is known for its potency and high alcohol content (80 and 90 proof). Most of the Lambanog distilleries are in the Quezon province of Luzon, Philippines. Constant efforts at standardizing lambanog production has led to its better quality. Presently, lambanog is being exported to other countries and continues to win foreign customers over due to its natural ingredients as well as its potency.
 Tapuy  is a traditional Philippine alcoholic drink made from fermented  glutinous rice . It is a clear wine of luxurious alcoholic taste, moderate sweetness and lingering finish. Its average alcohol content is 14% or 28 proof, and it does not contain any preservatives or sugar. To increase the awareness of  tapuy , the  Philippine Rice Research Institute  has created a cookbook containing recipes and cocktails from famous Filipino chefs and bartenders, featuring  tapuy  as one of the ingredients.
 
 Modern drinks 
 Beer  or  serbesa  (from the Spanish "cerveza") is the most widely available alcoholic drink in the Philippines.  San Miguel Pale Pilsen  is the most popular and widely sold brand. Together with associated San Miguel beer brands such as San Mig Light and Gold Eagle Beer the company holds an aggregate market share of 92.7%. [48]  Beer na Beer produced by local conglomerate  Asia Brewery  is another widely sold pale Pilsner style beer. Asia Brewery also produces under license and distributes a number of other mass market beers such as Colt 45, Asahi Super Dry, Heineken and Tiger Beer. Other beer labels include  Red Horse Beer , Lone Star, Lone Star Light, Lone Star Ultra, Carlsberg, Coors Light, San Miguel Superdry, San Mig Strong Ice, and just recently, Manila Beer. Echoing trends in international markets, bars in urban areas have also begun to serve locally produced and imported craft beers in a variety of styles.
 Rum  is often associated with  Tanduay .
 Several  gins , both local varieties like  Ginebra San Miguel  (as well as GSM Blue and GSM Premium Gin) and imported brands like  Gilbey's , are commonly found. Some people refer to gin by the shape of the bottle:  bilog  for a circular bottle and  kwatro kantos  (literally meaning four corners) for a square or rectangular bottle. Gin is sometimes combined with other ingredients to come up with variations.
 
 Desserts [ edit ] 
 Further information:  List of Philippine desserts 
   A  suman  with  latik  syrup 
   A woman selling  puto bumbong  at the  Nagcarlan  Public Market in  Laguna province 
   Shakoy  (also known as  lubid-lubid ), a doughnut variant from the Visayas 
 As the Philippines is a tropical country, many desserts made from rice and coconuts. One often seen dessert is  bibingka , a hot  rice cake  optionally topped with a pat of butter, slices of  kesong puti  (white cheese),  itlog na maalat  (salted duck eggs), and sometimes grated coconut. There are also glutinous rice sweets called  biko  made with sugar, butter, and coconut milk. In addition, there is a dessert known as  bitsu-bitsu,  also known as a Pinoy donut, made with fried rice flour which is then coated with Muscovado sugar syrup. There is also Karioka, made from glutinous rice flour, coconut, and coconut milk, fried and skewered and slathered with a brown sugar glaze. Another brown  rice cake  is  kutsinta .
 Puto  is another well-known example of sweet steamed rice cakes prepared in many different sizes and colors.  Sapin-sapin  (sapin means layer) are three-layered, tri-colored sweets made with rice flour, purple yam, and coconut milk characterized by its gelatinous appearance.  Palitaw  are rice patties that are covered with sesame seeds, sugar, and coconut;  pitsi-pitsi  which are  cassava  patties coated with cheese or coconut; and  tibok-tibok  is based on carabao milk as a de leche (similar to  maja blanca ). As a snack,  Binatog  is created with corn kernels with shredded coconut. Packaged snacks wrapped in banana or palm leaves then steamed,  suman  are made from sticky rice.
For cold desserts there is  halo-halo  which can be described as a dessert made with shaved ice, milk, and sugar with additional ingredients like coconut,  ube halaya  (mashed purple yam) or  ube ice cream , "leche flan" or caramel custard,  plantains ,  jackfruit , red beans,  tapioca  and  pinipig  being typical. Some of the Philippines' largest restaurant chains, such as  Kuya J , have dedicated dessert menus filled with many traditional Filipino desserts. [ citation needed ] 
 Other similar treats made with shaved ice include  saba con yelo  which is shaved ice served with milk and  minatamis na saging  (ripe plantains chopped and caramelized with brown sugar);  mais con yelo  which is shaved ice served with steamed corn kernels, sugar, and milk; and  buko pandan  sweetened grated strips of coconut with gulaman, milk, and the juice or extract from pandan leaves.  Sorbetes  (ice cream) is popular, as well, with some local versions utilizing coconut milk instead of cow milk.  Ice candy , are popular frozen snacks usually made from  fruit juice ,  chocolate  or local ingredients such as  mung beans  and  ube . It can be any kind of flavor depending on the maker; chocolate and  buko  (coconut) flavored ice candy are two of the most popular. Another dessert, often served during Christmas and New Year's Eve, is  mango float , [49]  a dessert composed of  Graham cracker , mangoes, cream and milk, and created by layering them together in a dish and then refrigerating or blast chilling.
 
 Regional dishes [ edit ] 
   Sapin-sapin , a sweet Filipino rice-based delicacy similar to  mochi 
   Filipino cuisine prepared in  Baliuag, Bulacan 
 The Philippine islands are home to various ethnic groups resulting in varied regional cuisines.
 
 Luzon [ edit ] 
 Ilocanos  from the mountainous  Ilocos Region  commonly have diets heavy in boiled or steamed vegetables and freshwater fish, and they are particularly fond of dishes flavored with  bagoong , fermented fish that is often used as a substitute for salt. Ilocanos often season boiled vegetables with  bagoong monamon  (fermented anchovy paste) to produce  pinakbet . Local specialties include the soft white larvae of ants and "jumping salad" of tiny live shrimp.
 The  Igorot  prefer roasted meats, particularly  carabao  meat, goat meat, and  venison .
 Due to its mild, sub-tropical climate,  Baguio , along with the outlying mountainous regions, is renowned for its produce. Temperate-zone fruits and vegetables ( strawberries  being a notable example) which would otherwise wilt in lower regions are grown there. It is also known for a snack called  sundot-kulangot  which literally means "poke the booger." It is a sticky kind of sweet made from milled glutinous rice flour mixed with molasses, and served inside  pitogo  shells, and with a stick to "poke" its sticky substance with.
 Isabela  is known for Pancit Cabagan of  Cabagan , Inatata & Binallay of  Ilagan City  are rice cakes prepared year-round in the city and both famous delicacies specially during the lenten season.  Cagayan  for its famous  Carabao  Milk Candy in the town  Alcala  and  Tuguegarao City  for Pancit Batil Patung and Buko Roll.
 The town of  Calasiao  in Pangasinan is known for its  puto , a type of steamed rice cake.
 Kapampangan cuisine  makes use of all the produce in the region available to the native cook. Among the treats produced in  Pampanga  are  longganisa  (original sweet and spicy sausages),  calderetang kambing  (savory goat stew), and  tocino  (sweetened cured pork). Combining pork cheeks and offal, Kapampangans make  sisig .
 The cuisine of the  Tagalog people  varies by province.  Bulacan  is popular for  Chicharrón  ( pork rinds ) and steamed rice and tuber cakes like  puto . It is a center for  panghimagas  or desserts, like brown  rice cake  or  kutsinta ,  sapin-sapin ,  suman ,  cassava  cake,  ube halaya  and the king of sweets, in  San Miguel ,  Bulacan , the famous  carabao  milk  candy   pastillas de leche , with its  pabalat  wrapper. [50]   Cainta , in  Rizal  province east of  Manila , is known for its Filipino  rice cakes  and puddings. These are usually topped with  latik , a mixture of coconut milk and brown sugar, reduced to a dry crumbly texture. A more modern, and time saving alternative to  latik  are coconut flakes toasted in a frying pan.  Antipolo , straddled mid-level in the mountainous regions of the Philippine  Sierra Madre , is a town known for its  suman  and cashew products.  Laguna  is known for  buko pie  (coconut pie) and  panutsa  (peanut brittle).  Batangas  is home to  Taal Lake , a body of water that surrounds  Taal Volcano . The lake is home to 75 species of freshwater fish, including landlocked marine species that have since adapted to the Taal lake environment. Eight of these species are of high commercial value. These include a population of  giant trevally  locally known as  maliputo  which is distinguished from their marine counterparts which are known as  talakitok . [51]  Another commercially important species is the  tawilis , the only known freshwater  sardine  and  endemic  to the lake.  Batangas  is also known for its special coffee,  kapeng barako .  Quezon , especially the town of  Lucban , is also known for its culinary dishes, with  Lucban longganisa , pancit habhab, and hardinera being the most notable. The influence of coconut milk dishes, such as laing (called  tinuto  in some places in Quezon) and sinantol, is also felt in the province because of its proximity to  Bicol .  Suman  is also a notable food in the province, especially in the town of  Infanta  and the city of  Tayabas , though having the same ingredients as the one in Antipolo, the things that makes Infanta and Tayabas suman unique is its packaging and size; Infanta's suman is smaller in size and is usually grouped into 20 per pack, while Tayabas' suman is also unique in packaging, with a long tail that makes it look like a lit candle, in connection to its tradition of throwing  suman  during the feast of the city's patron,  Isidore the Laborer .
 
   Sinilihan , popularly known as  Bicol Express , is a popular dish from Bicol 
 Bicol  is noted for its gastronomic appetite for the fiery or chili-hot dishes. [52]  Perhaps the most well-known Bicolano dish is the very spicy  Bicol Express . The region is also the well-known home of  natong  also known as  laing  or  pinangat  (pork or fish stew in  taro  leaves).
 
 Visayas [ edit ] 
   Piaya , one of the most popular delicacies of Bacolod 
 In Visayas, another souring agent in dishes in the form of  batuan  ( Garcinia binucao ) is used. It is a fruit that is greenish, yellowish, somewhat rounded, and four centimeters or more in diameter. They have a firm outer covering and contain a very acid pulp and several seeds. [53] 
 Tultul, a type of rock salt, is another ingredient made only in  Guimaras , where it is sprinkled on cooked rice to serve as a side dish. The salt is an assortment of reeds, twigs and small pieces of bamboo carried to the shore by the sea tide where they have been soaked in seawater for some time and is then burned in large quantities while continually being doused with salt water on a daily basis. The ashes then is strained continuously by  kaings  and are then cooked in pans.
 Bacolod  is the capital of Negros Occidental. There are a plethora of restaurants in Bacolod that serve delicious local dishes which are popular with visitors. [54]  It is known for  inasal  which literally translates to "cooked over fire". The "chicken  inasal " is a local version of chicken barbecue. It is cooked with red achuete or annatto seeds giving it a reddish color, and brushed with oil and cooked over the fire. The city is also famous for various delicacies such as  piaya ,  napoleones  and  pinasugbo  (deep-fried and caramelled banana sprinkled with sesame seeds).
 Leyte  is home to  Binagol ,  Carabao Milk  Pastillas ,  Suman Latik  and  Moron (food) .  Taclobanon  cuisine is made unique by the wide use of  kinagod  (grated coconut) and  hatok  (coconut milk). It is common to find  hinatokan  (dishes integrated in coconut milk) dishes in the city.  Humba  is said to have originated from the province since the taste in the region's cuisine distinctly has a slightly sweeter taste than the rest of the country. Because Leyte borders the sea, it is common to find multiple seafood dishes in the province.  Masag  (crab),  tilang  (scallops) and  pasayan  (shrimp) are common sea food in the region. Waray taste varies, allowing each family/ angkan  (clan) to create unique recipes. Other native delicacies from the province are  Roskas  (hard cookies made from lard, anise, flour, sugar, butter and eggs) and  Bukayo  (coconut strip candies).
 Aklan  is synonymous with  inubarang manok , chicken cooked with  ubad  (banana  pith ), as well as  binakol na manok , chicken cooked in  coconut water  with lemongrass. Of particular interest is  tamilok  ( shipworm ), which is either eaten raw or dipped in an acidic sauce such as vinegar or calamansi. [55] [56]  There is a special prevalence of chicken and coconut milk ( gata ) in Akeanon cooking. [57] 
 
   Batchoy , or "La Paz Batchoy", a Filipino noodle dish native to  La Paz district  in Iloilo 
 Iloilo  is home of the  batchoy , derived from "ba-chui" meaning pieces of meat in Hokkien Chinese. The authentic  batchoy  contains fresh egg noodles called  miki ,  buto-buto  broth slow-cooked for hours, and beef, pork and  bulalo  mixed with the local  guinamos  (shrimp paste). Toppings include generous amounts of fried garlic, crushed chicharon, scallions, slices of pork intestines and liver. [58]  Another type of  pancit  which is found in the said province is  pancit Molo , an adaptation of wonton soup and is a specialty of the town of  Molo , a well-known district in Iloilo. Unlike other pancit,  pancit Molo  is not dry but soupy and it does not make use of long, thin noodles but instead wonton wrappers made from rice flour. [59]  Iloilo is also famous for its two  kadios  or pigeon pea-based soups. The first is KBL or  kadios baboy langka . As the name implies, the three main ingredients of this dish are  kadyos ,  baboy  (pork), and  langka  (unripe jackfruit is used here). [60]  Another one is KMU or  kadios manok ubad . This dish is composed mainly of  kadyos ,  manok  (preferably free range chicken called  Bisaya nga manok  in Iloilo), and  ubad  (thinly cut white core of the banana stalk/trunk). Both of these dishes utilize another Ilonggo ingredient as a souring agent. This ingredient is  batwan , [61]  or  Garcinia binucao , [62]  a fruit closely related to mangosteen, which is very popular in  Western Visayas  and neighbouring  Negros Island , but is generally unknown to other parts of the Philippines. [63] 
 Roxas City  is another food destination in Western Visayas aside from Iloilo City and Kalibo. This coastal city, about two to three hours by bus from Iloilo City, prides itself as the "Seafood Capital of the Philippines" due to its bountiful rivers, estuaries and seas. Numerous seafood dishes are served in the city's Baybay area such as mussels, oysters, scallops, prawns, seaweeds, clams, fishes and many more.
 Cebu  is known for its  lechón  variant. Lechon prepared "Cebu style" is characterized by a crisp outer skin and a moist juicy meat with a unique taste given by a blend of spices. Cebu is also known for sweets like dried  mangoes  and caramel tarts.
 In  Bohol ,  kalamay  is popular. In  Palawan , crocodile meat is boiled, cured, and turned into  tocinos . In  Romblon , a specialty dish is pounded and flavored shrimp meat and rice cooked inside banana leaves.
 
 Mindanao [ edit ] 
   The  Southern Philippine  dish  Satti , served with  Ta'mu  rice cakes 
   Ginanggang , a snack food made of grilled  saba banana  with margarine and sugar 
 In  Mindanao , the southern part of  Palawan  island,  Sulu  and  Tawi-Tawi , dishes are richly flavored with the spices common to  Southeast Asia :  turmeric ,  coriander ,  lemon grass ,  cumin , and chillies—ingredients not commonly used in the rest of Philippine cooking. The cuisine of the indigenous ethnolinguistic nations who are either  Christian ,  Muslim  or  Lumad  peoples of  Mindanao  and the  Sulu archipelago  has much in common with the rich and spice-paste centric  Malay cuisines  of  Malaysia  and  Brunei , as well as  Indonesian  and  Thai  cuisine, and other Southeast Asian cuisines. Mindanaoan cuisine represents the cultural achievements of prehispanic Philippine cuisine in other most parts of the country immediately prior to Spanish colonization between in the late 16th to early 17th centuries. Hints of similar dishes and flavors can also found in the Bicol region and the Cordilleras, which still prefer a coconut and spice-paste rich palate similar to Mindanao.
 Well-known Mindanao and Sulu dishes include  Satti  (satay) and  ginataang manok  (chicken cooked in spiced coconut milk). Certain parts of Mindanao are predominantly  Muslim , where pork is rarely consumed, and lamb, mutton, goat and beef are the main red meats of choice.
 Rendang , is an often spicy beef curry whose origins derive from the  Minangkabau  people of  Sumatra ;  biryani ,  kulma , and  kiyoning  (pilaf) are dishes originally from the  Indian subcontinent  , that were given a Mindanaoan touch and served on special occasions.
 Piyanggang manok  is a Tausug dish made from barbecued chicken marinated in spices, and served with coconut milk infused with toasted coconut meat.
 Chupá Culo  &  Curacha con Gatâ  are examples of a Zamboangueño dishes made from shells cooked with coconut milk and crab with sauce blended in coconut milk with spices, respectively. There are other known Zamboangueño dishes and delicacy like  Estofado ,  Sicalañg ,  Alfajor ,  Endulzao ,  Tamal ,  Paella ,  Arroz a la Valenciana ,  Rebosao ,  Toron , and more.
 Popular crops such as  cassava root ,  sweet potatoes , and  yams  are grown.
 Sambal , a spicy sauce made with  belacan ,  tamarind , aromatic spices and chilies, is a popular base of many dishes in the region.
 Palapa , is a popular condiment unique to, and widely used in, Maranao and Maguindanaon cuisines, and consists of a base of shredded old coconut, sakurab (a variant of  green onion ), ginger, chillies, salt, pepper, and turmeric.
 Another popular dish from this region is  tiyula itum , a dark broth of beef or chicken lightly flavored with ginger, chili, turmeric, and toasted coconut flesh (which gives it its dark color).
 Lamaw  (Buko salad), is a mixture of young coconut, its juice, milk or orange juice, with ice.
 
 Street food and snacks [ edit ] 
   An example of street foods in  Manila 
   A  hawker  selling fish balls in  Angeles City ,  Pampanga 
 Aside from pastries and desserts, there are heartier snacks for  merienda  that can also serve as either an appetizer or side dish for a meal.  Siomai  is the local version  of Chinese  shaomai . 
 Lumpia  are spring rolls that can be either fresh or fried. Fresh  lumpia  ( lumpiang sariwa ) is usually made for fiestas or special occasions as it can be labor-intensive to prepare, while one version of fried  lumpia  ( lumpiang prito ),  lumpiang shanghai  is usually filled with ground pork and a combination of vegetables, and served with a sweet and sour dipping sauce. [64]  Other variations are filled with minced pork and shrimp and accompanied by a vinegar-based dipping sauce.  Lumpia  has been commercialized in  frozen food  form. Also, one of the common street food would be the  Beef Pares  in Manila. While Middle-Eastern food such as the  Shawarma  became popular in the Philippines in the late 1980s.
 There's a distinct range of  street foods  available in the Philippines. Some of these are skewered on sticks in the manner of a  kebab . One such example is  banana-cue  which is a whole  banana  or  plantain  skewered on a short thin bamboo stick, rolled in brown sugar, and pan-fried.  Kamote-cue  is a peeled  sweet potato  skewered on a stick, covered in brown sugar and then pan-fried.  Fish balls  or  squid balls  including  Calamares  are also pan-fried, then skewered on bamboo sticks and given to the customer, who then has a choice of dipping in a sweet or savory sauce. These are commonly sold frozen in markets and peddled by  street vendors . One of the more common habit of street vendors in  Metro Manila  carry out or yell the phrase, "Hopia, Mani, Popcorn at Vicks..".
 Turon , a kind of  lumpia  consisting of an eggroll or  phyllo  wrapper commonly filled with sliced  plantain  and occasionally  jackfruit , is fried and sprinkled with sugar.
 
   A  magtataho  (taho vendor) in  Vigan 
 Taho  is a warm treat made of soft  beancurd  which is the  taho  itself, dark caramel syrup called  arnibal , and  tapioca  pearls. It is often sold in neighborhoods by street vendors who yell out " taho! " in a manner like that of vendors in the stands at sporting events yelling out "hotdogs" or "peanuts". Sometimes,  taho  is served chilled, and flavors have recently been added, such as chocolate or strawberry.  Taho  is derived from the original  Chinese  snack food known as  douhua .
 There is also  iskrambol  (from the English "to scramble"), a kind of iced-based treat similar to a sorbet. The shaved ice is combined with various flavorings and usually topped with chocolate syrup. It is eaten by "scrambling" the contents or mixing them, then drinking with a large straw. It was later modified into  ice scramble , or simply  scramble , but with added skim milk, chocolate or strawberry syrup, and a choice of toppings such as  marshmallows , chocolate or candy sprinkles, rice crispies, or tapioca pearls.
 
   Balut 
 Street food featuring eggs include  kwek-kwek  which are hard-boiled quail eggs dipped in orange-dyed batter and then deep fried similar to  tempura .  Tokneneng  is a larger version of  kwek-kwek  using chicken or duck eggs. Another Filipino egg snack is  balut , essentially a boiled pre-hatched poultry egg, usually duck or chicken. These fertilized eggs are allowed to develop until the embryo reaches a pre-determined size and are then boiled. They are consumed, usually along with vinegar and salt. [65]  There is also another egg item called  penoy,  which is basically hard-boiled unfertilized duck eggs that does not contain embryo. Like  taho ,  balut  is advertised by street hawkers calling out their product.
 Okoy,  also spelled as  ukoy,  is another batter-covered, deep-fried street food in the Philippines. Along with the batter, it normally includes bean sprouts, shredded pumpkin and very small shrimps, shells and all. It is commonly dipped in a combination of vinegar and chilli.
 Among other street food are already mentioned  pulutan  like  isaw , seasoned hog or chicken intestines skewered onto a stick and grilled;  betamax , roasted dried chicken blood cut into and served as small cubes, from which it received its name due to its crude resemblance to a  Betamax  tape;  Adidas , grilled chicken feet named after the popular shoe brand; and  proven , the  proventriculus  of a chicken coated in cornstarch and deep-fried. Fries made from  sweet potatoes  have also been dubbed "Pinoy fries". Most street foods are usually found near certain schools and universities, one example would be at Metro Manila's  University Belt .
 In addition to the Availability of the 24/7 burgers stands such as  Burger Machine  (nicknamed "the burger that never sleeps"), Angel's Burger, Franks N' Burgers and Minute Burger across the country.
 Pagpag  is  leftover  food from restaurants (usually from  fast-food  restaurants) scavenged from  garbage  sites and dumps, [66]  Pagpag food can also be expired frozen meat, fish, or vegetables discarded by supermarkets and scavenged in garbage trucks where this expired food is collected. [67]  eaten by the people suffering from the extreme  poverty in the Philippines . Selling pagpag was a profitable business in areas where poor people live. [68]  Pagpag is basically more often than not food collected by homeless individuals in day's end from various fastfood local restaurants in the Philippines. [69] 
 
 Exotic dishes [ edit ] 
   A Tata Itong restaurant in  San Miguel, Bulacan  known for serving Filipino exotic dishes including Soup No. 5 and  papaitan 
 Some exotic dishes in the Filipino diet are  camaro , which are field crickets cooked in  soy sauce , salt, and vinegar, and is popular in  Pampanga ;  papaitan,  which is a stew made of goat or beef innards flavored with bile that gives it its characteristic bitter ( pait ) taste;  Soup No. 5  (Also spelled as "Soup #5") which is a soup made out of  bull 's  testes , [70] [71]  and can be found in restaurants in Ongpin St.,  Binondo , Manila; and  pinikpikan  na manok  that involves having a chicken beaten to death to  tenderize  the meat and to infuse it with blood. It is then burned in fire to remove its feathers then boiled with salt and itag (salt/smoke cured pork). [72]  The act of beating the chicken in preparation of the dish violates the Philippine Animal Welfare Act of 1998. [73] 
 
 Foreign influences [ edit ] 
 Spanish influences [ edit ] 
 This section is empty.   You can help by  adding to it .   ( February 2023 ) 
 Chinese influences [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Filipino Chinese cuisine 
 American influences [ edit ] 
 This section is empty.   You can help by  adding to it .   ( February 2023 ) 
 Indian influences [ edit ] 
 
 
 Further information:  History of Indian cuisine 
   Filipino chicken curry , a variant of the native  ginataang manok  with  curry powder 
 Indian influences can also be noted in rice-based delicacies such as  bibingka  (analogous to the Indonesian  bingka ),  puto , and  puto bumbong , where the latter two are plausibly derived from the  south Indian   puttu , which also has variants throughout  Maritime Southeast Asia  (e.g.  kue putu ,  putu mangkok ). The  kare-kare , more popular in Luzon, on the other hand could trace its origins from the  Seven Years' War  when the  British occupied Manila  from 1762 to 1764 with a force that included Indian  sepoys , who had to improvise Indian dishes given the lack of spices in the Philippines to make  curry . This is said to explain the name and its supposed thick, yellow-to-orange  annatto  and peanut-based sauce, which alludes to a type of curry. [74] 
 Atchara  originated from the  Indian   achar , which was transmitted via the  acar  of the  Indonesia ,  Malaysia , and  Brunei . [75] [76] 
 
 Japanese influences [ edit ] 
   Halo-halo made in  San Diego County , California 
 Some authors specifically attribute  halo-halo  to the 1920s or 1930s  Japanese migrants  in the  Quinta Market  of  Quiapo, Manila , due to its proximity to the  Insular Ice Plant , which was Quiapo's main ice supply. [77] 
 One of the earliest versions of  halo-halo  was a dessert known locally as  mongo-ya  in  Japanese  which consisted of only  mung beans  ( Tagalog :  monggo  or  munggo , used in place of red  azuki beans  from Japan), boiled and cooked in syrup ( minatamis na monggo ), served on top of crushed ice with milk and sugar. Over time, more native ingredients were added, resulting in the creation and development of the modern  halo-halo . One difference between  halo-halo  and its Japanese ancestor is the placement of ingredients mostly under the ice instead of on top of it. The original  monggo con hielo  type can still be found today along with similar variations using  sweet corn  ( maiz con hielo ) or  saba   bananas  ( saba con hielo ). [78] [79] 
 
   Odong with sardines 
 The name of  odong , a  Visayan   noodle soup , is derived from the  Japanese   udon  noodles, although it does not use  udon  noodles or bear any resemblance to  udon  dishes. It originates from the  Davao Region  of  Mindanao  and the  Visayas Islands  which had a large Japanese migrant community in the early 1900s. The  odong  noodles were previously locally manufactured by  Okinawans , but modern  odong  noodles (which are distinctly yellowish) are imported from  China . [80] 
 
 Arab influences [ edit ] 
 
 
 Further information:  Arabic cuisine  and  Maritime history of India 
 The Arab influence on Filipino cuisine is relatively minor. Historically, Arab influence arrived via India to Indonesia and the Philippines. In the earlier days, Arabs traded with Indians, who in turn traded with Southeast Asia. In the later era, with advancement of sea navigation, Arabs also started to trade directly with the Philippines. 
 
 Outside the Philippines [ edit ] 
 United States [ edit ] 
 Filipino-American cuisine was first brought over to and developed in the United States by  Filipino immigrants  in the early twentieth century, creating a distinct style of culinary traditions that were adapted to both the local availability of ingredients as well as American tastes.
 Many Filipino-owned restaurants and catering services can be found in various Filipino communities, also known as " Little Manilas" , located all throughout the United States, primarily concentrated within densely populated cities like Los Angeles and New York City. Many family-owned and chef-owned restaurants in these communities introduced many staple dishes found in the Philippines to the United States, such as  inihaw na liempo ,  lumpiang shanghai ,  adobo  and  kare-kare . [81] 
 Some modern Filipino-American restaurants have taken these traditional dishes and further adapted them for American tastes through variations in ingredients, preparation, and presentation with restaurants like Bad Saint in Washington D.C., Maharlika in New York, and Lasa in Los Angeles gaining mass popularity and praise for their speciality dishes. [82]  Cendrillion, opened in 1995 by Amy Besa and Romy Dorotan in New York, is seen as one of the first breakthrough Filipino-American restaurants that popularized Filipino cuisine with innovative, novel meals such as an adobo made with rabbit and quail or a  crème brûlée  flavored with ginger and lemongrass. [81] [83] 
 Tom Cunanan , a  James Beard award -winning Filipino-American chef and founder of Bad Saint, [84]  also opened a restaurant named Pogiboy that further combines American and Filipino cuisine by serving dishes such as sinigang-flavored  fried chicken  and  longganisa  and  tocino -filled  hamburgers . [85] [86]  Another restaurant, Señor Sisig, located in the San Francisco area, serves an innovative combination of Filipino and Mexican food through brick-and-mortar restaurants and food trucks. By combining traditional Filipino ingredients and flavor profiles with Mexican dishes like burritos and nachos, Evan Kidera, one of the co-founders of Señor Sisig hopes to better introduce Filipino cuisine to the United States by fusing it with a more familiar cuisine to better suit American palates. [87]  Some of these Filipino-American restaurants such as Barkada, Jeepney, Pogiboy and Maharlika have also introduced the  kamayan  feast to American diners, a traditional way of eating a variety of Filipino dishes served communal-style using ones hands. [86] [88] 
 Popular Filipino restaurant chains such as  Jollibee  have also established themselves in the United States, subsequently developing a rapidly-growing fanbase and social media presence. [89]  Jollibee, a Filipino fast-food chain well known for their American-influenced food items such as fried chicken and hamburgers, currently has sixty-four franchises in the country with plans to open one hundred and fifty stores within the next five years. [90]  The chain also serves Filipino dishes like  pancit palabok , halo-halo, and an American-inspired peach-mango pie. [89]  Other restaurant chains such as Chowking, a Filipino-Chinese inspired fast-food chain, and Red Ribbon, a bakery serving Filipino desserts and baked goods have also opened up a smaller amount of various locations within the United States. [91] 
 Ube , a purple yam traditionally used in many Filipino foods and desserts, has also seen a surge in popularity in the United States as a cooking ingredient in recent years. [92]  Traditionally served in desserts such as  ube halaya  or  halo-halo , it can be seen served in a variety of American restaurants and foods (typically desserts) including waffles, coffee cakes, cupcakes, and in doughnuts as well. [92] [93]  Ube has also seen popularity as a flavor of beer in American breweries in the states of California and Hawaii. [94]   Trader Joe's , an American grocery store chain, also sells ube-flavored ice cream, pancake mix, and shortbread cookies. [95] 
 
 See also [ edit ] 
 
 Food portal Philippines portal 
 List of Philippine desserts 
 List of Philippine dishes 
 List of restaurant chains in the Philippines 
 Philippine condiments 
 Filipino-American cuisine 
 Indonesian cuisine 
 Thai cuisine 
 References [ edit ] 
 
 
 ^   Alejandro, Reynaldo (1985).  The Philippine cookbook . New York, New York: Penguin. pp. 12–14.  ISBN   978-0-399-51144-8 . Retrieved  June 30,  2011 . Civitello, Linda (2011).  Cuisine and Culture: A History of cavalo and People . John Wiley and Sons. p. 263.  ISBN   978-1-118-09875-2 . Retrieved  June 30,  2011 .  Just as Filipino people are part Malay, Chinese and Spanish, so is the cuisine of their seven-thousand-island nation Philippines Country Study Guide . Int'l Business Publications. 2007. p. 111.  ISBN   978-1-4330-3970-6 . Retrieved  June 30,  2011 .  Throughout the centuries, the islands have incorporated the cuisine of the early Malay settlers, Arab and Chinese traders, and Spanish and American colonizers along with other Oriental and Occidental accent and flavours. "Philippine Cuisine."   Archived  June 16, 2011, at the  Wayback Machine   Balitapinoy.net   Archived  July 23, 2011, at the  Wayback Machine . Accessed July 2011. Morgolis, Jason (February 6, 2014).  "Why is it so hard to find a good Filipino restaurant?" .  Public Radio International . Retrieved  December 17,  2014 .  Philippine food has Chinese, Malaysian, Spanish and American influences—all cultures that have shaped the Philippines. 
 
 ^  a   b   c   "CNN poll: Philippines has world's 2nd best food" .  The Philippine Star . June 16, 2015. Archived from  the original  on October 6, 2016 . Retrieved  April 7,  2016 . 
 
 ^   Manguin, Pierre-Yves (2016).  "Austronesian Shipping in the Indian Ocean: From Outrigger Boats to Trading Ships" .  In Campbell, Gwyn (ed.).  Early Exchange between Africa and the Wider Indian Ocean World . Palgrave Macmillan. pp. 51–76.  ISBN   9783319338224 . 
 
 ^   Wu, David Y.H.; Cheung, Sidney C.H. (2002),  The globalization of Chinese food , Curzon 
 
 ^   Knuuttila, Kyle. (c. 2006).  Rice in the Philippines   Archived  July 3, 2011, at the  Wayback Machine . Retrieved October 3, 2010, from the Center for Southeast Asian Studies, Northern Illinois University. 
 
 ^   Lantrip, Brandon Chase (December 15, 2017).  "The Chinese Cultural Influence on Filipino Cuisine" .  Asian History Commons . 
 
 ^   "Filipino Recipes Collection by Pinoy Recipe at iba pa. (2007)" . Retrieved  December 2,  2009 . 
 
 ^   Goyan Kittler, Pamela; Sucher, Kathryn (2007).  Food and Culture .  Cengage Learning . p. 384.  ISBN   9780495115410 . Retrieved  July 18,  2012 . 
 
 ^   "Calamansi Facts - iTi Tropicals, Inc" . Archived from  the original  on June 20, 2015 . Retrieved  June 20,  2015 . 
 
 ^   "History of Kinilaw" . Retrieved  April 7,  2016 . 
 
 ^   "What are Pili Nuts?" .  Pili Nuts . Archived from  the original  on March 22, 2016 . Retrieved  April 7,  2016 . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   "Philippines – Eating Habits & Hospitality" . The Global Gourmet. Archived from  the original  on June 24, 2011 . Retrieved  November 21,  2006 . 
 
 ^   "Pakaplog" . Pinoy Slang. Archived from  the original  on December 5, 2008 . Retrieved  November 12,  2008 . 
 
 ^   "What do Filipinos usually eat?" .  Tips & Guides . Retrieved  November 23,  2020 . 
 
 ^   Francia, L. (1997).  Passport Philippines: Your Pocket Guide to Filipino Business, Customs & Etiquette . Passport to the world. World Trade Press. p.  86 .  ISBN   978-1-885073-40-2 . 
 
 ^   Davidson, A.; Jaine, T. (2014).  The Oxford Companion to Food . Oxford Companions. OUP Oxford. p. 514.  ISBN   978-0-19-104072-6 . 
 
 ^   "Philippines: Bizarre Foods with Andrew Zimmern" . Archived from  the original  on August 27, 2007 . Retrieved  July 16,  2007 . 
 
 ^   Vicky B. Bartlet (December 17, 2011).  "Palmonas: Make 'buko' juice as national drink" .  Business Mirror . Archived from  the original  on January 10, 2012 . Retrieved  January 26,  2012 . 
 
 ^   Abby (November 28, 2012).  "Lumpiang Shanghai (Filipino Spring Rolls)" .  Manila Spoon . 
 
 ^   "Rice in the Philippines" . International Rice Research Institute. Archived from  the original  on February 4, 2013 . Retrieved  March 19,  2013 . 
 
 ^   Alejandro, R.G.; Tettoni, L.I. (2015).  Food of the Philippines . Periplus Editions. p. 53.  ISBN   978-1-4629-0545-4 . 
 
 ^   Ku, R.J.S. (2013).  Eating Asian America: A Food Studies Reader . NYU Press. p. 150.  ISBN   978-1-4798-1023-9 . 
 
 ^   Perez, Irene C. (February 16, 2012).  "Camaron Rebosado con Jamon and other 'mestizong Intsik' favorites" .  Philippine Daily Inquirer . Retrieved  April 7,  2016 . 
 
 ^   Sanchez, P.C. (2008).  Philippine Fermented Foods: Principles and Technology . University of the Philippines Press. p. 378.  ISBN   978-971-542-554-4 . 
 
 ^   "Philippines: Pan De Sal (Pandesal)" .  196 flavors . April 12, 2019 . Retrieved  February 27,  2020 . 
 
 ^   Shah, Khushbu (February 16, 2016).  "How Pandesal Became a Filipino Breakfast Staple" .  Eater . Retrieved  February 27,  2020 . 
 
 ^   "Filipino Monay Bread Recipe!" .  Kusina Master Recipes . November 25, 2014 . Retrieved  February 27,  2020 . 
 
 ^   Tan, Yvette (December 5, 2017).  "From Mallorca to Manila: How a Spanish Pastry Became a Filipino Favorite" .  spot.ph . Retrieved  February 27,  2020 . 
 
 ^   "Ensaymada | Filipino Snack" .  Tagalog Lang . January 1, 2020 . Retrieved  February 27,  2020 . 
 
 ^   "Pan de Coco" .  kawaling pinoy . April 16, 2018 . Retrieved  February 27,  2020 . 
 
 ^   Sison, Jainey (January 15, 2019).  "Star Bread (Putok)" .  Mama's Guide Recipes . Retrieved  February 27,  2020 . 
 
 ^   Sison, Jainey (June 30, 2017).  "Kababayan Bread" .  Mama's Guide Recipes . Retrieved  February 27,  2020 . 
 
 ^   Bebs (February 3, 2017).  "Filipino Spanish Bread Recipe" .  Foxy Folksy . Retrieved  February 27,  2020 . 
 
 ^   "Spanish Bread Recipe – Filipino Recipes from Lutong Filipino" .  Lutong Filipino . June 5, 2015 . Retrieved  February 27,  2020 . 
 
 ^   "Pianono (Filipino Sponge Cake Roll)" .  kawaling pinoy . April 23, 2018 . Retrieved  February 27,  2020 . 
 
 ^   Bebs (May 1, 2016).  "Brazo de Mercedes" .  Foxy Folksy . Retrieved  February 27,  2020 . 
 
 ^   "Silvanas" .  kawaling pinoy . April 13, 2019 . Retrieved  February 27,  2020 . 
 
 ^   "Sylvana Recipe" .  Filipino Dessert Recipes by PingDesserts.com . June 4, 2013 . Retrieved  February 27,  2020 . 
 
 ^   "Filipino Snack: Barkilyos (Philippine Barquillos)" .  TAGALOG LANG . September 2, 2019 . Retrieved  February 27,  2020 . 
 
 ^   "Barquillos And Barquiron: Spanish-Inspired Ilonggo Snacks That Filipinos Love" .  Choose Philippines . Retrieved  February 27,  2020 . 
 
 ^   Polistico, Edgie (2017).  Philippine Food, Cooking, & Dining Dictionary . Anvil Publishing, Incorporated.  ISBN   9786214200870 . 
 
 ^   "Garcia's Pure Coffee" . Garcia's Kape, Tinapay Atbp. Archived from  the original  on May 2, 2013 . Retrieved  March 21,  2013 . 
 
 ^   "Home" .  Starbucks Coffee Company . 
 
 ^   "Tea in the Philippines" . euromonitor.com. 
 
 ^   "Philippine Medicinal Plants – Tsaang Gubat" . www.stuartexchange.com. 
 
 ^   Consunji, Bianca (May 20, 2011).  "The Mad Tea Party" . Inquirer. 
 
 ^   "dotPH domains available portal" .  tablea.com.ph . Archived from  the original  on June 12, 2011 . Retrieved  March 22,  2013 . 
 
 ^   Ong, Henry (September 11, 2018).  "Financial Advisor" . Entrepreneur Philippines . Retrieved  October 6,  2018 . 
 
 ^   Elizabeth Ann Quirino (December 16, 2014).  "Have Filipino food, will travel" .  Philippine Daily Inquirer . Retrieved  December 21,  2014 . 
 
 ^   "100% Pinoy: Pinoy Panghimagas" . (July 4, 2008). [Online video clip.] GMA News. Retrieved December 13, 2009. 
 
 ^   Alaira, Sofia A.; Rebancos, Carmelita M. (2014).  "Maliputo ( Caranx ignobilis  Foorskal) fish cage farming practices among selected operators in Taal Lake, Batangas, Philippines"   (PDF) .  Journal of Nature Studies .  13  (2): 25–40. 
 
 ^   "Bicol Native Cuisine" .  Camarines Sur Provincial Government . Archived from  the original  on June 28, 2013. 
 
 ^   "For resource id Ilonggo's "batuan" fruit undergoes DNA barcoding" .  philstar.com . Archived from  the original  on September 25, 2015 . Retrieved  April 7,  2016 . 
 
 ^   "Foods You Shouldn't Miss When Visiting Bacolod" .  Islands of the Philippines . Retrieved  June 26,  2013 . 
 
 ^   "Adventurous in Aklan: A 'Biyahe ni Drew' itinerary" .  GMA News Online . Retrieved  April 7,  2016 . 
 
 ^   " "Tamilok" (shipworm) now a tourism lure in Aklan" .  balita.ph – Online Filipino News . Retrieved  April 7,  2016 . 
 
 ^   "Ateneo Students Go Food Tripping in Kalibo" .  Ateneo de Manila University . Archived from  the original  on June 27, 2015 . Retrieved  April 7,  2016 . 
 
 ^   Diaz, Anton (January 25, 2013).  "Ilo-ilo Food Trip" .  Our Awesome Planet . Retrieved  June 27,  2013 . 
 
 ^   ABS-CBN Corp.  "A Big Warm Bowl of Flavorful Molo" .  Choose Philippines . Retrieved  April 7,  2016 . 
 
 ^   "Kadyo Baboy Langka Recipe" . Retrieved  April 7,  2016 . 
 
 ^   "Top 6 Health Benefits of Batwan Fruit" . Retrieved  December 18,  2017 . 
 
 ^   "Batuan Fruit is the Best" . Retrieved  December 16,  2017 . 
 
 ^   "Bureau of Agricultural Research Chronicle" . 
 
 ^   Besa, Amy & Romy Dorotan. (2006).  Memories of Philippine Kitchens . Stewart, Tabori & Chang.  ISBN   1-58479-451-8 . 
 
 ^   Magat, Margaret (2002).  "Balut: "Fertilized Duck Eggs and Their Role in Filipino Culture" " .  Western States Folklore Society .  61  (1): 63–96.  doi : 10.2307/1500289 .  JSTOR   1500289  – via JSTOR. 
 
 ^   " 'Garbage chicken' a grim staple for Manila's poor" .  CNN . May 30, 2012 . Retrieved  September 4,  2014 . 
 
 ^   "Sarbey hinggil sa Sosyo-ekonomikong Kalagayan at Pamumuhay ng mga Kababaihan sa Ilang Piling Maralitang Komunidad sa Bansa"   (PDF) .  Philippine Commission on Women  (in Tagalog) . Retrieved  June 13,  2016 . 
 
 ^   Cruz, Gen (June 22, 2015).  "Pagpag: A thriving business" .  CNN Philippines . Retrieved  June 13,  2016 . 
 
 ^   "Archdiocese of Manila achieves Zero Waste Management; prevents 'PAGPAG' eating by waste pickers by Romulo S. Arsenio, Ph.D."   Archdiocese of Manila . Retrieved  June 13,  2016 . 
 
 ^   "Bizarre food with Andrew Zimmern – Philippines" . Retrieved  July 16,  2007 . 
 
 ^   Sutherland, Matthew. (February 6, 2000).  "All a matter of taste" .  The Filipino Express . Retrieved October 3, 2010 from www.tingog.com. 
 
 ^   Fenix, Mickey. (June 7, 2006).  "Ringside view of pinikpikan process" .  The Philippine Daily Inquirer . Archived from  the original  on March 18, 2012 . Retrieved  December 14,  2009 . 
 
 ^   Republic of the Philippines.  "The Animal Welfare Act of 1998" . Retrieved  December 4,  2006 .  In all the above mentioned cases, including those of cattle, pigs, goats, sheep, poultry, rabbits, carabaos, horses, deer and crocodiles the killing of the animals shall be done through humane procedures at all times. 
 
 ^   Bhandari, Shirin (October 17, 2019).  "The Curry Trail: The Roots of Indian Flavours in the Philippines" .  Culture Trip . 
 
 ^   "Pickles Throughout History" . Retrieved  February 15,  2018 . 
 
 ^   "A Brief History Of The Humble Indian Pickle" . theculturetrip.com. July 20, 2016 . Retrieved  November 28,  2016 . 
 
 ^   Crisol, Christine (2006). "A  Halo-Halo  Menu".  In Zialcita, Fernando N. (ed.).  Quiapo: Heart of Manila . Manila: Quiapo Printing. p. 321.  ISBN   978-971-93673-0-7 .  Today, many non-Quiapense informants in their forties and older associate the Quinta Market with this dessert. Why did this market become important in the invention of this dessert? Aside from its being a Japanese legacy in the area [...] of all the city markets, the Quinta was closest to the  ice . 
 
 ^   Ocampo, Ambeth R.  (August 30, 2012).  "Japanese origins of the Philippine 'halo-halo' " .  Philippine Daily Inquirer . Retrieved  April 23,  2019 . 
 
 ^   "Halo-Halo Graham Float Recipe" .  Pinoy Recipe at Iba Pa . July 24, 2019 . Retrieved  July 24,  2019 . 
 
 ^   Figueroa, Antonio V. (September 12, 2016).  "US, Japan linguistic legacies" .  Edge Davao . No. 142. p. 9 . Retrieved  January 18,  2022 . 
 
 ^  a   b   "How Filipino Food is Becoming the Next Great American Cuisine" .  Vogue . June 1, 2017 . Retrieved  October 16,  2022 . 
 
 ^   Mishan, Ligaya (March 12, 2018).  "Filipino Food Finds a Place in the American Mainstream" .  The New York Times .  ISSN   0362-4331 . Retrieved  October 16,  2022 . 
 
 ^   "A New Generation of Filipino American Chefs is Finding Joy and Community in Cooking Their Heritage" .  Food & Wine . Retrieved  October 16,  2022 . 
 
 ^   Visaya, Momar G. (May 8, 2019).  "Bad Saint's Tom Cunanan wins 'Best Chef' at James Beard Awards —" .  Asian Journal News . Retrieved  October 16,  2022 . 
 
 ^   Hiatt, Gabe (January 27, 2021).  "The Original Chefs From Bad Saint Open the Fil-Am Fast Food Counter of Their Dreams" .  Eater DC . Retrieved  October 16,  2022 . 
 
 ^  a   b   Claridge, Laurann (May 4, 2022).  "Two James Beard Winners Team Up at Filipino Restaurant In POST Houston Food Hall — Soy Pinoy Ups Its Game" .  PaperCity Magazine . Retrieved  October 16,  2022 . 
 
 ^   Davis, Chelsea.  "Filipino-American Cuisine Pioneer Señor Sisig Expands And Continues To Innovate A Decade Later" .  Forbes . Retrieved  October 16,  2022 . 
 
 ^   "Filipino Food Has a Lot to Gain As It Builds Traction in the United States" .  www.vice.com . Retrieved  October 16,  2022 . 
 
 ^  a   b   Berger, Sarah.  "Why everyone is obsessed with Jollibee fast food — from its sweet spaghetti to fried chicken better than KFC" .  CNBC . Retrieved  October 16,  2022 . 
 
 ^   "Jollibee to build more stores in US, Canada" .  ABS-CBN News . November 19, 2018 . Retrieved  October 12,  2022 . 
 
 ^   Dumlao-Abadilla, Doris (December 16, 2021).  "Chowking enters US East Coast with first store in New Jersey" .  INQUIRER.net . Retrieved  October 16,  2022 . 
 
 ^  a   b   Zhang, Megan.  "Ube: The Filipino tuber taking over the world" .  www.bbc.com . Retrieved  October 16,  2022 . 
 
 ^   Paler, Kyla (August 4, 2016).  "These U.S. restaurants are recognizing the awesomeness of ube" .  spot.ph . Retrieved  October 16,  2022 . 
 
 ^   Demmon, Beth (June 2, 2022).  "Is Ube, the Filipino Staple, the Next Trend in Beer?" .  VinePair . Retrieved  October 16,  2022 . 
 
 ^   "The Ube Craze at Trader Joe's Doesn't Have to End at the Grocery Chain" .  Thrillist . Retrieved  October 16,  2022 . 
 
 
 Further reading [ edit ] 
 
 Alcuaz, N.T. (2005).  Banana Leaves: Filipino Cooking and Much More . Victoria: Trafford.  ISBN   1-4120-5378-1 . Retrieved  December 12,  2009 . 
 Alejandro, Reynaldo. (1985).  The Philippine Cookbook . New York: Perigee Books. p. 13.  ISBN   0-399-51144-X . Retrieved  December 10,  2009 . 
 Aleson, Susana, Alice Gratil, Lota Ignacio, Mhila Baiyon, Gladys Moya, and Virginia Zarate. (1998).  Cocina Filipina  (in Spanish). Barcelona: Icaria.  ISBN   84-7426-358-1 . Retrieved  December 12,  2009 . {{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) 
 Arroyo, Patricia T. (1974).  The Science of Philippine food . Quezon City: Abaniko Enterprises. 
 Barreto, Glenda R. (2007).  Flavors of the Philippines – A Culinary Guide to the Best of the Islands . Manila: Anvil.  ISBN   978-971-27-1869-4 . 
 Barreto, Glenda R., Conrad Calalang, Margarita Fores, Myrna Segismundo, Jessie Sincioco, and Claude Tayag. (2008).  Kulinarya – A Guidebook to Philippine Cuisine   Archived  April 6, 2010, at the  Wayback Machine  (Michaela Fenix, Ed.). Manila: Asia Society.  ISBN   971-27-2108-6 . 
 Bernardino, Minnie. (September 27, 1990).  "Breakfast – 8 Places Off the Beaten-Egg Track – Ethnic fare: Breakfast is many things to many peoples, as L.A.'s restaurants prove. A sampling from the variety available to a.m. adventurers. – Filipino" .  Los Angeles Times . 
 Bayhon-Yrastorza, Caren. (December 16, 2010).  Recipe: Chicken relleno for Noche Buena . ABS-CBN News. Retrieved December 24, 2010. 
 Classic, fail-safe 'Noche Buena' recipes . (December 24, 2009). ABS-CBN News. Retrieved December 24, 2010. 
 Davidson, Alan  and Tom Jaine. (2006).  The Oxford Companion to Food  (2nd ed.). New York: Oxford University Press. pp.  600–601 .  ISBN   0-19-280681-5 . 
 Davidson, Alan.  (2003).  Seafood of South-East Asia: A Comprehensive Guide with Recipes  (2nd ed.). Ten Speed Press. pp. 279–295.  ISBN   1-58008-452-4 . Retrieved  December 14,  2009 . 
 DuJunco, Mercedes. (2006).  "Luzon, Philippines" .  In Sean Williams (ed.).  The Ethnomusicologists' Cookbook: Complete Meals from Around the World . New York: Routledge. p. 85.  ISBN   0-415-97818-1 . Retrieved  December 10,  2009 . 
 Fernandez, Doreen . (1988).  "Culture Ingested: On the Indigenization of Philippine Food" . In E.N. Alegre & D. G. Fernandez (Eds.)  Sarap: Essays on Philippine Food . Manila: Mr. & Ms. Publishing Company, Inc. Retrieved 2010-08-02. 
 Fernandez, Doreen.  (2000).  "What is Filipino Food?" .  In Reynaldo G. Alejandro (ed.).  Food of the Philippines . Boston: Periplus Editions. p. 7.  ISBN   962-593-245-3 . Retrieved  December 10,  2009 . 
 Gelle, Gerry G. (2008).  Filipino Cuisine: Recipes from the Islands  (3rd ed.). Museum of New Mexico Press.  ISBN   0-89013-513-4 . 
 Halili, Maria Christine N. (2004).  Philippine History . Rex Bookstore. pp. 42–50.  ISBN   971-23-3934-3 . Retrieved  February 2,  2011 . 
 International Business Publications, USA. (2008).  Philippines Country Study Guide  (4th ed.). Washington, D.C.: International Business Publications, USA. pp. 111–113.  ISBN   978-1-4330-3970-6 . Retrieved  December 12,  2009 .   {{ cite book }} :  |author=  has generic name ( help ) 
 Nolan, James L. (1996).  Philippines Business: The Portable Encyclopedia for Doing Business with the Philippines . San Rafael: World Trade Press. p. 143.  ISBN   1-885073-08-9 . Retrieved  December 10,  2009 . 
 Orosa, Maria Y. and Helen Orosa del Rosario. (1970).  Maria Y. Orosa, Her Life and Work  (Helen Orosa del Rosario, Ed.). [Quezon City:] R. P. Garcia Pub. Co. 
 Philippine Cuisine . (n.d.).  Tagalog at NIU . Retrieved 2011-01-17 from the Northern Illinois University, Center for Southeast Asian Studies, SEAsite Project. 
 Rodell, Paul A. (2002).  Culture and Customs of the Philippines . Westport: Greenwood. p.  102 .  ISBN   0-313-30415-7 . Retrieved  December 10,  2009 .  filipino cuisine. 
 Rowthorn, Chris & Greg Bloom. (2006).  Philippines  (9th ed.). Lonely Planet. p.  47 .  ISBN   1-74104-289-5 . Retrieved  December 10,  2009 .  filipino cuisine. 
 Sokolov, Raymond.  (1993).  Why We Eat What We Eat – How Columbus Changed the Way the World Eats . Simon & Schuster.  ISBN   0-671-79791-3 . 
 Solomon, Charmaine. (2002).  The Complete Asian Cookbook  (2nd ed.). Turtle Publishing. pp. 347–366.  ISBN   0-8048-3757-0 . Retrieved  December 14,  2009 . 
 Sta. Maria; Felice Prudente. (2006).  The Governor-General's Kitchen – Philippine Culinary Vignettes and Period Recipes – 1521–1935 . Manila: Anvil.  ISBN   971-27-1696-1 . 
 Zibart, Eve. (2001).  The Ethnic Food Lover's Companion: Understanding the Cuisines of the World . Menasha Ridge Press. pp. 266–280.  ISBN   0-89732-372-6 . Retrieved  December 14,  2009 . 
 Zibart, Eve. (September 8, 2000).  "Fare Minded – Sam's II: Philippine Soul Food" .  Washington Post . p. N.21 . Retrieved  March 12,  2010 . 
 
 External links [ edit ] 
 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons has media related to  Cuisine of the Philippines . 
 
 Filipino cuisine  at  Curlie 
 McGeown, Kate (September 12, 2012).  "Philippine chefs look to take national cuisine mainstream" .  BBC News . Retrieved  September 12,  2012 . 
 v t e   Filipino cuisine Main dishes 
 Adobo 
 Adobong kangkong 
 Afritada 
 Aligue fried rice 
 Arroz a la cubana 
 Arroz a la valenciana 
 Arroz caldo 
 Asado de carajay 
 Bagnet 
 Bagoong fried rice 
 Balao-balao 
 Balbacua 
 Balut 
 Batchoy Tagalog  (Batsoy) 
 Bicol Express  (Sinilihan) 
 Binagoongan 
 Binagoongang kangkong 
 Binakol 
 Binalot 
 Bistek 
 Biyaring 
 Bola-bola 
 Bopis 
 Bringhe 
 Bulalo 
 Burong isda 
 Burong mangga 
 Calamares 
 Camaron rebosado 
 Cansi 
 Carne frita 
 Carne norte guisado 
 Chicharon 
 Chori burger 
 Coconut burger 
 Crispy kangkóng 
 Crispy pata 
 Crispy tadyang ng baka 
 Curacha 
 Curacha Alavar 
 Daing 
 Decho 
 Dinakdakan  (Warek-Warek) 
 Dinengdeng 
 Dinuguan 
 Embutido 
 Escabeche 
 Everlasting 
 Filipino chicken curry 
 Fish balls 
 Ginataan 
 Ginataang ampalaya 
 Ginataang curacha 
 Ginataang hipon 
 Ginataang isda 
 Ginataang kalabasa 
 Ginataang kuhol 
 Ginataang labong 
 Ginataang langka 
 Ginataang manok 
 Ginataang sugpo 
 Ginataang ubod 
 Giniling 
 Ginisang kangkóng 
 Ginisang munggo 
 Gising-gising 
 Goto 
 Halabós 
 Hamonado 
 Hardinera 
 Humbà 
 Igado 
 Inasal 
 Inihaw  (Filipino barbecue) 
 Inubaran 
 Inulukan 
 Inun-unan 
 Isaw 
 Junay 
 Kadyos, baboy, kag langka 
 Kadyos, manok, kag ubad 
 Kaldereta 
 Kare-kare 
 Kiampong 
 Kikiam 
 Kilawin 
 Kinilnat 
 Kinilaw 
 Kulawo 
 Kuning 
 Kwek kwek 
 Laing  (Pinangat) 
 Lechon 
 Lechon kawali 
 Lechon manok 
 Linagpang 
 Linapay  (Tinamuk) 
 Linarang 
 Linat-an 
 Lugaw 
 Lumlom 
 Mechado 
 Menudo  (Ginamay) 
 Morcón 
 Nasing biringyi 
 Nilaga 
 Nilasing na hipon 
 Okoy 
 Paelya 
 Paklay 
 Paksiw 
 Papaitan 
 Pares 
 Pares kanto 
 Pastil 
 Pata tim 
 Piaparan 
 Picadillo 
 Pinakbet 
 Pinangat na isda 
 Pinatisan 
 Pinikpikan 
 Pininyahang hipon 
 Pininyahang manok 
 Pinsec frito 
 Piyanggang manok 
 Piutu 
 Poqui poqui 
 Pork asado 
 Proben 
 Pudpod 
 Pusô  (Tamu) 
 Putsero 
 Rendang 
 Ropa vieja 
 Sarsa na uyang 
 Sarsiado 
 Satti 
 Silog 
 Sinabawang corned beef 
 Sinabawang gulay 
 Sinampalukan 
 Sinangág 
 Sinanglay 
 Sinantolan 
 Sinigang 
 Sinigapuna 
 Shumai  (siomai) 
 Sisig 
 Sorol 
 Soup Number Five 
 Suam na mais 
 Talunan 
 Tapa 
 Tinapa 
 Tinapayan 
 Tinola 
 Tinumok 
 Tiyula itum 
 Tocino 
 Tokneneng 
 Tokwa’t baboy 
 Tortang carne norte 
 Tortang kalabasa 
 Tortang sardinas 
 Tortang talong 
 Tuslob buwa 
 Waknatoy 
 Noodles and pasta 
 Balbacua con misua 
 Batchoy 
 Batchoy Tagalog  (Batsoy) 
 Filipino spaghetti 
 Kinalas 
 Macaroni salad 
 Maki mi 
 Odong 
 Pancit 
 Pancit bihon 
 Pancit buko 
 Pancit canton 
 Pancit choca 
 Pancit estacion 
 Pancit lomi 
 Pancit luglug 
 Pancit Malabon 
 Pancit mami 
 Pancit miki 
 Pancit Molo 
 Pancit palabok 
 Pares mami 
 Sinigáng sa misô 
 Pancit sotanghon 
 Sopa de fideo 
 Sopas 
 Sausages 
 Alaminos longganisa 
 Baguio longganisa 
 Cabanatuan longganisa  (Batutay) 
 Calumpit longganisa 
 Chicken longganisa 
 Chorizo de Bilbao 
 Chorizo de Cebu 
 Chorizo de Macao 
 Chorizo Negrense 
 Chorizo pudpud 
 Fish longganisa 
 Guagua longganisa  (Candaba longganisa) 
 Guinobatan longganisa 
 Longganisa  (Chorizo) 
 Longganisang dugo 
 Lucban longganisa 
 Pampanga longganisa 
 Pinuneg 
 Tuguegarao longganisa 
 Vigan longganisa 
 Lumpia  and  turón 
 Daral 
 Dinamita 
 Lumpia 
 Lumpiang adobo 
 Lumpiang gulay 
 Lumpiang hubad 
 Lumpiang isda 
 Lumpiang keso 
 Lumpiang labong 
 Lumpiang prito 
 Lumpiang sariwa 
 Lumpiang Shanghai 
 Lumpiang singkamas 
 Lumpiang togue 
 Lumpiang ubod 
 Ngohiong 
 Turón 
 Vegetarian lumpia 
 Breads and pastries 
 Alfajor 
 Aparon 
 Apas 
 Asado roll 
 Banada 
 Barquillos 
 Barquiron 
 Belekoy 
 Bicho 
 Binangkal 
 Biscocho 
 Brazo de Mercedes 
 Broas 
 Buko pandan cake 
 Buko pie 
 Buñuelo 
 Camachile cookies 
 Caycay 
 Churro 
 Crema de Fruta 
 Egg pie 
 Empanada 
 Ensaymada 
 Flan cake 
 Galletas de bato 
 Galletas de patatas 
 Galletas del Carmen 
 Galletas pesquera  (Galyetas) 
 Hopia 
 Half-moon cookie 
 Inipit 
 Jacobina 
 Kinihad 
 Kumukunsi 
 Lengua de gato 
 Linga 
 Mamón 
 Mamón tostado 
 Mango cake 
 Mango float 
 Masa podrida 
 Napoleones 
 Ohaldre 
 Otap 
 Paciencia 
 Paborita 
 Pan de coco 
 Pan de monggo 
 Pan de monja  (Monáy) 
 Pan de regla 
 Pan de siosa  (Pan de leche) 
 Pandesal 
 Paowaw 
 Pastel de Camiguín 
 Pianono 
 Piaya 
 Pilipit 
 Pinagong 
 Polvorón 
 Puto mamón 
 Puto seco 
 Putok 
 Roscas 
 Rosquillo 
 Sans rival 
 Señorita bread  (Spanish bread) 
 Shakoy 
 Shing-a-ling 
 Silvana 
 Siopao 
 Taisan 
 Ube cake 
 Ube cheesecake 
 Ube crinkles 
 Ugoy-ugoy 
 Uraró  (Arrowroot cookies) 
 Waffle dog 
 Yema cake 
 Kakanin  (ricecakes) and other  desserts 
 Ampaw 
 Avocado and milk in ice  (Abukado lamaw) 
 Banana chips 
 Banana cue 
 Baye baye 
 Bibingka 
 Bibingkoy 
 Bilo-bilo 
 Binagol 
 Binaki 
 Binakle 
 Binatog 
 Binignit 
 Biko 
 Buko halo 
 Buko melon 
 Buko pandan 
 Buko salad 
 Camote cue 
 Camote halaya 
 Cascaron 
 Cassava cake 
 Champorado 
 Champóy 
 Coconut macaroon 
 Cornick 
 Daral 
 Dodol 
 Duman 
 Espasol 
 Ginanggang 
 Ginataang mais 
 Ginataang munggo 
 Ginataang saba 
 Guinomis 
 Halo-halo 
 Ice buko 
 Ice scramble 
 Kabkab  (Cassava cracker) 
 Kalamay 
 Kiamoy 
 Kiping 
 Kropek 
 Kutsinta 
 Lamaw 
 Leche flan 
 Lokot-lokot 
 Mache 
 Maíz con hielo 
 Maja blanca 
 Maruya 
 Masareal 
 Masi 
 Minatamis na saging 
 Moche 
 Morón 
 Nilupak  (Nilusak) 
 Palitaw 
 Panocha mani 
 Panyalam 
 Pastillas 
 Peanut Brittle 
 Pinasugbo  (Consilva) 
 Pinipig 
 Pitsi-pitsî 
 Pritong saging 
 Putli mandi 
 Puto 
 Puto bumbong 
 Puto maya 
 Queso ice cream 
 Saba con hielo 
 Salukara 
 Sampalok candy 
 Sapin-sapin 
 Sayongsong 
 Sorbetes 
 Suman 
 Taho 
 Tamales 
 Tibok-tibok 
 Tikoy 
 Tocino de cielo 
 Tupig 
 Turón 
 Turrón de casúy 
 Turrón de pili 
 Ube halaya 
 Ube ice cream 
 Ube macapuno 
 Yema 
 Condiments and ingredients 
 Agre dulce  (sweet and sour sauce) 
 Achuete 
 Asín tibuok 
 Atchara 
 Bagoong 
 Bagoong alamang 
 Bagoong monamon 
 Bagoong terong 
 Banana ketchup 
 Biasong 
 Bukayo 
 Burô  (tapay) 
 Calamansi 
 Cane vinegar 
 Coconut vinegar 
 Dayap 
 Dayok 
 Dungon 
 Galapóng 
 Gamet 
 Gatâ  (coconut milk) 
 Giniling 
 Gulaman 
 Gusô 
 Kakang gatâ  (coconut cream) 
 Kamias 
 Kaong 
 Kaong palm vinegar 
 Kasubha 
 Keso de bola 
 Kesong puti 
 Labóng 
 Landang 
 Latik 
 Latô 
 Lemongrass 
 Liver spread  (Lechon sauce) 
 Luyang dilaw 
 Macapuno 
 Minatamís na báo 
 Muscovado 
 Nata de coco 
 Nata de piña 
 Nipa palm vinegar 
 Pakô 
 Palapa 
 Pandan 
 Panutsa 
 Patis 
 Pili nut 
 Saba banana 
 Sago 
 Sakurab  (Sibujing) 
 Siling haba 
 Siling labuyo 
 Spiced vinegar 
 Taba ng talangka 
 Tabon-tabon 
 Toyomansi 
 Toyo, suka, at sili 
 Túltul 
 Ube 
 Ubad 
 Ubod 
 Beverages 
 Agkud 
 Anisado 
 Avocado milkshake 
 Bahalina 
 Bais 
 Basi 
 Barako coffee 
 Benguet coffee 
 Bignay wine 
 Buko pandan drink 
 Byais 
 Calamansi juice 
 Dubado 
 Duhat wine 
 Intus 
 Kabarawan 
 Kinutil 
 Laksoy  (Dalisay de nipa, Barik) 
 Lambanog  (Dalisay de coco) 
 Mallorca 
 Palek 
 Pangasi 
 Sagada coffee 
 Salabat 
 Sago at gulaman 
 Samalamig 
 Sulu coffee 
 Tapuy  (Baya) 
 Tsokolate 
 Tubâ 
 Tubho tea 
 Tuhak 
 Tunggang 
 
   Food portal 
 See also: 
 Philippine condiments 
 Filipino Chinese cuisine 
 Kamayan 
 Kapampangan cuisine 
 List of restaurant chains in the Philippines 
 
 v t e Philippines  articles History Chronology 
 Prehistory 
 Pre-colonial era 
 Colonial era
 Spanish period 
 American period 
 Japanese occupation 
 Postcolonial era
 Third Republic 
 Marcos dictatorship 
 Fifth Republic 
 By topic 
 Archaeology 
 Economy 
 Inventions 
 Military 
 Political 
 Geography 
 Bays 
 Biosphere reserves 
 Borders 
 Climate 
 Earthquakes 
 Ecoregions 
 Environmental issues 
 Climate change 
 Deforestation 
 Extreme points 
 Island groups 
 islands 
 Lakes 
 Mountains 
 National parks 
 Protected areas 
 Ramsar sites 
 Rivers 
 Tallest statues 
 Tourist attractions 
 Volcanoes 
 Wildlife 
 World Heritage Sites 
 Politics Government Executive 
 Cabinet 
 lists 
 Executive departments 
 Executive office 
 Law enforcement 
 President of the Philippines 
 Legislative 
 House of Representatives 
 Speaker 
 Senate 
 Senate president 
 President pro tempore 
 Judicial 
 Court of Appeals 
 Regional Trial Court 
 Supreme Court 
 Law 
 Constitution 
 Philippine legal codes 
 Human rights 
 Intelligence 
 National Bureau of Investigation 
 National Counter-Terrorism Action Group 
 National Intelligence Coordinating Agency 
 Philippine Drug Enforcement Agency 
 Uniformed 
 Armed Forces of the Philippines 
 Philippine Air Force 
 Philippine Army 
 Philippine Navy 
 Philippine Marine Corps 
 Philippine Coast Guard 
 Philippine National Police 
 
 Administrative divisions 
 Elections 
 Foreign relations 
 Political families 
 Political parties 
 Economy 
 Agriculture 
 Automotive 
 Business process outsourcing 
 Census 
 Central bank 
 Energy 
 Fiscal policy 
 National debt 
 Labor 
 Peso 
 Statistics 
 Stock exchange 
 Taxation 
 Telecommunications 
 Tourism 
 Transportation 
 Science and technology 
 Water and sanitation 
 Society 
 Corruption 
 Crime 
 Demographics 
 Education 
 Ethnic groups 
 Genetics 
 Health 
 Immigration 
 Income inequality 
 Languages 
 Poverty 
 Prostitution 
 Provinces by HDI 
 Refugees 
 Religion 
 Sex trafficking 
 Squatting 
 Women 
 LGBT 
 Pinoy 
 Culture 
 Architecture 
 Arts 
 Cinema 
 Cuisine 
 Cultural properties 
 Dance 
 Fashion and clothing 
 Festivals 
 Historical markers 
 Literature 
 Media 
 Music 
 Mythology 
 Name 
 Public holidays 
 Psychology 
 Sexuality 
 Sports 
 Traditional games 
 Value system 
 Symbols 
 Anthem 
 Bird 
 Coat of arms 
 Flag 
 Flower 
 Gem 
 Great Seal 
 Language 
 Motto 
 Sign language 
 Sport and martial art 
 Tree 
 
 
   Category 
   Philippines portal 
 
 v t e Cuisine of Southeast Asia 
 Brunei 
 Cambodia 
 Christmas Island 
 Cocos (Keeling) Islands 
 East Timor 
 Indonesia 
 Laos 
 Malaysia 
 Myanmar 
 Philippines 
 Singapore 
 Thailand 
 Vietnam 
 
 v t e Asian cuisine Sovereign states 
 Afghanistan 
 Armenia 
 Azerbaijan 
 Bahrain 
 Bangladesh 
 Bhutan 
 Brunei 
 Burma (Myanmar) 
 Cambodia 
 China 
 Cyprus 
 East Timor (Timor-Leste) 
 Egypt 
 Georgia 
 India 
 Indonesia 
 Iran 
 Iraq 
 Israel 
 Japan 
 Jordan 
 Kazakhstan 
 North Korea 
 South Korea 
 Kuwait 
 Kyrgyzstan 
 Laos 
 Lebanon 
 Malaysia 
 Maldives 
 Mongolia 
 Nepal 
 Oman 
 Pakistan 
 Philippines 
 Qatar 
 Russia 
 Saudi Arabia 
 Singapore 
 Sri Lanka 
 Syria 
 Tajikistan 
 Thailand 
 Turkey 
 Turkmenistan 
 United Arab Emirates 
 Uzbekistan 
 Vietnam 
 Yemen 
 States with limited recognition 
 Abkhazia 
 Artsakh 
 Northern Cyprus 
 Palestine 
 South Ossetia 
 Taiwan 
 Dependencies and other territories 
 British Indian Ocean Territory 
 Christmas Island 
 Cocos (Keeling) Islands 
 Hong Kong 
 Macau 
 
 v t e Cuisines Continental 
 African 
 North 
 West 
 list 
 Americas 
 Caribbean 
 North 
 South 
 list 
 Asian 
 Caucasian 
 Central 
 Indian subcontinent 
 Levantine 
 list 
 European 
 Balkan 
 Central 
 Eastern 
 list 
 Oceanic 
 Intercontinental
 Global 
 Latin American 
 Mediterranean 
 Middle Eastern 
 National  and regional 
 Afghan 
 Albanian 
 Algerian 
 American 
 Californian 
 Floribbean 
 Hawaiian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Lowcountry (South Carolina) 
 New England 
 New Mexico 
 Pacific Northwest 
 Pennsylvania Dutch 
 Puerto Rican 
 Southern US 
 Southwest US 
 Texas 
 Angolan 
 Argentine 
 Armenian 
 Australian 
 Austrian 
 Azerbaijani 
 Bahraini 
 Bangladeshi 
 Barbadian 
 Belarusian 
 Belgian 
 Belizean 
 Beninese 
 Bhutanese 
 Bolivian 
 Bosnian-Herzegovinian 
 Botswana 
 Brazilian 
 British 
 Channel Islands 
 English 
 Gibraltarian 
 Northern Irish 
 Saint Helena 
 Scottish 
 Welsh 
 Bruneian 
 Bulgarian 
 Burkinabé 
 Burmese 
 Burundian 
 Cambodian 
 Cameroonian 
 Canadian 
 Acadian 
 Québécois 
 Central African Republic 
 Chadian 
 Chilean 
 Chinese 
 Cantonese 
 Hong Kong 
 Macanese 
 Tibetan 
 Xinjiang 
 Colombian 
 Congolese 
 Corsican 
 Croatian 
 Cuban 
 Cypriot 
 Czech 
 Danish 
 Faroese 
 Greenlandic 
 Djiboutian 
 Dominican 
 Dominican Republic 
 Dutch 
 East Timorese 
 Ecuadorian 
 Egyptian 
 Emirati 
 Equatorial Guinean 
 Eritrean 
 Estonian 
 Ethiopian 
 Fijian 
 Filipino 
 Finnish 
 French 
 Occitan 
 French Guianan 
 Gabonese 
 Gambian 
 Georgian 
 German 
 Ghanaian 
 Greek 
 Cretan 
 Epirotic 
 Greek Macedonian 
 Heptanesean 
 Guatemalan 
 Guinea-Bissauan 
 Guinean 
 Haitian 
 Honduran 
 Hungarian 
 Icelandic 
 Indian 
 Arunachalese 
 Assamese 
 Bengali 
 Bihari 
 Goan 
 Gujarati 
 Himachal Pradesh 
 Kashmiri 
 Jharkhandi 
 Karnataka 
 Kerala 
 Maharashtrian 
 Manipuri 
 Meghalayan 
 Mizo 
 Naga 
 Odia 
 Punjabi 
 Rajasthani 
 Sikkimese 
 Sindhi 
 Tamil 
 Telangana 
 Telugu 
 Indonesian 
 Acehnese 
 Balinese 
 Banjar 
 Batak 
 Betawi 
 Indo 
 Javanese 
 Madurese 
 Makassar 
 Minahasan 
 Minangkabau 
 Palembangese 
 Sundanese 
 Iranian 
 Iraqi 
 Irish 
 Israeli 
 Italian 
 Abruzzese 
 Ligurian 
 Lombard 
 Lucanian 
 Neapolitan 
 Roman 
 Sardinian 
 Sicilian 
 Venetian 
 Ivorian 
 Jamaican 
 Japanese 
 Okinawan 
 Jordanian 
 Kazakh 
 Kenyan 
 Korean 
 North Korean 
 South Korean 
 Kosovan 
 Kuwaiti 
 Kyrgyz 
 Lao 
 Latvian 
 Lebanese 
 Lesotho 
 Liberian 
 Libyan 
 Liechtensteiner 
 Lithuanian 
 Luxembourg 
 Macedonian 
 Malagasy 
 Malawian 
 Malaysian 
 Sabahan 
 Sarawakian 
 Maldivian 
 Malian 
 Maltese 
 Mauritanian 
 Mauritian 
 Mexican 
 Moldovan 
 Monégasque 
 Mongolian 
 Montenegrin 
 Moroccan 
 Mozambican 
 Namibian 
 Nauruan 
 Nepalese 
 New Zealand 
 Nicaraguan 
 Niger 
 Nigerian 
 Niuean 
 Norwegian 
 Omani 
 Pakistani 
 Palestinian 
 Panamanian 
 Peruvian 
 Polish 
 Portuguese 
 Qatari 
 Romanian  (incl.  Transylvanian Saxon ) 
 Russian 
 Bashkir 
 Chechen 
 Circassian 
 Komi 
 Mordovian 
 Sakha 
 Tatar 
 Udmurt 
 Yamal 
 Rwandan 
 Saint Lucian 
 Salvadoran 
 Sammarinese 
 São Tomé and Príncipe 
 Saudi Arabian 
 Senegalese 
 Serbian 
 Seychellois 
 Sierra Leonean 
 Singaporean 
 Slovak 
 Slovenian 
 Somali 
 South African 
 Spanish 
 Andalusian 
 Asturian 
 Balearic 
 Basque 
 Canarian 
 Cantabrian 
 Catalan 
 Extremaduran 
 Galician 
 Manchegan 
 Valencian 
 Sri Lankan 
 Sudanese 
 Swazi 
 Swedish 
 Swiss 
 Syrian 
 Taiwanese 
 Tajik 
 Tanzanian 
 Zanzibari 
 Thai 
 Togolese 
 Tunisian 
 Turkish 
 Turkmen 
 Trinidadian and Tobagonian 
 Ugandan 
 Ukrainian 
 Uruguayan 
 Uzbek 
 Venezuelan 
 Vietnamese 
 Western Saharan 
 Yemeni 
 Zambian 
 Zimbabwean 
 Ethnic 
 Ainu 
 Arab 
 Indonesian 
 Aromanian 
 Assyrian 
 Balochi 
 Berber 
 Cajun 
 Chinese 
 American 
 Canadian 
 Chifa 
 Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Crimean Tatar 
 Greek American 
 Hazaragi 
 Indian 
 Anglo-Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Indigenous American 
 Inuit 
 Italian American 
 Kurdish 
 Livonian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Malay 
 Ossetian 
 Parsi 
 Pashtun 
 Peranakan 
 Romani 
 Sámi 
 Soul food 
 Sylheti 
 Transylvanian Saxon 
 Yup'ik 
 Religious 
 Buddhist 
 Christian 
 Goan Catholic 
 Mangalorean Catholic 
 Mennonite 
 Hindu 
 Islamic 
 Chinese 
 Ital 
 Jain 
 Jewish 
 American 
 Ashkenazi 
 Bukharan 
 Ethiopian 
 Mizrahi 
 Sephardic 
 Syrian 
 Ritual slaughter 
 Sikh 
 Historical 
 Ancient Egyptian 
 Ancient Greek 
 Ancient Israelite 
 Ancient Roman 
 Antebellum America 
 Aztec 
 Byzantine 
 Early modern European 
 Historical Chinese 
 Historical Indian subcontinent 
 Historical North Indian and Pakistani 
 History of agriculture 
 History of alcoholic drinks 
 History of bread 
 History of seafood 
 History of vegetarianism 
 Historical Argentine 
 Historical Japanese 
 Inca 
 Mayan 
 Muisca 
 Mughal 
 Medieval 
 Ottoman 
 Peasant 
 Soviet 
 Thirteen Colonies 
 Styles 
 Classique 
 Fast food 
 Fusion 
 New American 
 Eurasian 
 Haute 
 Molecular gastronomy 
 Note by Note 
 Nouvelle 
 Lists 
 List of cuisines 
 List of historical cuisines 
 Lists of prepared foods 
 Related 
 Cookbook 
 Cooking 
 Culinary arts 
 Drink 
 Food 
 history 
 Diet 
 Meal preparation 
 
   Food portal 
   Drink portal 
   Category 
   Commons 
   Cookbook 
   WikiProject 
   Outline 
 
  
NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw2338
Cached time: 20230311184709
Cache expiry: 1814400
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc, no‐toc‐conversion]
CPU time usage: 1.670 seconds
Real time usage: 2.031 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 25327/1000000
Post‐expand include size: 457154/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 36551/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 40/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 359214/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.851/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 21809788/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/400
 
 
Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1439.794      1 -total
 37.22%  535.856      1 Template:Reflist
 17.38%  250.251     66 Template:Cite_web
 14.34%  206.506      8 Template:Navbox
 14.25%  205.235     29 Template:Cite_book
  9.29%  133.775      1 Template:Asian_topic
  6.01%   86.479      1 Template:Philippines_topics
  5.87%   84.563      1 Template:Country_topics
  5.79%   83.380     52 Template:Iso2country
  5.53%   79.582      1 Template:Lang-fil
 
  Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:idhash:2047222-0!canonical and timestamp 20230311184707 and revision id 1143122150. Rendering was triggered because: page-view
  
 esi <esi:include src="/esitest-fa8a495983347898/content" />  
 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Filipino_cuisine&oldid=1143122150 " 
 Categories :  Philippine cuisine Southeast Asian cuisine Hidden categories:  Webarchive template wayback links CS1 Tagalog-language sources (tl) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use mdy dates from September 2022 Use Philippine English from September 2022 All Wikipedia articles written in Philippine English Articles containing Filipino-language text Articles to be expanded from February 2023 All articles to be expanded Articles using small message boxes Articles lacking reliable references from June 2015 All articles lacking reliable references Articles needing additional references from April 2016 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2019 Articles with unsourced statements from June 2020 Articles with empty sections from February 2023 All articles with empty sections Articles containing Cebuano-language text CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) CS1 errors: generic name Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with Curlie links Region topic template using suffix 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  This page was last edited on 6 March 2023, at 01:32  (UTC) . 
 Text is available under the  Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0 ;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the  Terms of Use  and  Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the  Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. 
 
 
 Privacy policy 
 About Wikipedia 
 Disclaimers 
 Contact Wikipedia 
 Mobile view 
 Developers 
 Statistics 
 Cookie statement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
