
 
 
 Jump to content 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle sidebar 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Create account Log in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Personal tools 
 
 
 
 
   Create account   Log in 
 
 
 
 
		Pages for logged out editors  learn more 
 
 
 Contributions Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Navigation 
 
 
 Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate 
 
 
 
 
 Contribute 
 
 
 Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file 
 
 
 
 
 Tools 
 
 
 What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item 
 
 
 
 
 Print/export 
 
 
 Download as PDF Printable version 
 
 
 
 
 In other projects 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons Wikibooks 
 
 
 
 
 Languages 
 
 On this Wikipedia the language links are at the top of the page across from the article title.  Go to top . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CentralNotice  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Contents 
 move to sidebar 
 hide 
 
 
 
 
 (Top) 
 
 
 
 
 
 1 Characteristics 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 Finnish food 
 
 
				Toggle Finnish food subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 2.1 Meats from Finland 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.2 Berries 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.3 Fish 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.4 Mushrooms 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.5 Bread 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.6 Porridges 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.7 Beverages 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.8 Desserts 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.9 Sweets 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 Examples of Finnish dishes 
 
 
				Toggle Examples of Finnish dishes subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 3.1 Typical Finnish dishes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.2 Holiday specialties 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.2.1 Shrove Tuesday 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.2.2 Easter 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.2.3 Vappu (May Day) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.2.4 Christmas 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4 Regional cuisine 
 
 
				Toggle Regional cuisine subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 4.1 Lapland 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.2 Kainuu 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.3 Karelia 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.4 Savonia 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.5 Ostrobothnia and Åland 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.6 Other specialties 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5 Meals 
 
 
				Toggle Meals subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 5.1 Breakfast 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5.2 Coffee breaks 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6 Criticism 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 7 See also 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8 References 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 9 External links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
						Toggle the table of contents
					 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle the table of contents 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Finnish cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 32 languages 
 
 
 
 العربية Azərbaycanca Беларуская Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Jawa ქართული Kurdî Lietuvių Magyar 日本語 Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Русский Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 
 Edit links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Article Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 English 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 More 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
 
 
 Culinary traditions of Finland 
 
 
 This article  needs additional citations for  verification .  Please help  improve this article  by  adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources:   "Finnish cuisine"  –  news   ·   newspapers   ·   books   ·   scholar   ·   JSTOR   ( May 2010 )  ( Learn how and when to remove this template message ) 
   Karelian pasty  ( karjalanpiirakka )  is a traditional Finnish dish made from a thin rye crust with a filling of barley or rice. Butter, often mixed with boiled egg ( egg butter  or  munavoi ), is spread over the hot pastries before eating. 
 Part of  a series  on the Culture of Finland 
 History 
 People 
 Languages 
 Mythology  and  Folklore 
 Cuisine 
 Festivals 
 Religion 
 Art 
 Design 
 
 Literature 
 Music 
 Media 
 Radio 
 Television 
 Cinema 
 
 Sport 
 Monuments 
 World Heritage Sites 
 
 Symbols 
 Flag 
 Coat of arms 
 National anthem 
 
   Finland portal v t e 
 Finnish cuisine  is notable for generally combining traditional country fare and  haute cuisine  with contemporary continental-style cooking.  Fish  and  meat  (usually pork, beef or reindeer) play a prominent role in traditional  Finnish  dishes in some parts of the country, while the dishes elsewhere have traditionally included various  vegetables  and  mushrooms .  Evacuees from Karelia  contributed to foods in other parts of Finland in the aftermath of the  Continuation War . [1] 
 Finnish foods often use  wholemeal  products ( rye ,  barley ,  oats ) and berries (such as  bilberries ,  lingonberries ,  cloudberries , and  sea buckthorn ).  Milk  and its derivatives like  buttermilk  are commonly used as food, drink or in various recipes. Various  turnips  were common in traditional cooking, but were replaced with the  potato  after its introduction in the 18th century.
 
 
 Characteristics [ edit ] 
 The way of life and culture of  Finns  was mainly based on agriculture already at prehistoric times. However, in the harsh and cold environment, agriculture was neither a very effective nor secure way of life, so getting food from nature has often been an important secondary livelihood. When crops failed, it might have been the only way to survive. Also, while farms mainly produced plants like crops or turnips, and often families had only some farm animals to get milk products and meat, hunting and especially fishing were important ways to get more protein. Large-scale meat production and therefore meat as a daily food started to emerge only at the beginning of 20th century, after periods of malnutrition in the 19th century caused by failed crops. [ citation needed ] 
 In former times, the country's harsh climate meant that fresh fruit and vegetables were largely unavailable for at least nine months of the year, leading to a heavy reliance on staple tubers (initially  turnip , later  potato ), dark  rye bread  and fermented dairy products, occasionally enlivened with preserved fish and meat. Traditionally, very few spices other than salt were available, and fresh herbs like  dill  and  chives  were limited to the summer months. Many Finnish traditional dishes are prepared by stewing them for a long time in an oven, which produces hearty but bland fare. Forests and lakes were historically a major source of food, and produce from forests currently accounts for the distinctive traits in Finnish cuisine. The simplicity of traditional Finnish food has been turned into an advantage by shifting the emphasis to freshness. Modern Finnish restaurateurs now blend high-quality Finnish products with continental cooking techniques. This approach helped Helsinki's  Chez Dominique  to receive two  Michelin stars  in 2003. The restaurant closed in 2013.
 Internationalization brought imported goods. As pasta, pizza, kebab, and hamburgers were integrated into Finnish menus, they displaced some traditional everyday dishes like  kaalilaatikko  (cabbage casserole), or herring fillets, which some consider inferior. As of the 20th century, when the majority of Finnish women entered the workforce, many traditional dishes that require long preparation time are reserved for holidays.
 Even with modern agriculture and transportation, food remains expensive in Finland relative to other European countries. This is notwithstanding the effect of accession to the European Union in 1995. The consequent elimination of trade barriers led prices of products like grains, meat, and milk to drop as much as 50%. [2]  Before that, heavy taxes and outright bans on imports that competed with local produce severely limited the availability of foreign or unseasonal food. Nowadays Finnish supermarkets and restaurants provide a variety of food from all over the world.
 Finnish cuisine is very similar to  Swedish cuisine . Swedish dishes like  Janssons frestelse  ( janssoninkiusaus ),  pyttipannu , and  gravlax   ( graavilohi ) are common in Finland. The overarching difference is the Finns' preference for unsweetened foods. For example, while traditional Swedish rye bread includes plenty of syrup and spices, Finnish rye bread is unsweetened, even bitter. Finnish cuisine also bears some resemblance to  German  and  Russian cuisines . [3]  Sausages and buttered bread (like  Butterbrot ), and  kiisseli  ( kissel ) and  lihapiirakka  (cf.  pirozhki ) are similar to their respective German and Russian counterparts. Finnish recipes, however, tend to favour fresh ingredients over canned or pickled foods, as fresh vegetables, fish, and meat are available throughout the year. [4] 
 
 Finnish food [ edit ] 
 Meats from Finland [ edit ] 
   Grilled chorizo sausage and a glass of Sandels beer as a summertime meal. 
 The most popular meats in Finland are  pork  (33.5 kg/year/person in 2005),  beef  (18.6 kg),  chicken  (13.3 kg). [5]  Approximately one third of this is eaten as  sausage  ( makkara ), which is mostly made from pork but often mixes in other meats as well. [6]   Horse meat , lamb and  reindeer  make up a small portion of the total meat consumption, but they are widely available. [7] 
 In addition to domesticated animals, there are long traditions of  hunting  and  fishing  in Finland. The hunters focus on  deer ,  moose  and  bear , but small game such as  hare ,  duck  and  grouse  are popular. Approximately 70,000–80,000 moose are culled yearly producing significant amounts of meat. Due to very strict food hygiene regulations, moose meat is mainly consumed within households and is rarely obtainable in restaurants.
 
 Berries [ edit ] 
   Lingonberries  (known in Finnish as  puolukka ) are common throughout Finland. 
   Typical Finnish  Kiisseli 
 Arctic wild berries are distinctively featured in Finnish cuisine with their strong flavor and high nutrient content. Traditionally, they were eaten fresh in summer and dried at other times of year. It is still quite common to go picking berries straight from the forests – in fact, wild berries are free to pick in any forest, state or private, except in close proximity to dwellings (see  Freedom to roam ). Wild  raspberries  ( vadelma ),  bilberries  ( mustikka ) and  lingonberries  ( puolukka ) are found in almost every part of Finland, while  cloudberries  ( lakka ),  cranberries  ( karpalo ),  arctic brambles  ( mesimarja ) and  sea buckthorns  ( tyrni ) grow in more limited areas. The intensely flavored  wild strawberry  ( metsämansikka ) is a seasonal delicacy decorating cakes, served alone, with cream, or with ice cream. Farmed  strawberry  ( mansikka ) is also very common.
 Today, berries are no longer dried for winter consumption but usually frozen. They may be used as ingredients, or eaten on their own, for example, with porridge and sugar.  Kiisseli  (a sweet soup of berry juice and berries thickened with potato starch) is a common dessert. Homemade berry juices and jams are common, especially among older people. While berries are most often used for desserts, they are also served with meat, especially the sour lingonberry relish.
 Bilberry  kiisseli  ( mustikkakiisseli ) and  pie  ( mustikkapiirakka ), made from wild bilberries ( Vaccinium myrtillus ), are traditional Finnish desserts. Bilberries are frequently used in Finnish cuisine, both as an ingredient, such as bilberry pie, and also served with cream or ice cream. They are often used on top of  viili  and other yogurt-type dishes.
 
 Fish [ edit ] 
   Fried vendace ( Coregonus albula ) is a summer-time delicacy in Finland. The fish are fried, served, and eaten whole, usually accompanied with garlic sauce. 
   Loimulohi  (blazed salmon) 
   Fried  Baltic herring  is a popular and wholesome Finnish dish. It is usually accompanied with boiled or mashed potatoes. 
 Lakes and rivers in Finland and the Baltic Sea provide many opportunities for fishing and fish has always been an important protein source. Numerous methods of preparing fish are used, including frying, boiling, drying, salting, fermenting,  cold smoking  or simply slicing sea fish and eating it raw. Salmon is a popular choice, both as  kylmäsavustettu lohi :  cold smoked salmon, lox , or served raw with lemon juice as  graavilohi  ( gravlax  in Swedish). The soup called  lohikeitto  is also one of the most popular salmon dishes in Finland. [8]  It is common to  smoke  any types of fish, like  salmon ,  zander ,  pike ,  perch  and Baltic  herring . A popular dish among the  Swedish-speaking population  is  smoked herring  ( Finnish :  savusilakka ,  Swedish :  böckling ). There are many styles of  pickled herring  which is a common appetizer and also served around Midsummer accompanied by small potatoes called  uusiperuna  ( nypotatis  in Swedish) which means 'new potato', usually the first harvests of potato.  Whitefish  and  vendace   roe  are Finnish delicacies served on top of a toast or with blinis.  Crayfish  can be found in many lakes and streams in Finland and, in August especially, the Swedish-speaking population often arranges  parties centered around eating crayfish  and drinking.
 
 Mushrooms [ edit ] 
   Chanterelles  often grow near  birch  trees. 
 Various species of mushrooms grow in abundance in Finnish forests and  false morels  start the season in spring and are used in creamy dishes.  Chanterelles  and  ceps  pop up after  Midsummer  and are popular in the whole country, while in eastern Finland almost all edible fungi are consumed, including  milkcaps  and  russulas . Most of the mushroom recipes originate from Russia, since Finns used mushrooms in coloring fabrics rather than as food. Mushrooms are used in soups, sauces, stews, pie fillings, or simply fried in a pan with onions as a side dish. They are preserved for the winter by pickling or drying. Chanterelles are frequently featured in Finnish haute cuisine with their relatives  winter chanterelles  which often end the season. Just like berry picking, mushroom hunting is also a popular outdoor activity among Finns. [ citation needed ] 
 
 Bread [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Finnish bread 
   Rye and potato rieska 
 Dark and fiber-rich  ruisleipä , rye bread, is a staple of the Finnish diet. Breads are made from grains like  barley ,  oat ,  rye  and  wheat , or by mixing different grits and flours. For example,  sihtileipä  is made of a combination of rye and wheat. There is also a variety of flat breads called  rieska , like  maitorieska  (milk  flatbread ),  ryynirieska  with barley grits from  Savonia ,  läskirieska  (lard flatbread) a somewhat flat barley bread with pieces of lard from Western coast, and  perunarieska  (potato flatbread). In  Kainuu , North Finland, the flatbreads are very flat and baked on naked flame.  Näkkileipä , crisp rye bread, is also common. Famines caused by crop failures in the 19th century caused Finns to improvise  pettuleipä  or  bark bread , [9]  bread made from rye flour and the soft  phloem  layer of  pine  bark, which was nutritious, but rock-hard and anything but tasty. It was eaten also during the Second World War, and the tradition of making this bread has had a minor come-back with claims of health benefits. [ citation needed ] 
 
 Porridges [ edit ] 
   Rice porridge with sugar and cinnamon, typically eaten at Christmas time, is sweeter than other Finnish porridges so it can also be served as a dessert. 
 The Finnish breakfast traditionally includes a substantial portion of  porridge . Rolled oats, rye or multi-grain porridge are most common. However, there are other options such as the milk-based  mannapuuro  ( semolina -milk porridge) and  helmipuuro  (starch grain-milk porridge). Porridges are often eaten with milk, sugar, butter or berry  kiisseli . The Christmas season introduces milk-based  rice porridge  ( riisipuuro ), sprinkled with cinnamon and sugar and often topped with prune  kiisseli  ( luumukiisseli ). There is also a semolina-based porridge flavored with fresh or frozen lingonberries called  vispipuuro  ("beaten porridge").
 
 Beverages [ edit ] 
   Koff  is one of Finland's oldest beer trademark 
   A bottle of  Finlandia vodka 
   Long Drink ( Lonkero ) 
 Water and  coffee  are the most common drinks in Finland, but during meals  milk  and  sour milk  ( piimä , a  fermented milk ) are popular too, even among adults. Coffee is often drunk several times a day and served everywhere. In fact, Finland has the highest per capita consumption of coffee in the world. [10]   Tea  is also available in most homes. There are several types of home-brewed alcoholic beverages, such as  sima  (mead) and  sahti  (traditional  beer ). Spirits brands include  Koskenkorva  ( vodka -like clear spirit) and a  salmiakki  flavored shot  Salmiakkikossu ,  Jaloviina  ( cut brandy ),  Finlandia vodka , and  Marskin ryyppy  ( Marshal Mannerheim 's shot). Around Christmas time a type of  mulled wine  called  glögi  is served, also often as a non-alcoholic version. Many berries are used to season liqueurs, e.g.  cloudberry liqueur  and there are  fruit wines  produced from red and black currants. A national specialty would be multiple brands of flavored hard ciders (as in Sweden) and long drink mixes with the pet name  lonkero , which was originally a gin and grapefruit soda long drink.
 The  Finnish beer scene  is dominated by pale lagers. The most popular local brands are  Koff ,  Lapin Kulta ,  Karjala ,  Olvi  and  Karhu  and their taste is rather similar to the Danish counterparts like  Carlsberg  and  Tuborg ; soft and a bit sweet. Non-alcoholic beer has also become a popular alternative during recent years.  Kotikalja  (similar to Slavic  kvass ) is the traditional small beer. Kotikalja is a malty, sugar-containing sweet beer fermented only for carbonation, thus its alcohol content is low enough (<1.2%) to be served as a soft drink. Hops are often absent. Fresh kotikalja is unfiltered, cloudy and cannot be stored. A Finnish beer specialty is  sahti , a traditional ale flavoured with juniper berries.
 
 Desserts [ edit ] 
 See also:  List of Finnish desserts 
 Pulla , sweet, cardamom-flavored bread eaten with coffee or as dessert
 Cinnamon rolls ( korvapuustit ) –  pulla  made into a roll with cinnamon and sugar 
 Kiisseli  – water, sugar, berry juice and berries (nowadays often canned or frozen) thickened with  potato starch flour , served with milk/cream and sugar. These may be less liquid than drink-like  mustikkakeitto  ( Swedish :  blåbärssoppa ), depending on preparation, but not gelatinous. 
 Leipäjuusto , a soft cheese often served with cloudberry jam ( lakkahillo ) and or coffee. 
 Runeberg torte  named after a national poet  Johan Ludvig Runeberg  and served on his memorial day on 5 February. 
 Rönttönen  pastry with lingonberry filling 
 Uunijuusto , baked milk dish eaten with berries 
 Vispipuuro  (whipped porridge) a sweet pink dessert porridge with lingonberries or other berries, served with milk and sugar 
 
 
 
 
 Ruisreikäleipä  (rye hole-bread)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Runeberg tortes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Several types of  pulla  sweet bread
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Blueberry pie  (Mustikkapiirakka) is a very popular dessert
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Joulutorttu  (Christmas pastry)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Funnel cake  (Tippaleipä)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Leipäjuusto  (Bread Cheese) served with cloudberry jam
 
 
 
 
 Sweets [ edit ] 
   Pihlaja  marmalade candy 
 Salmiakki  – salty black liquorice candy 
 Fazer Blue  ( Fazer Sininen ) – milk chocolate 
 Kismet  – (waffle chocolate bar) 
 Tupla  – (chocolate bar) 
 Pihlaja  – marmalade candy 
 Kiss-Kiss  – hard pink peppermint-flavoured shell and a sticky toffee filling candy 
 Marianne  – hard peppermint-flavoured shell and a chocolate filling candy 
 Omar  – Caramel candy 
 Wood tar  – ( terva ) flavoured candy, such as  Terva Leijona 
 Examples of Finnish dishes [ edit ] 
 The term  perinneruoka  ("traditional dish") is often applied to specialties that are rarely eaten on a daily basis. These are often regional, associated with the older generations or specific holidays—for example,  mämmi  on Easter—and most people eat these dishes rarely, or not at all. In contrast, with  perinneruoka , the term  kotiruoka  ("home-made food") is applied to daily staple dishes. Meatballs, pea soup and rye bread are examples of such staples.
 The following list is a sample of typical dishes traditionally consumed in Finland.
 
 Typical Finnish dishes [ edit ] 
   Leipäjuusto  is a soft  cheese 
 Kaalikääryleet  – cabbage rolls 
 Game  food. – Moose, deer, grouse, duck, hare, etc. dishes. Rarely attainable in restaurants, except the finest ones. Common amongst those whose hobby is  hunting . 
 Hernekeitto  – pea soup, usually served on Thursdays, along with pancakes for dessert. 
 Leipäjuusto , alternate names  hiilikko  and  juustoleipä  – a halloumi-like soft cheese 
 Viili  – a  yoghurt -like  fermented milk product 
 Perunamuusi  – mashed potato, a common side dish 
 Lihapullat  – Finnish meatballs, often in gravy and with lingonberry sauce on the side 
 Palvikinkku  and  palviliha  – smoked  ham  or  beef 
 Holiday specialties [ edit ] 
 Shrove Tuesday [ edit ] 
   Laskiaispulla 
 Hernekeitto  – pea soup made with ham 
 Laskiaispulla  – (' Shrovetide   pulla ') filled with whipped cream and  almond paste  or jam 
 Easter [ edit ] 
 Mämmi  – Easter dessert pudding: sweetened, oven-baked rye malt porridge, served with sugar and milk or cream, available frozen around the year. In the Catholic era it was Lent food and also served on Good Friday. 
 Pasha  – a dessert made of quark, butter, eggs and spices, originates from Russia 
 Vappu (May Day) [ edit ] 
   A  munkki  and a glass of  sima  served as dessert on 30 April, Vappu eve. 
 Sima  – mead, home-made or purchased 
 Munkki  (deep-fried  pulla  coated in sugar, similar to  doughnuts ) 
 Tippaleipä  (' May Day  fritters'), a kind of  funnel cake 
 Christmas [ edit ] 
 Joulupöytä  ('Christmas table'), consists of many dishes, some of which are almost entirely exclusive to Christmas, e.g.  lipeäkala . 
 Glögi , mulled wine, is served during the holiday season. 
 Regional cuisine [ edit ] 
 Lapland [ edit ] 
   Sautéed reindeer with mashed potatoes, lingonberry jam and pickles 
   Karelian stew  has been voted as the national food of Finland. 
 Sautéed reindeer  ( poronkäristys ) 
 Lohikeitto  salmon soup with cream 
 Kainuu [ edit ] 
 Rönttönen , pastry with lingonberry filling ( PGI protection  under EU law) 
 Smoked meat soup 
 Kainuun Juustoleipä, Bread Cheese 
 Vendace fish soup 
 Pettuleipä  (' Pettu -bread'), a  bark bread  made from rye flour and pine  phloem  during famine years 
 Karelia [ edit ] 
 Karelian pasties  popular throughout the whole of Finland 
 Karelian stew  often eaten on Finland's  Independence Day  and on Christmas 
 Sultsina  sold at the market square in  Joensuu  and other places in the area 
 Savonia [ edit ] 
 Kalakukko  fish pasty loaf 
 Mykyrokka  blood dumpling soup 
 Lörtsy  pastry filled with sour or sweet fillings (meat, vegetable or jam) 
 Ostrobothnia and Åland [ edit ] 
 Due to the location on the West coast, the cuisine has some local specialities.
 
 Klimpsoppa  flour dumpling soup 
 Åland's pancake  typically made of leftover porridge and served with plum jam 
 Swedish  svartbröd  ('black bread') is eaten in Swedish-speaking  Åland ; similar dark bread, known as  skärgårdslimpa  ('islander's bread', referring to Åland), is made on southern coast, and in  Malax  on the Ostrobothnian coast ( malaxlimpa ). This bread, coloured dark brown, is made from  rye  and contains a substantial quantity of dark syrup. 
 Other specialties [ edit ] 
   Mustamakkara  Meal 
 Kesäkeitto  – a traditional vegetable soup with butter and milk 
 Mustamakkara  –  blood sausage  from  Tampere 
 Rössypottu  from  Oulu  (mixed blood pudding and pork stew) 
 Hapanvelli  (rye and pea porridge) from  Virolahti 
 Kakko , a type of white bread baked mostly in the  Satakunta  region [11] 
 Meals [ edit ] 
   Lohikeitto  is a creamy  salmon   soup  and a common dish in Finland and other Nordic countries. 
   Lihapiirakka  (meat pie) is a common  Street food  in Finland. 
 There are three meals per day: breakfast, lunch and dinner. In all primary and secondary schools, including  high school , a hot free lunch is served as part of Finland's  welfare state  system. Lunch, eaten around noon, is usually a warm meal, although some people may select a lighter meal such as a  sandwich  or a salad. Taking a  lunchbox  is not as common as elsewhere in Europe. [12]  Universities also provide lunch for students, but contrary to primary and secondary schools, lunch in universities is not free of charge but subsidized. [13] 
 Lunch typically consists of a single course with optional side salad, bread and dessert. Many workplaces have a lunch restaurant, and if not, employers often give lunch vouchers. Restaurants often have a separate lunch menu for this purpose. In the evening, the dinner is usually a hot meal, again with sides. Meals are usually single-course, commonly consisting of meat of some sort (pork, lamb, chicken, beef) and potatoes, rice or pasta with the meat. Soups, such as pea soup or fish soup, are not considered appetizers only, but may be served as lunch or dinner, and they are correspondingly heavier and come in larger portions.
 
 Breakfast [ edit ] 
   Valio   Viilis  (strawberry flavor) 
 Breakfast is seen as a substantial meal and usually consists of  open sandwiches . The sandwich is often buttered, with savoury toppings such as hard cheese or  cold cuts . Sour milk products such as  yoghurt  or  viili  are also common breakfast foods, usually served in a bowl with  cereals  such as  corn flakes ,  muesli , and sometimes with sugar, fruit or jam. A third food that is commonly eaten at breakfast is  porridge  ( puuro ), often made of rolled oats, and eaten with a pat of butter ( voisilmä , lit. 'butter eye') or with milk, or fruit or jam, especially the sort made of raspberries or strawberries (sometimes lingonberries). Drinks are milk, juice, tea, or coffee.
 
 Coffee breaks [ edit ] 
 Finland has the highest coffee consumption per capita in the world, averaging 12 kilograms (26 lb) of coffee per person annually. [14]  It is typical for a Finn to drink coffee continuously throughout the day, often accompanied by a sweet bun or a sandwich. [ citation needed ]  Most workplaces allocate time for coffee breaks and serving coffee is very likely to happen to a visitor to a private home. Finns consider it as a small courtesy.
 
 Criticism [ edit ] 
   Pizza Berlusconi 
 In 2005, Finnish cuisine came under heavy fire from two leaders of countries renowned for their cuisine. The  Italian   prime minister   Silvio Berlusconi  claimed that "I've been to Finland and I had to endure the Finnish diet so I am in a position to make a comparison." Berlusconi started his anti-Finnish food campaign in 2001. He went on: "The Finns don't even know what  prosciutto  is." This followed the initial decision by the  European Commission  to establish the  European Food Safety Authority  in  Helsinki . On 4 July 2005  French   President   Jacques Chirac  claimed that "After Finland, [Britain is] the country with the worst food." [15] [16] 
 After Jacques Chirac's and Silvio Berlusconi's critiques, some international food reporters answered:
 
 
 "Chirac and Berlusconi are wrong! Finnish cuisine is much more international than I expected. I have eaten very good food in wonderful restaurants, visited market places and enjoyed in good cafeterias. Cheese is very good in Finland. I also love Finnish  cloudberry  and smoked fish." (Ute Junker,  Australian Financial Review Magazine ,  Sydney ,  Australia )
 
 
 
 "Food in Finnish restaurants is extremely good. Especially I love Finnish salmon, mushroom soup and desserts. I have also got very good Finnish wines. The worldwide reputation of Finnish cuisine isn't very good – but it should be!" (Liliane Delwasse,  Le Figaro , Paris, France)
 
 
 
 "I have eaten only good food in Finland. Food in Finland is very fresh. Bread, berries, mushrooms and desserts are very delicious. Finnish berries (especially  cloudberry ), salmon, cheeses and reindeer should be available in London, too." (April Hutchinson,  Abta Magazine ,  London , England).
 
 
 Finnish pizza chain  Kotipizza  won the 2008 America's Plate International pizza contest in New York, while Italian-American pizza came in second. They named their award-winning smoked reindeer pizza  Berlusconi  as symbolic payback for the critique Finnish cuisine had received from the  Italian prime minister  earlier. [17] 
 
 See also [ edit ] 
 
 Food portal 
 
 Beer in Finland 
 Culture of Finland 
 Sami cuisine 
 List of Christmas dishes 
 Porilainen 
 Swedish cuisine 
 National Finnish Food Day 
 
 References [ edit ] 
 
 
 ^   Tolvanen, Kristiina.  "A Nation in Transition: The Resettlement of the Karelian Evacuees" . Department of Translation Studies, University of Tampere. Archived from  the original  on 12 November 2013 . Retrieved  12 November  2013 . 
 
 ^   Tietoaika, Tilastokeskus.  "Tilastokeskus – Tietoaika – Tietoaika 2/2005" .  Stat.fi . Archived from  the original  on 2 August 2017 . Retrieved  2 August  2017 . 
 
 ^   "Finnish Food" . Fresh! From Finland. Archived from  the original  on 12 November 2013 . Retrieved  12 November  2013 . 
 
 ^   "??"   (PDF) .  Publications.theseus.fi . Retrieved  2 August  2017 . 
 
 ^   "Liha" .  Akva.ayy.fi . 27 May 2013. Archived from  the original  on 27 May 2013 . Retrieved  2 August  2017 . 
 
 ^   "Wigren" . Archived from  the original  on 27 May 2010 . Retrieved  22 October  2011 . 
 
 ^   "Suomessa lihaa syödään kohtuullisesti" .  Lihatiedotus.fi . Retrieved  30 December  2018 . 
 
 ^   Salmon soup is one of many Lappish wonders  –  Helsinki Times 
 
 ^   "Famine Bread" .  Genealogia.fi . Retrieved  30 December  2018 . 
 
 ^   "Coffee: Who grows, drinks and pays the most?" .  BBC News . 13 April 2018 . Retrieved  7 December  2020 . 
 
 ^   "Pakarin pitkän iän salaisuus piilee kakossa" .  yle.fi  (in Finnish). Yle. 12 August 2011 . Retrieved  30 December  2018 . 
 
 ^   "Englantilainen vs. suomalainen ruoka eli friteerattua Mars-patukkaa ja unohdettuja metsän antimia – Makutarinoita" .  Makutarinoita . Archived from  the original  on 5 December 2014 . Retrieved  27 November  2014 . 
 
 ^   "Ateriatuki"  (in Finnish). Kela. 1 January 2021 . Retrieved  18 January  2021 . 
 
 ^   Soria, Claudia.  "Coffee Consumption Per Capita Worldwide" . IndexMundi Blog . Retrieved  30 December  2018 . 
 
 ^   McIntosh, Neil (4 July 2005).  "Chirac shares a joke at Britain's expense" .  The Guardian . London . Retrieved  30 December  2018 . 
 
 ^   "Archived copy" . Archived from  the original  on 21 June 2005 . Retrieved  5 July  2005 . {{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: archived copy as title ( link ) 
 
 ^   "Reindeer Pizza Named after Berlusconi" .  Corriere.it . Retrieved  3 January  2019 . 
 
 
 External links [ edit ] 
 
 
 
 Wikibooks  Cookbook  has a recipe/module on
 
  Finnish cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons has media related to  Cuisine of Finland . 
 
 Food from Finland 
 Mediaeval Food from Finland from the Hotel and Restaurant Museum  On the museum website can be found menus over the last century, which shows the food available in Finland. 
 v t e Finland   articles History 
 Early wars 
 Finland under Swedish rule 
 Cudgel War 
 Great Northern War 
 The Great Wrath 
 Lesser Wrath 
 Finnish War 
 Grand Duchy 
 Åland War (1854–1856) 
 Famine of 1866–1868 
 Russification 
 February Manifesto 
 October Revolution 
 Independence of Finland 
 Declaration of Independence 
 Civil War 
 Red Finland 
 Monarchy 
 Kinship Wars 
 Language strife 
 Finland in World War II 
 Winter War 
 Continuation War 
 Lapland War 
 Finlandization 
 YYA Treaty 
 Night Frost 
 Note Crisis 
 Great Recession 
 Geography 
 Cities and towns 
 Extreme points 
 Geology 
 Islands 
 Lakes 
 National parks 
 Municipalities 
 Provinces 
 Regions 
 Åland 
 Rivers 
 Urban areas 
 Helsinki 
 Tampere 
 Turku 
 Wildlife 
 Politics 
 Administrative divisions 
 Constitution 
 Elections 
 Foreign relations 
 Government 
 Human rights 
 LGBT 
 Law 
 Judiciary 
 Enforcement 
 Military 
 NATO 
 Parliament 
 Political parties 
 President 
 Prime Minister 
 Speaker of the Parliament 
 Economy 
 Agriculture 
 Central bank 
 Energy 
 Government-owned companies 
   Industry 
 Markka  (currency) 
 National income agreement 
 Ship-building 
 Startups 
 Stock exchange 
 Taxation 
 Telecommunications 
 Tourism 
 Transport 
 Society 
 Crime 
 Demographics 
 Education 
 Finns 
 Healthcare 
 Languages 
 Religion 
 Paganism 
 Welfare system 
 Prostitution 
 Culture 
 Anthem 
 Architecture 
 Alcohol culture 
 Kalsarikänni 
 Cinema 
 Coat of arms 
 Cuisine 
 Flag 
 Literature 
 Abckiria 
 The Kalevala 
 The Seven Brothers 
 Maternity package 
 Media 
 Music 
 National symbols 
 Nordic walking 
 Peltoauto 
 Management by  perkele 
 Pikkujoulu 
 Public holidays 
 Sauna 
 Sisu 
 Sport 
 Outline Index Bibliography 
 Category 
 Portal 
 v t e European cuisine Sovereign states European Union 
 Austria 
 Belgium 
 Bulgaria 
 Croatia 
 Cyprus 
 Czech Republic 
 Denmark 
 Estonia 
 Finland 
 France 
 Germany 
 Greece 
 Hungary 
 Republic of Ireland 
 Italy 
 Latvia 
 Lithuania 
 Luxembourg 
 Malta 
 Netherlands 
 Poland 
 Portugal 
 Romania 
 Slovakia 
 Slovenia 
 Spain 
 Sweden 
 Other 
 Albania 
 Andorra 
 Armenia 
 Azerbaijan 
 Belarus 
 Bosnia and Herzegovina 
 Georgia 
 Iceland 
 Kazakhstan 
 Liechtenstein 
 Moldova 
 Monaco 
 Montenegro 
 North Macedonia 
 Norway 
 Russia 
 San Marino 
 Serbia 
 Switzerland 
 Turkey 
 Ukraine 
 United Kingdom 
 Vatican City 
 States with limited recognition 
 Abkhazia 
 Kosovo 
 Nagorno-Karabakh 
 Northern Cyprus 
 South Ossetia 
 Transnistria 
 Dependencies  and other territories 
 Faroe Islands 
 Gibraltar 
 Guernsey 
 Isle of Man 
 Jersey 
 
 v t e Cuisines Continental 
 African 
 North 
 West 
 list 
 Americas 
 Caribbean 
 North 
 South 
 list 
 Asian 
 Caucasian 
 Central 
 Indian subcontinent 
 Levantine 
 list 
 European 
 Balkan 
 Central 
 Eastern 
 list 
 Oceanic 
 Intercontinental
 Global 
 Latin American 
 Mediterranean 
 Middle Eastern 
 National  and regional 
 Afghan 
 Albanian 
 Algerian 
 American 
 Californian 
 Floribbean 
 Hawaiian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Lowcountry (South Carolina) 
 New England 
 New Mexico 
 Pacific Northwest 
 Pennsylvania Dutch 
 Puerto Rican 
 Southern US 
 Southwest US 
 Texas 
 Angolan 
 Argentine 
 Armenian 
 Australian 
 Austrian 
 Azerbaijani 
 Bahraini 
 Bangladeshi 
 Barbadian 
 Belarusian 
 Belgian 
 Belizean 
 Beninese 
 Bhutanese 
 Bolivian 
 Bosnian-Herzegovinian 
 Botswana 
 Brazilian 
 British 
 Channel Islands 
 English 
 Gibraltarian 
 Northern Irish 
 Saint Helena 
 Scottish 
 Welsh 
 Bruneian 
 Bulgarian 
 Burkinabé 
 Burmese 
 Burundian 
 Cambodian 
 Cameroonian 
 Canadian 
 Acadian 
 Québécois 
 Central African Republic 
 Chadian 
 Chilean 
 Chinese 
 Cantonese 
 Hong Kong 
 Macanese 
 Tibetan 
 Xinjiang 
 Colombian 
 Congolese 
 Corsican 
 Croatian 
 Cuban 
 Cypriot 
 Czech 
 Danish 
 Faroese 
 Greenlandic 
 Djiboutian 
 Dominican 
 Dominican Republic 
 Dutch 
 East Timorese 
 Ecuadorian 
 Egyptian 
 Emirati 
 Equatorial Guinean 
 Eritrean 
 Estonian 
 Ethiopian 
 Fijian 
 Filipino 
 Finnish 
 French 
 Occitan 
 French Guianan 
 Gabonese 
 Gambian 
 Georgian 
 German 
 Ghanaian 
 Greek 
 Cretan 
 Epirotic 
 Greek Macedonian 
 Heptanesean 
 Guatemalan 
 Guinea-Bissauan 
 Guinean 
 Haitian 
 Honduran 
 Hungarian 
 Icelandic 
 Indian 
 Arunachalese 
 Assamese 
 Bengali 
 Bihari 
 Goan 
 Gujarati 
 Himachal Pradesh 
 Kashmiri 
 Jharkhandi 
 Karnataka 
 Kerala 
 Maharashtrian 
 Manipuri 
 Meghalayan 
 Mizo 
 Naga 
 Odia 
 Punjabi 
 Rajasthani 
 Sikkimese 
 Sindhi 
 Tamil 
 Telangana 
 Telugu 
 Indonesian 
 Acehnese 
 Balinese 
 Banjar 
 Batak 
 Betawi 
 Indo 
 Javanese 
 Madurese 
 Makassar 
 Minahasan 
 Minangkabau 
 Palembangese 
 Sundanese 
 Iranian 
 Iraqi 
 Irish 
 Israeli 
 Italian 
 Abruzzese 
 Ligurian 
 Lombard 
 Lucanian 
 Neapolitan 
 Roman 
 Sardinian 
 Sicilian 
 Venetian 
 Ivorian 
 Jamaican 
 Japanese 
 Okinawan 
 Jordanian 
 Kazakh 
 Kenyan 
 Korean 
 North Korean 
 South Korean 
 Kosovan 
 Kuwaiti 
 Kyrgyz 
 Lao 
 Latvian 
 Lebanese 
 Lesotho 
 Liberian 
 Libyan 
 Liechtensteiner 
 Lithuanian 
 Luxembourg 
 Macedonian 
 Malagasy 
 Malawian 
 Malaysian 
 Sabahan 
 Sarawakian 
 Maldivian 
 Malian 
 Maltese 
 Mauritanian 
 Mauritian 
 Mexican 
 Moldovan 
 Monégasque 
 Mongolian 
 Montenegrin 
 Moroccan 
 Mozambican 
 Namibian 
 Nauruan 
 Nepalese 
 New Zealand 
 Nicaraguan 
 Niger 
 Nigerian 
 Niuean 
 Norwegian 
 Omani 
 Pakistani 
 Palestinian 
 Panamanian 
 Peruvian 
 Polish 
 Portuguese 
 Qatari 
 Romanian  (incl.  Transylvanian Saxon ) 
 Russian 
 Bashkir 
 Chechen 
 Circassian 
 Komi 
 Mordovian 
 Sakha 
 Tatar 
 Udmurt 
 Yamal 
 Rwandan 
 Saint Lucian 
 Salvadoran 
 Sammarinese 
 São Tomé and Príncipe 
 Saudi Arabian 
 Senegalese 
 Serbian 
 Seychellois 
 Sierra Leonean 
 Singaporean 
 Slovak 
 Slovenian 
 Somali 
 South African 
 Spanish 
 Andalusian 
 Asturian 
 Balearic 
 Basque 
 Canarian 
 Cantabrian 
 Catalan 
 Extremaduran 
 Galician 
 Manchegan 
 Valencian 
 Sri Lankan 
 Sudanese 
 Swazi 
 Swedish 
 Swiss 
 Syrian 
 Taiwanese 
 Tajik 
 Tanzanian 
 Zanzibari 
 Thai 
 Togolese 
 Tunisian 
 Turkish 
 Turkmen 
 Trinidadian and Tobagonian 
 Ugandan 
 Ukrainian 
 Uruguayan 
 Uzbek 
 Venezuelan 
 Vietnamese 
 Western Saharan 
 Yemeni 
 Zambian 
 Zimbabwean 
 Ethnic 
 Ainu 
 Arab 
 Indonesian 
 Aromanian 
 Assyrian 
 Balochi 
 Berber 
 Cajun 
 Chinese 
 American 
 Canadian 
 Chifa 
 Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Crimean Tatar 
 Greek American 
 Hazaragi 
 Indian 
 Anglo-Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Indigenous American 
 Inuit 
 Italian American 
 Kurdish 
 Livonian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Malay 
 Ossetian 
 Parsi 
 Pashtun 
 Peranakan 
 Romani 
 Sámi 
 Soul food 
 Sylheti 
 Transylvanian Saxon 
 Yup'ik 
 Religious 
 Buddhist 
 Christian 
 Goan Catholic 
 Mangalorean Catholic 
 Mennonite 
 Hindu 
 Islamic 
 Chinese 
 Ital 
 Jain 
 Jewish 
 American 
 Ashkenazi 
 Bukharan 
 Ethiopian 
 Mizrahi 
 Sephardic 
 Syrian 
 Ritual slaughter 
 Sikh 
 Historical 
 Ancient Egyptian 
 Ancient Greek 
 Ancient Israelite 
 Ancient Roman 
 Antebellum America 
 Aztec 
 Byzantine 
 Early modern European 
 Historical Chinese 
 Historical Indian subcontinent 
 Historical North Indian and Pakistani 
 History of agriculture 
 History of alcoholic drinks 
 History of bread 
 History of seafood 
 History of vegetarianism 
 Historical Argentine 
 Historical Japanese 
 Inca 
 Mayan 
 Muisca 
 Mughal 
 Medieval 
 Ottoman 
 Peasant 
 Soviet 
 Thirteen Colonies 
 Styles 
 Classique 
 Fast food 
 Fusion 
 New American 
 Eurasian 
 Haute 
 Molecular gastronomy 
 Note by Note 
 Nouvelle 
 Lists 
 List of cuisines 
 List of historical cuisines 
 Lists of prepared foods 
 Related 
 Cookbook 
 Cooking 
 Culinary arts 
 Drink 
 Food 
 history 
 Diet 
 Meal preparation 
 
   Food portal 
   Drink portal 
   Category 
   Commons 
   Cookbook 
   WikiProject 
   Outline 
 
 Authority control   National libraries 
 France 
 BnF data 
 Israel 
 United States 
 Other 
 IdRef 
 
  
NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw2413
Cached time: 20230310194323
Cache expiry: 1814400
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc, no‐toc‐conversion]
CPU time usage: 1.189 seconds
Real time usage: 1.462 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 20377/1000000
Post‐expand include size: 218340/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 20457/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 16/100
Expensive parser function count: 58/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 94076/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.603/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 25100097/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/400
 
 
Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1169.227      1 -total
 28.39%  331.966      3 Template:Navbox
 15.53%  181.607     60 Template:Lang
 14.74%  172.296      1 Template:European_topic
 14.47%  169.176      1 Template:Reflist
 11.56%  135.119     14 Template:Cite_web
 11.16%  130.471      1 Template:Culture_of_Finland
 11.02%  128.821      1 Template:Culture_of_region
 10.78%  126.089      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  9.66%  113.000      1 Template:Finland_topics
 
  Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:idhash:215429-0!canonical and timestamp 20230310194321 and revision id 1143429222. Rendering was triggered because: page-view
  
 esi <esi:include src="/esitest-fa8a495983347898/content" />  
 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Finnish_cuisine&oldid=1143429222 " 
 Categories :  Finnish cuisine Arctic cuisine Hidden categories:  CS1 Finnish-language sources (fi) CS1 maint: archived copy as title Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from March 2023 Articles needing additional references from May 2010 All articles needing additional references Articles containing Finnish-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2020 Articles containing Swedish-language text Articles with unsourced statements from December 2022 Articles with unsourced statements from January 2023 Commons category link from Wikidata Articles with BNF identifiers Articles with J9U identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers Articles with SUDOC identifiers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  This page was last edited on 7 March 2023, at 17:33  (UTC) . 
 Text is available under the  Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0 ;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the  Terms of Use  and  Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the  Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. 
 
 
 Privacy policy 
 About Wikipedia 
 Disclaimers 
 Contact Wikipedia 
 Mobile view 
 Developers 
 Statistics 
 Cookie statement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
