
 
 
 Jump to content 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle sidebar 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Create account Log in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Personal tools 
 
 
 
 
   Create account   Log in 
 
 
 
 
		Pages for logged out editors  learn more 
 
 
 Contributions Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Navigation 
 
 
 Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate 
 
 
 
 
 Contribute 
 
 
 Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file 
 
 
 
 
 Tools 
 
 
 What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item 
 
 
 
 
 Print/export 
 
 
 Download as PDF Printable version 
 
 
 
 
 In other projects 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons Wikibooks Wikivoyage 
 
 
 
 
 Languages 
 
 On this Wikipedia the language links are at the top of the page across from the article title.  Go to top . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CentralNotice  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Contents 
 move to sidebar 
 hide 
 
 
 
 
 (Top) 
 
 
 
 
 
 1 History 
 
 
				Toggle History subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 1.1 Middle Ages 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.2 Ancien Régime 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.3 Late 18th century –  early 19th century 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.4 Late 19th century – early 20th century 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 National cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 Regional cuisine 
 
 
				Toggle Regional cuisine subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 3.1 Paris and Île-de-France 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.2 Champagne, Lorraine, and Alsace 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.3 Nord Pas-de-Calais, Picardy, Normandy, and Brittany 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.4 Loire Valley and central France 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.5 Burgundy and Franche-Comté 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.6 Auvergne-Rhône-Alpes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.7 Poitou-Charentes and Limousin 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.8 Bordeaux, Périgord, Gascony, and Basque country 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.9 Toulouse, Quercy, and Aveyron 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.10 Roussillon, Languedoc, and Cévennes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.11 Provence-Alpes-Côte d'Azur 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.12 Corsica 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.13 French Guiana 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.14 Réunion 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.15 Martinique 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.16 Guadeloupe 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.17 New Caledonia 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.18 French Polynesia 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.19 Mayotte 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4 Specialties by season 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5 Foods and ingredients 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6 Structure of meals 
 
 
				Toggle Structure of meals subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 6.1 Breakfast 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6.2 Lunch 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6.3 Dinner 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 7 Beverages and drinks 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8 Christmas 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 9 Food establishments 
 
 
				Toggle Food establishments subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 9.1 History 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 9.2 Restaurant staff 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 10 See also 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 11 References 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 12 Further reading 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 13 External links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
						Toggle the table of contents
					 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle the table of contents 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 French cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 49 languages 
 
 
 
 Afrikaans العربية Azərbaycanca Беларуская Български Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Jawa ქართული Kurdî ລາວ Latina Magyar Македонски Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål ភាសាខ្មែរ Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 
 Edit links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Article Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 English 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 More 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
 
 
 Cuisine originating from France 
 For the 2015 film, see  French Cuisine  (film) . 
 
 
 This article  needs additional citations for  verification .  Please help  improve this article  by  adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources:   "French cuisine"  –  news   ·   newspapers   ·   books   ·   scholar   ·   JSTOR   ( February 2023 )  ( Learn how and when to remove this template message ) 
 Part of  a series  on the Culture of France 
 History France in the Middle Ages  •  Early Modern France  •  Ancien Régime  •  French Wars of Religion  •  Louis XIV of France  •  French Revolution  •  Napoleonic wars  •  French Third Republic  •  France in the 20th century 
 
 People 
 Languages French  •  Alsatian  •  Breton  •  Catalan  •  Corsican  •  Gallo  •  Languages of New Caledonia  •  Occitan  •  Tahitian 
 
 Mythology  and  Folklore 
 Cuisine 
 Festivals 
 Religion 
 Art 
 Literature 
 Music  and  Performing arts 
 Media 
 Radio 
 Television 
 Cinema 
 
 Sport 
 Monuments 
 World Heritage Sites 
 
 Symbols 
 Flag 
 Coat of arms 
 National anthem 
 
   France portal v t e 
   A  nouvelle cuisine  presentation 
   French  haute cuisine  presentation 
   French wines  are usually made to accompany French cuisine 
 French cuisine  ( French :  Cuisine française ) is the  cooking  traditions and practices from  France . In the 14th century,  Guillaume Tirel , a  court   chef  known as "Taillevent", wrote  Le Viandier , one of the earliest  recipe  collections of  medieval France . In the 17th century, chefs  François Pierre La Varenne  and  Marie-Antoine Carême  spearheaded movements that shifted French cooking away from its foreign influences and developed France's own indigenous style.
 Cheese  and  wine  are a major part of the cuisine. They play different roles regionally and nationally, with many variations and  appellation d'origine contrôlée  (AOC) (regulated appellation) laws. [1] 
 Culinary tourism  and the  Guide Michelin  helped to acquaint commoners with the  cuisine bourgeoise  of the urban elites and the peasant cuisine of the French countryside starting in the 20th century. Many dishes that were once regional have proliferated in variations across the country.
 Knowledge of French cooking has contributed significantly to Western cuisines. Its criteria are used widely in Western cookery school boards and  culinary education . In November 2010, French  gastronomy  was added by the  UNESCO  to its lists of the world's  "intangible cultural heritage" . [2] [3] 
 
 
 History [ edit ] 
 Middle Ages [ edit ] 
   John, Duke of Berry  enjoying a grand meal. The Duke is sitting with a  cardinal  at the high table, under a luxurious  baldaquin , in front of the fireplace, tended to by several servants, including a  carver . On the table to the left of the Duke is a golden  salt cellar , or  nef , in the shape of a ship; illustration from  Très Riches Heures du Duc de Berry , circa 1410. 
 In French  medieval cuisine , banquets were common among the  aristocracy . Multiple courses would be prepared, but served in a style called  service en confusion , or all at once. Food was generally eaten by hand, meats being sliced off in large pieces held between the thumb and two fingers. The sauces were highly seasoned and thick, and heavily flavored mustards were used.
 Pies were a common banquet item, with the crust serving primarily as a container, rather than as food itself, and it was not until the very end of the  Late Middle Ages  that the  shortcrust  pie was developed.
 Meals often ended with an  issue de table , which later changed into the modern dessert, and typically consisted of  dragées  (in the Middle Ages, meaning spiced lumps of hardened sugar or honey), aged cheese and spiced wine, such as  hypocras . [4] : 1–7  
 The ingredients of the time varied greatly according to the seasons and the church calendar, and many items were preserved with salt, spices, honey, and other preservatives. Late spring, summer, and autumn afforded abundance, while winter meals were more sparse. Livestock were slaughtered at the beginning of winter. Beef was often salted, while pork was salted and smoked. Bacon and sausages would be smoked in the chimney, while the tongue and hams were  brined  and dried.  Cucumbers were brined as well, while greens would be packed in jars with salt. Fruits, nuts and root vegetables would be boiled in honey for preservation. Whale, dolphin and porpoise were considered fish, so during  Lent , the salted meats of these sea mammals were eaten. [4] : 9–12  
 Artificial freshwater ponds (often called  stews ) held  carp ,  pike ,  tench ,  bream ,  eel , and other fish. Poultry was kept in special yards, with pigeon and  squab  being reserved for the elite. Game was highly prized, but very rare, and included  venison ,  boar ,  hare , rabbit, and  fowl .
 Kitchen gardens provided herbs, including some, such as  tansy ,  rue ,  pennyroyal , and  hyssop , which are rarely used today. Spices were treasured and very expensive at that time—they included pepper, cinnamon, cloves, nutmeg, and  mace . Some spices used then, but no longer today in French cuisine are  cubebs , long pepper (both from vines similar to black pepper),  grains of paradise , and  galengale .
 Sweet-sour flavors were commonly added to dishes with vinegars and  verjus  combined with sugar (for the affluent) or honey. A common form of food preparation was to thoroughly cook, pound, and strain mixtures into fine pastes and mushes, something believed to be beneficial to make use of nutrients. [4] : 13–15  
 Visual display was prized. Brilliant colors were obtained by the addition of, for example, juices from spinach and the green part of  leeks . Yellow came from  saffron  or egg yolk, while red came from  sunflower , and purple came from  Crozophora tinctoria  or  Heliotropium europaeum .
 Gold and  silver leaf  were placed on food surfaces and brushed with egg whites. Elaborate and showy dishes were the result, such as  tourte parmerienne  which was a pastry dish made to look like a castle with chicken-drumstick turrets coated with  gold leaf . One of the grandest showpieces of the time was roast  swan  or  peacock  sewn back into its skin with feathers intact, the feet and beak being  gilded . Since both birds are stringy, and taste unpleasant, the skin and feathers could be kept and filled with the cooked, minced and seasoned flesh of tastier birds, like goose or chicken. [4] : 15–16  
 The most well known French chef of the Middle Ages was  Guillaume Tirel , also known as Taillevent. Taillevent worked in numerous royal kitchens during the 14th century. His first position was as a kitchen boy in 1326. He was chef to  Philip VI , then the  Dauphin  who was son of  John II . The Dauphin became King  Charles V of France  in 1364, with Taillevent as his chief cook. His career spanned sixty-six years, and upon his death he was buried in grand style between his two wives. His tombstone represents him in armor, holding a shield with three cooking pots,  marmites , on it. [4] : 18–21  
 
 Ancien Régime [ edit ] 
 Paris was the central hub of culture and economic activity, and as such, the most highly skilled culinary craftsmen were to be found there. Markets in Paris such as  Les Halles ,  la Mégisserie , those found along  Rue Mouffetard , and similar smaller versions in other cities were very important to the distribution of food. Those that gave French produce its characteristic identity were regulated by the  guild  system, which developed in the  Middle Ages . In Paris, the guilds were regulated by city government as well as by the French crown. A guild restricted those in a given branch of the culinary industry to operate only within that field. [4] : 71–72  
 There were two groups of guilds—first, those that supplied the raw materials: butchers, fishmongers, grain merchants, and gardeners. The second group were those that supplied prepared foods: bakers,  pastry cooks , sauce makers, poulterers, and  caterers . There were also guilds that offered both raw materials and prepared food, such as the  charcutiers  and  rôtisseurs  (purveyors of roasted meat dishes). They would supply cooked meat pies and dishes as well as raw meat and poultry. This caused issues with butchers and poulterers, who sold the same raw materials. [4] : 72–73  
 The guilds served as a training ground for those within the industry. The degrees of assistant cook, full-fledged cook and master chef were conferred. Those who reached the level of master chef were of considerable rank in their individual industry, and enjoyed a high level of income as well as economic and job security. At times, those in the royal kitchens did fall under the  guild  hierarchy, but it was necessary to find them a parallel appointment based on their skills after leaving the service of the royal kitchens. This was not uncommon as the Paris cooks' guild regulations allowed for this movement. [4] : 73  
 During the 16th and 17th centuries, French cuisine assimilated many new food items from the  New World . Although they were slow to be adopted, records of banquets show  Catherine de' Medici  (1519–1589?) serving sixty-six turkeys at one dinner. [4] : 81    The dish called  cassoulet  has its roots in the New World discovery of  haricot beans , which are central to the dish's creation, but had not existed outside of the Americas until the arrival of Europeans. [4] : 85  
 Haute cuisine  ( pronounced  [ot kɥizin] , "high cuisine") has foundations during the 17th century with a chef named  La Varenne . As author of works such as  Le Cuisinier françois , he is credited with publishing the first true French cookbook. His book includes the earliest known reference to  roux  using pork fat. The book contained two sections, one for meat days, and one for  fasting . His recipes marked a change from the style of cookery known in the Middle Ages, to new techniques aimed at creating somewhat lighter dishes, and more modest presentations of pies as individual pastries and turnovers. La Varenne also published a book on pastry in 1667 entitled  Le Parfait confitvrier  (republished as  Le Confiturier françois ) which similarly updated and codified the emerging  haute cuisine  standards for desserts and pastries. [4] : 114–120  
 Chef  François Massialot  wrote  Le Cuisinier roïal et bourgeois  in 1691, during the reign of  Louis XIV . The book contains menus served to the royal courts in 1690. Massialot worked mostly as a freelance cook, and was not employed by any particular household. Massialot and many other royal cooks received special privileges by association with the French royalty. They were not subject to the regulation of the guilds; therefore, they could cater weddings and banquets without restriction. His book is the first to list recipes alphabetically, perhaps a forerunner of the first culinary dictionary. It is in this book that a  marinade  is first seen in print, with one type for poultry and feathered game, while a second is for fish and shellfish. No quantities are listed in the recipes, which suggests that Massialot was writing for trained cooks. [4] : 149–154  
 The successive updates of  Le Cuisinier roïal et bourgeois  include important refinements such as adding a glass of wine to  fish stock . Definitions were also added to the 1703 edition. The 1712 edition, retitled  Le Nouveau cuisinier royal et bourgeois , was increased to two volumes, and was written in a more elaborate style with extensive explanations of technique. Additional smaller preparations are included in this edition as well, leading to lighter preparations, and adding a third course to the meal.  Ragout , a stew still central to French cookery, makes its first appearance as a single dish in this edition as well; prior to that, it was listed as a garnish. [4] : 155  
 
 Late 18th century –  early 19th century [ edit ] 
   The  Polish  wife of  Louis XV of France , Queen  Marie Leszczyńska , influenced French cuisine. 
   Marie-Antoine Carême  was a French chef and an early practitioner and exponent of the elaborate style of cooking known as  grande cuisine 
 Shortly before the French Revolution, dishes like  bouchées à la Reine  gained prominence. Essentially royal cuisine produced by the royal household, this is a chicken-based recipe served on  vol-au-vent  created under the influence of Queen  Marie Leszczyńska , the Polish-born wife of  Louis XV . This recipe is still popular today, as are other recipes from Queen Marie Leszczyńska like  consommé à la Reine  and  filet d'aloyau braisé à la royale . Queen Marie is also credited with introducing  Polonaise garnishing  to the French diet.
 The  French Revolution  was integral to the expansion of French cuisine, because it abolished the guild system. This meant anyone could now produce and sell any culinary item they wished.
 Bread was a significant food source among peasants and the working class in the late 18th century, with many of the nation's "people" being dependent on it. In French provinces, bread was often consumed three times a day by the "people" of France. [5]  According to Brace, bread was referred to as the basic dietary item for the masses, and it was also used as a foundation for soup.  In fact, bread was so important that harvest, interruption of commerce by wars, heavy flour exploration, and prices and supply were all watched and controlled by the French Government. Among the underprivileged, constant fear of famine was always prevalent. From 1725 to 1789, there were fourteen years of bad yields to blame for low grain supply. In Bordeaux, during 1708–1789, thirty-three bad harvests occurred. [5] 
 Marie-Antoine Carême  was born in 1784, five years before the  Revolution . He spent his younger years working at a  pâtisserie  until he was discovered by  Charles Maurice de Talleyrand-Périgord ; he would later cook for  Napoleon Bonaparte . Prior to his employment with Talleyrand, Carême had become known for his  pièces montées , which were extravagant constructions of pastry and sugar architecture. [6] : 144–145  
 More important to Carême's career was his contribution to the refinement of French cuisine. The basis for his style of cooking was his sauces, which he named  mother sauces . Often referred to as  fonds , meaning "foundations", these base sauces,  espagnole ,  velouté , and  béchamel , are still known today. Each of these sauces was made in large quantities in his kitchen, then formed the basis of multiple derivatives. Carême had over one hundred sauces in his repertoire.
 In his writings, soufflés appear for the first time. Although many of his preparations today seem extravagant, he simplified and codified an even more complex cuisine that existed beforehand. Central to his codification of the cuisine were  Le Maître d'hôtel français  (1822),  Le Cuisinier parisien  (1828) and  L'Art de la cuisine française au dix-neuvième siècle  (1833–5). [6] : 144–148  
 
 Late 19th century – early 20th century [ edit ] 
   Georges Auguste Escoffier  was a French chef, restaurateur and culinary writer who popularized and updated traditional French cooking methods 
 Georges Auguste Escoffier  is commonly acknowledged as the central figure to the modernization of  haute cuisine  and organizing what would become the national cuisine of France. His influence began with the rise of some of the great hotels in Europe and America during the 1880s-1890s. The  Savoy Hotel  managed by  César Ritz  was an early hotel in which Escoffier worked, but much of his influence came during his management of the kitchens in the Carlton from 1898 until 1921. He created a system of "parties" called the  brigade system , which separated the professional kitchen into five separate stations.
 These five stations included the  garde manger  that prepared cold dishes; the  entremettier  prepared starches and vegetables, the  rôtisseur  prepared roasts, grilled and fried dishes; the  saucier  prepared sauces and soups; and the  pâtissier  prepared all pastry and desserts items.
 This system meant that instead of one person preparing a dish on one's own, now multiple cooks would prepare the different components for the dish. An example used is  oeufs au plat Meyerbeer , the prior system would take up to fifteen minutes to prepare the dish, while in the new system, the eggs would be prepared by the  entremettier , kidney grilled by the  rôtisseur , truffle sauce made by the  saucier  and thus the dish could be prepared in a shorter time and served quickly in the popular restaurants. [6] : 157–159  
 Escoffier also simplified and organized the modern menu and structure of the meal. He published a series of articles in professional journals which outlined the sequence, and he finally published his  Livre des menus  in 1912. This type of service embraced the  service à la russe  (serving meals in separate courses on individual plates), which Félix Urbain Dubois had made popular in the 1860s. Escoffier's largest contribution was the publication of  Le Guide Culinaire  in 1903, which established the fundamentals of French cookery. The book was a collaboration with Philéas Gilbert, E. Fetu, A. Suzanne, B. Reboul, Ch. Dietrich, A. Caillat and others. The significance of this is to illustrate the universal acceptance by multiple high-profile chefs to this new style of cooking. [6] : 159–160  
 Le Guide Culinaire  deemphasized the use of heavy sauces and leaned toward lighter  fumets , which are the essence of flavor taken from fish, meat and vegetables. This style of cooking looked to create garnishes and sauces whose function is to add to the flavor of the dish, rather than mask flavors like the heavy sauces and ornate garnishes of the past. Escoffier took inspiration for his work from personal recipes in addition to recipes from Carême, Dubois and ideas from Taillevent's  Le Viandier , which had a modern version published in 1897. A second source for recipes came from existing peasant dishes that were translated into the refined techniques of  haute cuisine .
 Expensive ingredients would replace the common ingredients, making the dishes much less humble. The third source of recipes was Escoffier himself, who invented many new dishes, such as  pêche Melba . [6] : 160–162    Escoffier updated  Le Guide Culinaire  four times during his lifetime, noting in the foreword to the book's first edition that even with its 5,000 recipes, the book should not be considered an "exhaustive" text, and that even if it were at the point when he wrote the book, "it would no longer be so tomorrow, because progress marches on each day." [7] 
 This period is also marked by the appearance of the  nouvelle cuisine . The term "nouvelle cuisine" has been used many times in the history of French cuisine which emphasized the freshness, lightness and clarity of flavor and inspired by new movements in world cuisine. In the 1740s,  Menon  first used the term, but the cooking of  Vincent La Chapelle  and François Marin was also considered modern. In the 1960s,  Henri Gault  and  Christian Millau  revived it to describe the cooking of  Paul Bocuse ,  Jean  and  Pierre Troisgros ,  Michel Guérard , Roger Vergé and  Raymond Oliver . [8]  These chefs were working toward rebelling against the "orthodoxy" of  Escoffier 's cuisine. Some of the chefs were students of  Fernand Point  at the  Pyramide  in  Vienne , and had left to open their own restaurants. Gault and Millau "discovered the formula" contained in ten characteristics of this new style of cooking. [6] : 163–164  
 The characteristics that happened during this period were: 
 1. A rejection of excessive complication in cooking.
 2. The cooking times for most fish, seafood, game birds, veal, green vegetables and pâtés was greatly reduced in an attempt to preserve the natural flavors. Steaming was an important trend from this characteristic.
 3. The cuisine was made with the freshest possible ingredients. 
 4. large menus were abandoned in favor of shorter menus.
 5. Strong marinades for meat and game ceased to be used. [6] : 163–164  
 6. They stopped using heavy sauces such as  espagnole  and  béchamel  thickened with flour based " roux " in favor of seasoning their dishes with fresh herbs, quality butter, lemon juice, and vinegar.
 7. They used regional dishes for inspiration instead of  haute cuisine  dishes.
 8. New techniques were embraced and modern equipment was often used; Bocuse even used microwave ovens.
 9. The chefs paid close attention to the dietary needs of their guests through their dishes.
 10. And finally, the chefs were extremely inventive and created new combinations and pairings. [6] : 163–164  
 Some have speculated that a contributor to  nouvelle cuisine  was World War II when animal protein was in short supply during the German occupation. [9]  By the mid-1980s food writers stated that the style of cuisine had reached exhaustion and many chefs began returning to the  haute cuisine  style of cooking, although much of the lighter presentations and new techniques remained. [6] : 163–164  
 When the French  colonized Vietnam , one of the most famous and popular dishes,  Pot-au-feu  was subsequently introduced to the local people. While it didn't directly create the widely recognizable Vietnamese dish,  Pho , it served as a reference for the modern-day form of Pho.
 
 National cuisine [ edit ] 
 Main article:  List of French dishes 
 There are many dishes that are considered part of French national cuisine today.
 A meal often consists of three courses,  hors d'œuvre  or  entrée  (introductory course, sometimes soup),  plat principal  (main course),  fromage  (cheese course) or  dessert , sometimes with a salad offered before the cheese or dessert.
 
 Hors d'œuvre 
 
 
 
 
 Basil salmon  terrine 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bisque  is a smooth and creamy French  potage .
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Foie gras  with mustard seeds and green onions in duck  jus 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Croque monsieur 
 
 
 
 
 Plat principal 
 
 
 
 
 Pot-au-feu  is a  cuisine classique  dish.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Steak frites  is a simple and popular dish.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Blanquette de veau 
 
 
 
 
 Pâtisserie 
 
 
 
 
 Typical French  pâtisserie 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mille-feuille 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Macaron 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Éclair 
 
 
 
 
 Dessert 
 
 
 
 
 Crème brûlée 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mousse au chocolat 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Crêpe 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Île flottante 
 
 
 
 
 Regional cuisine [ edit ] 
   The 22  regions  and 96  departments  of  metropolitan France  include  Corsica  ( Corse , lower right). Paris area is expanded (inset at left). 
 French regional cuisine is characterized by its extreme diversity and style. Traditionally, each region of France has its own distinctive cuisine. [10] 
 
 Paris and Île-de-France [ edit ] 
 Paris and Île-de-France are central regions where almost anything from the country is available, as all  train lines  meet in the city. Over 9,000 restaurants exist in Paris and almost any cuisine can be obtained here. High-quality  Michelin Guide -rated restaurants proliferate here. [11] 
 
 Champagne, Lorraine, and Alsace [ edit ] 
 Game and ham are popular in  Champagne , as well as the special sparkling wine simply known as  Champagne . Fine fruit preserves are known from  Lorraine  as well as the  quiche Lorraine . [12]  As region of historically Allemanic German culture  Alsace  has retained Elements of  German cuisine , especially similar to those from the neighboring  Palatinate  and  Baden  region, but has implemented French influences since France first took control of the region in the 17th century. As such,  beers  made in the area are similar to the style of bordering Germany. Dishes like  choucroute  (French for  sauerkraut ) are also popular. [11] : 55   Many " Eaux de vie " (distilled alcohol from fruit) also called schnaps are from this region, due to a wide variety of local fruits (cherry, raspberry, pear, grapes) and especially prunes (mirabelle, plum).[9]:259,295 [ clarification needed ] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Flute  of  Champagne  wine
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Alsatian  Flammekueche 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Quiche 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Choucroute garnie 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Andouillette 
 
 
 
 
   "Carte Gastronomique de la France" belong to the outset of the "Cours Gastronomique" by Charles Louis Cadet de Gassicourt (1809). 
 Nord Pas-de-Calais, Picardy, Normandy, and Brittany [ edit ] 
 The coastline supplies many  crustaceans ,  sea bass ,  monkfish  and  herring .  Normandy  has top-quality seafood, such as  scallops  and  sole , while  Brittany  has a supply of lobster, crayfish and  mussels .
 Normandy is home to a large population of apple trees; apples are often used in dishes, as well as  cider  and  Calvados . The northern areas of this region, especially  Nord , grow ample amounts of wheat, sugar beets and  chicory . Thick stews are found often in these northern areas as well.
 The produce of these northern regions is also considered some of the best in the country, including cauliflower and artichokes. Buckwheat grows widely in Brittany as well and is used in the region's  galettes , called  jalet , which is where this dish originated. [11] : 93  
 
 
 
 
 
 Crème Chantilly , created at the  Château de Chantilly .
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Camembert , cheese specialty from  Normandy 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Crêpe  and  Cider , specialty from  Brittany 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lille Waffles 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Belon oysters 
 
 
 
 
 Loire Valley and central France [ edit ] 
 High-quality fruits come from the  Loire Valley  and central France, including cherries grown for the liqueur  Guignolet  and  Belle Angevine  pears. The strawberries and melons are also of high quality.
 Fish are seen in the cuisine, often served with a  beurre blanc  sauce, as well as wild game, lamb, calves,  Charolais cattle ,  Géline  fowl, and  goat cheeses .
 Young vegetables are used often, as are the specialty mushrooms of the region,  champignons de Paris . Vinegars from  Orléans  are a specialty ingredient used as well. [11] : 129, 132  
 
 Burgundy and Franche-Comté [ edit ] 
 Burgundy  and  Franche-Comté  are known for their wines.  Pike ,  perch , river crabs, snails, game,  redcurrants ,  blackcurrants  are from both  Burgundy  and  Franche-Comté .
 Amongst savorous specialties accounted in the  Cuisine franc-comtoise  from the  Franche-Comté  region are  Croûte aux morilles  [ fr ] ,  Poulet à la Comtoise  [ fr ] ,  trout , smoked meats and cheeses such as  Mont d'Or ,  Comté  and  Morbier  which are best eaten hot or cold, the exquisite  Coq au vin jaune  [ fr ]  and the special dessert  gâteau de ménage  [ fr ] .
 Charolais  beef,  poultry  from  Bresse ,  sea snail , honey cake,  Chaource  and  Epoisses cheese  are specialties of the local cuisine of Burgundy.  Dijon mustard  is also a specialty of Burgundy cuisine.  Crème de cassis  is a popular liquor made from the blackcurrants. Oils are used in the cooking here, types include nut oils and  rapeseed  oil. [11] : 153, 156, 166, 185  
 
 
 
 
 
 Bœuf bourguignon 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Coq au vin 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Escargots , with special tongs and fork
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Beaujolais  wine
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dijon mustard 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Comté  cheese and  Vin jaune 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gâteau de ménage 
 
 
 
 
 Auvergne-Rhône-Alpes [ edit ] 
 See also:  Lyonnaise cuisine 
   Grand sechoir , Museum of the  Walnut  in  Vinay, Isère 
   Salade lyonnaise 
   Drome  apricots 
   Sweet chestnuts 
 The area covers the old province of  Dauphiné , once known as the "larder" of France, [ dubious    –  discuss ]  that gave its name to  gratin dauphinois , [13]  traditionally made in a large baking dish rubbed with garlic. Successive layers of potatoes, salt, pepper and milk are piled up to the top of the dish. It is then baked in the oven at low temperature for 2 hours. [14] 
 Fruit and young vegetables are popular in the cuisine from the  Rhône valley , as are wines like  Hermitage AOC ,  Crozes-Hermitage AOC  and  Condrieu AOC .  Walnuts  and walnut products and oil from  Noix de Grenoble AOC , lowland cheeses, like  St. Marcellin , St. Félicien and  Bleu du Vercors-Sassenage .
 Poultry from  Bresse , guinea fowl from  Drôme  and fish from the  Dombes , a light yeast-based cake, called Pogne de  Romans  and the regional speciality,  Raviole du Dauphiné , and there is the  short-crust  "Suisse", a  Valence  biscuit speciality.
 Lakes and mountain streams in  Rhône-Alpes  are key to the cuisine as well.  Lyon  and  Savoy  supply sausages while the  Alpine  regions supply their specialty cheeses like  Beaufort ,  Abondance ,  Reblochon ,  Tomme  and  Vacherin . [15] [16] [17] [18] 
 Mères lyonnaises  are female cooks particular to this region who provide local  gourmet  establishments. [19]  Celebrated chefs from this region include  Fernand Point ,  Paul Bocuse , the  Troisgros brothers  and  Alain Chapel . [20] 
 The  Chartreuse Mountains  are the source of the green and yellow  Digestif  liquor,  Chartreuse  produced by the monks of the  Grande Chartreuse . [11] : 197, 230  
 Since the 2014 administrative reform, the ancient area of  Auvergne  is now part of the  region . One of its leading chefs is  Regis Marcon .
 
 
 
 
 
 Gratin dauphinois 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bleu du Vercors-Sassenage 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Chartreuse Elixir Végétal 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Salade de ravioles 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Condrieu  wine
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Suisse de Valence biscuit  [ fr ] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bleu de Bresse 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Poulet de Bresse  chicken salad
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rosette de Lyon   charcuterie 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Noix de Grenoble , unusual trilaterally symmetric walnut
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Beaufort cheeses  ripening in a cellar
 
 
 
 
 Poitou-Charentes and Limousin [ edit ] 
 Oysters  come from the  Oléron - Marennes  basin, while  mussels  come from the  Bay of Aiguillon .
 High-quality produce comes from the region's hinterland, especially goat cheese. This region and in the  Vendée  is grazing ground for  Parthenaise  cattle, while poultry is raised in  Challans .
 The region of  Poitou-Charentes  purportedly produces the best butter and cream in France.  Cognac  is also made in the region along the river  Charente .
 Limousin  is home to the  Limousin cattle , as well as sheep. The woodlands offer game and mushrooms. The southern area around  Brive  draws its cooking influence from  Périgord  and  Auvergne  to produce a robust cuisine. [11] : 237  
 
 Bordeaux, Périgord, Gascony, and Basque country [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Basque cuisine 
 Bordeaux  is known for its wine, with certain areas offering specialty grapes for wine-making. Fishing is popular in the region for the cuisine, sea fishing in the  Bay of Biscay , trapping in the  Garonne  and stream fishing in the  Pyrenees .
 The Pyrenees also has lamb, such as the  Agneau de Pauillac , as well as sheep cheeses. Beef cattle in the region include the  Blonde d'Aquitaine ,  Boeuf de Chalosse ,  Boeuf Gras de Bazas , and  Garonnaise .
 Free-range chicken, turkey, pigeon,  capon , goose and duck prevail in the region as well.  Gascony  and  Périgord  cuisines includes  pâtés ,  terrines ,  confits  and  magrets . This is one of the regions notable for its production of  foie gras , or fattened goose or duck liver.
 The cuisine of the region is often heavy and farm based.  Armagnac  is also from this region, as are prunes from  Agen . [11] : 259, 295  
 
 
 
 
 
 Confit de canard 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 A  terrine  of  foie gras  with a bottle of  Sauternes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Black Périgord  Truffle 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tourin , a garlic soup from  Dordogne 
 
 
 
 
 Toulouse, Quercy, and Aveyron [ edit ] 
 Gers , a department of France, is within this region and has poultry, while  La Montagne Noire  and  Lacaune  area offer hams and dry sausages.
 White corn is planted heavily in the area both for use in fattening ducks and geese for foie gras and for the production of  millas , a cornmeal porridge.  Haricot beans  are also grown in this area, which are central to the dish  cassoulet .
 The finest sausage in France is  saucisse de Toulouse , which also part of  cassoulet  of  Toulouse . The  Cahors  area produces a specialty " black wine " as well as  truffles  and mushrooms.
 This region also produces milk-fed lamb. Unpasteurized  ewe 's milk is used to produce  Roquefort  in  Aveyron , while in  Laguiole  is producing unpasteurized cow's milk cheese.  Salers  cattle produce milk for cheese, as well as beef and veal products.
 The volcanic soils create flinty cheeses and superb lentils. Mineral waters are produced in high volume in this region as well. [11] : 313    Cabécou cheese  is from  Rocamadour , a medieval settlement erected directly on a cliff, in the rich countryside of  Causses du Quercy  [ fr ;  nl ] .
 This area is one of the region's oldest milk producers [ verification needed ] ; it has chalky soil, marked by history and human activity, and is favourable for the raising of goats.
 
 
 
 
 
 Cassoulet 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aligot 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Roquefort  cheese
 
 
 
 
 Roussillon, Languedoc, and Cévennes [ edit ] 
 Restaurants are popular in the area known as  Le Midi . Oysters come from the  Étang de Thau , to be served in the restaurants of  Bouzigues ,  Mèze , and  Sète . Mussels are commonly seen here in addition to fish specialties of Sète,  bourride ,  tielles  and  rouille de seiche .
 In the  Languedoc   jambon cru , sometimes known as  jambon de montagne  is produced. High quality  Roquefort  comes from the  brebis  (sheep) on the  Larzac  plateau.
 The  Les Cévennes  area offers mushrooms, chestnuts, berries, honey, lamb, game, sausages,  pâtés  and  goat cheeses .  Catalan  influence can be seen in the cuisine here with dishes like  brandade  made from a purée of dried  cod  wrapped in  mangold  leaves. Snails are plentiful and are prepared in a specific  Catalan  style known as a  cargolade .  Wild boar  can be found in the more mountainous regions of the  Midi . [11] : 349, 360  
 
 Provence-Alpes-Côte d'Azur [ edit ] 
 See also:  Provencal cuisine 
 The  Provence  and  Côte d'Azur  region is rich in quality citrus, vegetables, fruits and herbs; the region is one of the largest suppliers of all these ingredients in France. The region also produces the largest amount of olives, and creates superb olive oil.  Lavender  is used in many dishes found in  Haute Provence . Other important herbs in the cuisine include  thyme ,  sage ,  rosemary ,  basil ,  savory ,  fennel ,  marjoram ,  tarragon ,  oregano , and  bay leaf . [21]  Honey is a prized ingredient in the region.
 Seafood  is widely available throughout the coastal area and is heavily represented in the cuisine.  Goat cheeses , air-dried sausages, lamb, beef, and chicken are popular here. Garlic and anchovies are used in many of the region's sauces, as in  Poulet Provençal , which uses white wine, tomatoes, herbs, and sometimes anchovies, and  Pastis  is found everywhere that alcohol is served.
 The cuisine uses a large amount of vegetables for lighter preparations. Truffles are commonly seen in Provence during the winter.  Thirteen desserts  in Provence are the traditional Christmas dessert, [22]  e.g.  quince cheese , biscuits, almonds,  nougat , apple, and  fougasse .
 Rice is grown in the  Camargue , which is the northernmost rice growing area in Europe, with  Camargue red rice  being a specialty. [11] : 387, 403, 404, 410, 416   Anibal Camous, a Marseillais who lived to be 104, maintained that it was by eating garlic daily that he kept his "youth" and brilliance. When his eighty-year-old son died, the father mourned: "I always told him he wouldn't live long, poor boy. He ate too little garlic!"
 
 
 
 
 
 Ratatouille 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Salade niçoise 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bouillabaisse 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Daube 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pissaladière 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pan bagnat 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Vacqueyras  wine
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bourride de fruits de mer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Salade Mesclun 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pieds paquets 
 
 
 
 
 Corsica [ edit ] 
 See also:  Cuisine of Corsica 
 Goats and sheep proliferate on the island of  Corsica , and lamb are used to prepare dishes such as  stufato ,  ragouts  and roasts. Cheeses are also produced, with  brocciu  being the most popular.
 Chestnuts , growing in the Castagniccia forest, are used to produce flour, which is used in turn to make bread, cakes and  polenta . The forest provides acorns used to feed the pigs and  boars  that provide much of the protein for the island's cuisine. Fresh fish and seafood are common.
 The island's pork is used to make fine hams, sausage and other unique items including  coppa  (dried rib cut),  lonzu  (dried pork fillet),  figatellu  (smoked and dried liverwurst),  salumu  (a dried sausage),  salcietta ,  Panzetta , bacon, and  prisuttu  (farmer's ham).
 Clementines  (which hold an AOC designation), lemons, nectarines and figs are grown there. Candied  citron  is used in  nougats , while and the aforementioned  brocciu  and chestnuts are also used in desserts.
 Corsica offers a variety of wines and fruit liqueurs, including Cap Corse, Patrimonio,  Cédratine , Bonapartine,  liqueur de myrte ,  vins de fruit ,  Rappu , and  eau-de-vie  de châtaigne . [11] : 435, 441, 442  
 
 French Guiana [ edit ] 
 See also:  French Guianan cuisine  and  Awara broth 
 French Guianan cuisine  or  Guianan cuisine  is a blend of the different cultures that have settled in  French Guiana . Creole and Chinese restaurants are common in major cities such as  Cayenne ,  Kourou  and  Saint-Laurent-du-Maroni . Many indigenous animal species such as  caiman  and  tapir  are used in spiced stews.
 
 Réunion [ edit ] 
 See also:  Cuisine of Reunion 
 The cuisine of Réunion is a  Creole cuisine  (in French,  Créole ) with a mixture of cooking styles and ingredients. It is strongly influenced by  Malagasy cuisine  (from  Madagascar ), as well as other cuisines from  East Africa . It also incorporates elements of larger French,  Indian  and  Chinese  cuisines, brought by French colonialization and Indian and Chinese immigrants respectively. [23] [24]  Notable dishes include samosas, bouchons, rougail, and various curries. [25] 
 
 Martinique [ edit ] 
 The  cuisine of Martinique  is a  Creole cuisine  with a mix of French, indigenous, African, and Indian cooking styles using local ingredients such as  breadfruit ,  cassava , and  christophine . [26]  Creole dishes rely heavily on  seafood , including  curries  and  fritters .  Crêperies , Brasseries, and restaurants featuring cuisine from various French regions can be found all over Martinique. [26]  Notable local dishes include Accra a fish-based fritter, Boudin sausage, Fricassée de chatrou an occotpus stew, Colombo de Martinique a coconut-milk based curry, and Ti Punch a rum and cane juice based drink. [27] 
 
 Guadeloupe [ edit ] 
 The cuisine of Guadeloupe includes Caribbean, African, European and Indian influences. Notable dishes includes the fish fritter accra, a savory stuffed donut called bokit, and coconut based deserts like custard and sorbet. [28]  Notably. the spice blend “colombo” ot “massalé” is a curry-like mix of pepper, saffron, coriander, cumin and garlic with the flavor profile included by Sri Lankan immigrants. [28] [29]  The island is also known for rums and includes nine distilleries producing traditional and agricultural rum. [29] 
 
 New Caledonia [ edit ] 
 The cuisine of New Caledonia includes local Kanak, Melanesian, and traditional French cooking styles. [30]  A notable local dish is bougna which is a stew composed of starches, taros, sweet potatoes, poingo bananas, yams, and is accompanied by local meat and cooked in coconut milk. [31]  Seafood is also common including fish and lobster. [32]  Traditional French pastries, breads, and cheese may also be found especially in the capital of  Nouméa . [30] 
 
 French Polynesia [ edit ] 
 The  cuisine of French Polynesia  includes includes a significant array of fruits and vegetables especially sweet potato and coconut. [33]  Due to the island nature of the region, seafood is also very common. [34]  The “ ahima’a ”, is a traditional Polynesian underground oven in which hot stones are placed inside to cook the ingredients. [34]  Notable dishes include  Faraoa 'ipo ,  Poisson cru  and  Rēti'a .
 
 Mayotte [ edit ] 
 The  cuisine of Mayotte  includes influences from European France, Portugal, the Arab world, and India. [35]  Common food includes rice as a daily staple staple mixed with root vegetables, plantains, fresh and dried fish, and milk from grated coconuts and meat. Notable dishes include Chahoula ya nadzi, rice boiled in water or coconut milk generally served for large meals and makarara a festive fried cake that is prepared into rolls of dough made of flour and coconut milk. [36] [37] 
 
 Specialties by season [ edit ] 
 French cuisine varies according to the season. In summer, salads and fruit dishes are popular because they are refreshing and produce is inexpensive and abundant. Greengrocers prefer to sell their fruits and vegetables at lower prices if needed, rather than see them rot in the heat. At the end of summer, mushrooms become plentiful and appear in stews throughout France. The hunting season begins in September and runs through February. Game of all kinds is eaten, often in elaborate dishes that celebrate the success of the hunt. Shellfish are at their peak when winter turns to spring, and oysters appear in restaurants in large quantities.
 With the advent of deep-freeze and the air-conditioned  hypermarché , these seasonal variations are less marked than hitherto, but they are still observed, in some cases due to legal restrictions.  Crayfish , for example, have a short season and it is illegal to catch them out of season. [38]  Moreover, they do not freeze well.
 
 Foods and ingredients [ edit ] 
 This section  does not  cite  any  sources .  Please help  improve this section  by  adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and  removed .   ( August 2010 )  ( Learn how and when to remove this template message ) 
 French regional cuisines use locally grown vegetables, such as  pomme de terre  ( potato ),  blé  ( wheat ),  haricots verts  (a type of French green bean),  carotte  ( carrot ),  poireau  ( leek ),  navet  ( turnip ),  aubergine  ( eggplant ),  courgette  ( zucchini ), and  échalotte  ( shallot ).
 French regional cuisines use locally grown fungi, such as  truffe  ( truffle ),  champignon de Paris  ( button mushroom ),  chanterelle ou girolle  ( chanterelle ),  pleurote (en huître)  ( oyster mushrooms ), and  cèpes  ( porcini ).
 Common fruits include oranges, tomatoes,  tangerines ,  peaches ,  apricots ,  apples ,  pears ,  plums ,  cherries ,  strawberries ,  raspberries ,  redcurrants ,  blackberries ,  grapes ,  grapefruit , and  blackcurrants .
 Varieties of meat consumed include  poulet  ( chicken ),  pigeon  ( squab ),  canard  ( duck ),  oie  ( goose , the source of  foie gras ),  bœuf  ( beef ),  veau  ( veal ),  porc  ( pork ),  agneau  ( lamb ),  mouton  ( mutton ),  caille  ( quail ),  cheval  ( horse ),  grenouille  ( frog ), and  escargot  (snails). Commonly consumed fish and seafood include  cod ,  canned sardines ,  fresh sardines , canned  tuna , fresh tuna,  salmon ,  trout ,  mussels ,  herring ,  oysters ,  shrimp  and  calamari .
 Eggs often eaten as:  omelettes , hard-boiled with  mayonnaise ,  scrambled  plain, scrambled  haute cuisine  preparation,  œuf à la coque .
 Herbs and seasonings vary by region, and include  fleur de sel ,  herbes de Provence ,  tarragon ,  rosemary ,  marjoram ,  lavender ,  thyme ,  fennel , and  sage .
 Fresh fruit and vegetables, as well as fish and meat, can be purchased either from supermarkets or specialty shops. Street markets are held on certain days in most localities; some towns have a more permanent covered market enclosing food shops, especially meat and fish retailers. These have better shelter than the periodic street markets.
 
 
 
 
 
 Herbes de provence 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Charolais cattle 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Champignon de Paris 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Haricots verts 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Piments d'Espelette 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fleur de sel  de  Guérande 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Grappe de raisin 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Poulet de Bresse 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Blé ( Wheat ) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Black Périgord truffle 
 
 
 
 
 Structure of meals [ edit ] 
 Breakfast [ edit ] 
 This section  needs additional citations for  verification .  Please help  improve this article  by  adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.   ( July 2020 )  ( Learn how and when to remove this template message ) 
   Café  with a  croissant  for breakfast 
 Le petit déjeuner  (breakfast) is traditionally a quick meal consisting of  tartines  (slices) of French bread with butter and honey or jam (sometimes  brioche ), along with  café au lait  (also called  café crème ), or black coffee, or tea [39]  and rarely hot chicory. Children often drink  hot chocolate  in bowls or cups along with their breakfasts.  Croissants ,  pain aux raisins  or  pain au chocolat  (also named  chocolatine  in the south-west of France) are mostly included as a weekend treat. Breakfast of some kind is always served in cafés opening early in the day.
 There are also savoury dishes for breakfast. An example is  le petit déjeuner gaulois  or  petit déjeuner fermier  with the famous long narrow bread slices topped with soft white cheese or boiled ham, called  mouillettes , [40]  which is dipped in a soft-boiled egg and some fruit juice and hot drink.
 Another variation called  le petit déjeuner chasseur , meant to be very hearty, is served with  pâté  and other  charcuterie  products. A more classy version is called  le petit déjeuner du voyageur , where delicatessens serve gizzard, bacon, salmon, omelet, or  croque monsieur , with or without soft-boiled egg and always with the traditional coffee/tea/chocolate along fruits or fruit juice. When the egg is cooked sunny-side over the  croque-monsieur , it is called a  croque-madame .
 In  Germinal  and other novels, Émile Zola also reported the  briquet : two long bread slices stuffed with butter, cheese and or ham. It can be eaten as a standing/walking breakfast, or meant as a "second" one before lunch.
 In the movie  Bienvenue chez les Ch'tis , Philippe Abrams ( Kad Merad ) and Antoine Bailleul ( Dany Boon ) share together countless breakfasts consisting of  tartines de Maroilles  (a rather strong cheese) along with their hot chicory.
 
 Lunch [ edit ] 
 Le déjeuner  (lunch) is a two-hour mid-day meal or a one-hour lunch break [ verification needed ] . In some smaller towns and in the south of France, the two-hour lunch may still be customary [ verification needed ] . Sunday lunches are often longer and are taken with the family. [41]  Restaurants normally open for lunch at noon and close at 2:30 pm. Some restaurants are closed on Monday during lunch hours. [42] 
 In large  cities , a majority of working people and  students  eat their lunch at a corporate or school cafeteria, which normally serves complete meals as described above; it is not usual for students to bring their own lunch to eat. For companies that do not operate a cafeteria, it is mandatory for employees to be given lunch vouchers as part of their employee benefits. These can be used in most restaurants, supermarkets and  traiteurs ; however, workers having lunch in this way typically do not eat all three courses of a traditional lunch due to price and time constraints. In smaller cities and towns, some working people leave their workplaces to return home for lunch. Also, an alternative, especially among  blue-collar workers , is eating sandwiches followed by a dessert; both dishes can be found ready-made at bakeries and supermarkets at budget prices.
 
 Dinner [ edit ] 
 Le dîner  (dinner) often consists of three  courses ,  hors d'œuvre  or  entrée  (appetizers or introductory course, sometimes soup),  plat principal  (main course), and a cheese course or dessert, sometimes with a salad offered before the cheese or dessert. Yogurt may replace the cheese course, while a simple dessert would be fresh fruit. The meal is often accompanied by bread,  wine  and  mineral water . Most of the time the bread would be a  baguette  which is very common in France and is made almost every day. Main meat courses are often served with vegetables, along with potatoes, rice or pasta. [41] : 82   Restaurants often open at 7:30 pm for dinner, and stop taking orders between the hours of 10:00 pm and 11:00 pm. Some restaurants close for dinner on Sundays. [42] : 342  
 
 Beverages and drinks  [ edit ] 
 In French cuisine, beverages that precede a meal are called  apéritifs  (literally: "that opens the appetite"), and can be served with  amuse-bouches  (literally: "mouth amuser"). Those that end it are called  digestifs . During the meal, plates are served with water, wine or sometimes beer ( choucroute  and beer, for example).
 
 Apéritifs 
 The  apéritif  varies from region to region:  Pastis  is popular in the south of France,  Crémant d'Alsace  in the eastern region.  Champagne  can also be served.  Kir , also called  Blanc-cassis , is a common and popular  apéritif -cocktail made with a measure of  crème de cassis  (blackcurrant liqueur) topped up with  white wine . The phrase  Kir Royal  is used when white wine is replaced with a  Champagne  wine. A simple glass of red wine, such as  Beaujolais nouveau , can also be presented as an  apéritif , accompanied by  amuse-bouches . Some  apéritifs  can be  fortified wines  with added herbs, such as  cinchona ,  gentian  and  vermouth . Trade names that sell well include  Suze  (the classic gentiane),  Byrrh ,  Dubonnet , and  Noilly Prat . Beer can also be an  apéritif . Other drinks are fruit juices or syrups for children.
 
 Digestifs 
 Digestifs  are traditionally stronger, and include  Cognac ,  Armagnac ,  Calvados ,  Eau de vie  and fruit alcohols.
 
 Christmas [ edit ] 
 A typical French Christmas dish is turkey with chestnuts. Other common dishes are smoked salmon, oysters, caviar and  foie gras . The Yule log ( bûche de Noël ) is a very French tradition during Christmas. Chocolate and cakes also occupy a prominent place for Christmas in France. This cuisine is normally accompanied by Champagne. Tradition says that thirteen desserts complete the Christmas meal in reference to the twelve apostles and Christ. [43] [44] [45] [46] 
 
   Yule log, a French Christmas tradition 
 Food establishments [ edit ] 
   Cooks at work 
 History [ edit ] 
 The modern restaurant has its origins in French culture. Prior to the late 18th century, diners who wished to "dine out" would visit their local  guild  member's kitchen and have their meal prepared for them. However, guild members were limited to producing whatever their guild registry delegated to them. [47] : 8–10   These guild members offered food in their own homes to steady clientele that appeared day-to-day but at set times. The guest would be offered the meal  table d'hôte , which is a meal offered at a set price with very little choice of dishes, sometimes none at all. [47] : 30–31  
 The first steps toward the modern restaurant were locations that offered  restorative   bouillons , or  restaurants —these words being the origin of the name "restaurant". This step took place during the 1760s–1770s. These locations were open at all times of the day, featuring ornate tableware and reasonable prices. These locations were meant more as meal replacements for those who had "lost their appetites and suffered from jaded palates and weak chests." [47] : 34–35  
 In 1782 Antoine Beauvilliers,  pastry chef  to the future  Louis XVIII , opened one of the most popular restaurants of the time—the  Grande Taverne de Londres —in the arcades of the  Palais-Royal . Other restaurants were opened by chefs of the time who were leaving the failing  monarchy of France , in the period leading up to the  French Revolution . It was these restaurants that expanded upon the limited menus of decades prior, and led to the full restaurants that were completely legalized with the advent of the French Revolution and abolition of the guilds. This and the substantial discretionary income of the  French Directory 's  nouveau riche  helped keep these new restaurants in business. [47] : 140–144  
 
   Restaurant  Le Train Bleu , in Paris 
   A  bouchon ,  Le tablier  (the apron), in Vieux Lyon 
   Café de Flore , in Paris 
   An  estaminet  in Lille 
 
 Categories
 
 
 English
 
 French
 
 Description
 
 
 Restaurant 
 
 More than 5,000 in Paris alone, with varying levels of prices and menus. Open at certain times of the day, and normally closed one day of the week. Patrons select items from a printed  menu . Some offer regional menus, while others offer a modern styled menu. Waiters and waitresses are trained and knowledgeable professionals. By law, a prix-fixe menu must be offered, although high-class restaurants may try to conceal the fact. Few French restaurants cater to vegetarians. The  Guide Michelin  rates many of the better restaurants in this category. [11] : 30  
 
 
 Bistro(t) 
 
 Often smaller than a restaurant and many times using chalk board or verbal menus. Wait staff may well be untrained. Many feature a regional cuisine. Notable dishes include  coq au vin ,  pot-au-feu ,  confit de canard , calves' liver and  entrecôte . [11] : 30  
 
 
 Bistrot à Vin
 
 Similar to  cabarets  or  tavernes  of the past in France. Some offer inexpensive alcoholic drinks, while others take pride in offering a full range of vintage  AOC  wines. The foods in some are simple, including sausages, ham and cheese, while others offer dishes similar to what can be found in a bistro. [11] : 30  
 
 
 Bouchon 
 
 Found in  Lyon , they produce traditional Lyonnaise cuisine, such as sausages, duck  pâté  or roast pork. The dishes can be quite fatty, and heavily oriented around meat. There are about twenty officially certified traditional bouchons, but a larger number of establishments describing themselves using the term. [48] 
 
 
 Brewery
 
 Brasserie 
 
 These establishments were created in the 1870s by refugees from  Alsace-Lorraine . These establishments serve beer, but most serve wines from Alsace such as  Riesling ,  Sylvaner , and  Gewürztraminer . The most popular dishes are  choucroute  and  seafood  dishes. [11] : 30   In general, a brasserie is open all day every day, offering the same menu. [49] 
 
 
 Café 
 
 Primarily locations for coffee and alcoholic drinks. Additional tables and chairs are usually set outside, and prices are usually higher for service at these tables. The limited foods sometimes offered include  croque-monsieur , salads,  moules-frites  ( mussels  and  pommes frites ) when in season.   Cafés  often open early in the morning and shut down around nine at night. [11] : 30  
 
 
 Salon de Thé 
 
 These locations are more similar to cafés in the rest of the world. These tearooms often offer a selection of cakes and do not offer alcoholic drinks. Many offer simple snacks, salads, and sandwiches. Teas, hot chocolate, and  chocolat à l'ancienne  (a popular chocolate drink) are offered as well. These locations often open just prior to noon for lunch and then close late afternoon. [11] : 30  
 
 
 Bar 
 
 Based on the American style, many were built at the beginning of the 20th century (particularly around World War I, when young American expatriates were quite common in France, particularly Paris). These locations serve cocktails, whiskey,  pastis  and other alcoholic drinks. [11] : 30  
 
 
 Estaminet
 
 Typical of the  Nord-Pas-de-Calais  region, these small bars/restaurants used to be a central place for farmers, mine or textile workers to meet and socialize, sometimes the bars would be in a grocery store. [50]  Customers could order basic regional dishes, play boules, or use the bar as a meeting place for clubs. [51]  These estaminets almost disappeared, but are now considered a part of Nord-Pas-de-Calais history, and therefore preserved and promoted.
 
 Restaurant staff [ edit ] 
 Larger restaurants and hotels in France employ extensive staff and are commonly referred to as either the  kitchen brigade  for the kitchen staff or  dining room brigade  system for the dining room staff. This system was created by  Georges Auguste Escoffier .  This structured team system delegates responsibilities to different individuals who specialize in certain tasks. The following is a list of positions held both in the kitchen and dining rooms brigades in France: [11] : 32  
 
 
 Staff
 
 
 Section
 
 French
 
 English
 
 Duty
 
 
 Kitchen brigade
 
 Chef de cuisine 
 
 Head chef
 
 Responsible for overall management of kitchen. They supervise staff, and create menus and new recipes with the assistance of the restaurant manager, make purchases of raw food items, train apprentices and maintain a sanitary and hygienic environment for the preparation of food. [11] : 32  
 
 
 Sous-chef de cuisine 
 
 Deputy Head chef
 
 Receives orders directly from the  chef de cuisine  for the management of the kitchen and often represents the  chef de cuisine  when he or she is not present. [11] : 32  
 
 
 Chef de partie 
 
 Senior chef
 
 Responsible for managing a given station in the kitchen where they specialize in preparing particular dishes. Those that work in a lesser station are referred to as a  demi-chef . [11] : 32  
 
 
 Cuisinier 
 
 Cook
 
 This position is an independent one where they usually prepare specific dishes in a station. They may be referred to as a  cuisinier de partie . [11] : 32  
 
 
 Commis 
 
 Junior cook
 
 Also works in a specific station, but reports directly to the  chef de partie  and takes care of the tools for the station. [11] : 32  
 
 
 Apprenti(e) 
 
 Apprentice
 
 Many times they are students gaining theoretical and practical training in school and work experience in the kitchen. They perform preparatory or cleaning work. [11] : 30  
 
 
 Plongeur 
 
 Dishwasher
 
 Cleans dishes and utensils and may be entrusted with basic preparatory jobs. [11] : 32  
 
 
 Marmiton 
 
 Pot and pan washer
 
 In larger restaurants, takes care of all the pots and pans instead of the  plongeur . [11] : 33  
 
 
 Saucier 
 
 Saucemaker/sauté cook
 
 Prepares  sauces , warm  hors d'œuvres , completes meat dishes and in smaller restaurants may work on fish dishes and prepare sautéed items. This is one of the most respected positions in the kitchen brigade. [11] : 32  
 
 
 Rôtisseur 
 
 Roast cook
 
 Manages a team of cooks that roasts, broils and deep fries dishes. [11] : 32  
 
 
 Grillardin 
 
 Grill cook
 
 In larger kitchens this person prepares the grilled foods instead of the  rôtisseur . [52] : 8  
 
 
 Friturier 
 
 Fry cook
 
 In larger kitchens this person prepares fried foods instead of the  rôtisseur . [52] 
 
 
 Poissonnier 
 
 Fish cook
 
 Prepares fish and seafood dishes. [11] : 33  
 
 
 Entremetier 
 
 Entrée preparer
 
 Prepares soups and other dishes not involving meat or fish, including vegetable dishes and egg dishes. [11] : 32  
 
 
 Potager 
 
 Soup cook
 
 In larger kitchens, this person reports to the  entremetier  and prepares the soups. [52] 
 
 
 Legumier 
 
 Vegetable cook
 
 In larger kitchen this person also reports to the  entremetier  and prepares the vegetable dishes. [52] 
 
 
 Garde manger 
 
 Pantry supervisor
 
 Responsible for preparation of cold  hors d'œuvres , prepares salads, organizes large buffet displays and prepares  charcuterie  items. [11] : 30  
 
 
 Tournant 
 
 Spare hand/ roundsperson
 
 Moves throughout kitchen assisting other positions in kitchen.
 
 
 Pâtissier 
 
 Pastry cook
 
 Prepares desserts and other meal end sweets, and in locations without a  boulanger  also prepares breads and other baked items. They may also prepare pasta for the restaurant. [11] : 33  
 
 
 Confiseur 
 
 Prepares candies and  petit fours  in larger restaurants instead of the  pâtissier . [52] 
 
 
 Glacier 
 
 Prepares frozen and cold desserts in larger restaurants instead of the  pâtissier . [52] 
 
 
 Décorateur 
 
 Prepares show pieces and specialty cakes in larger restaurants instead of the  pâtissier . [52] : 8–9  
 
 
 Boulanger 
 
 Baker
 
 Prepares bread, cakes and breakfast pastries in larger restaurants instead of the  pâtissier . [11] : 33  
 
 
 Boucher 
 
 Butcher
 
 Butchers meats, poultry and sometimes fish. May also be in charge of breading meat and fish items. [52] 
 
 
 Aboyeur 
 
 Announcer/ expediter
 
 Takes orders from dining room and distributes them to the various stations. This position may also be performed by the  sous-chef de partie . [52] 
 
 
 Communard 
 
 Prepares the meal served to the restaurant staff. [52] 
 
 
 Garçon de cuisine 
 
 Performs preparatory and auxiliary work for support in larger restaurants. [11] : 33  
 
 
 Dining room brigade
 
 Directeur de la restauration 
 
 General manager
 
 Oversees economic and administrative duties for all food-related business in large hotels or similar facilities including multiple restaurants, bars, catering and other events. [11] : 33  
 
 
 Directeur de restaurant 
 
 Restaurant manager 
 
 Responsible for the operation of the restaurant dining room, which includes managing, training, hiring and firing staff, and economic duties of such matters. In larger establishments there may be an assistant to this position who would replace this person in their absence. [11] : 33  
 
 
 Maître d'hôtel 
 
 Welcomes guests, and seats them at tables. They also supervise the service staff. Commonly deals with complaints and verifies patrons' bills. [11] : 33  
 
 
 Chef de salle 
 
 Commonly in charge of service for the full dining room in larger establishments; this position can be combined into the  maître d'hotel  position. [52] 
 
 
 Chef de rang 
 
 The dining room is separated into sections called  rangs . Each  rang  is supervised by this person to coordinate service with the kitchen. [11] : 33  
 
 
 Demi-chef de rang 
 
 Back server
 
 Clears plates between courses if there is no  commis débarrasseur , fills water glasses and assists the  chef de rang . [52] 
 
 
 commis de rang 
 
 
 Commis débarrasseur 
 
 Clears plates between courses and the table at the end of the meal. [11] : 33  
 
 
 Commis de suite 
 
 In larger establishments, this person brings the different courses from the kitchen to the table. [11] : 33  
 
 
 Chef d'étage 
 
 Captain
 
 Explains the menu to the guest and answers any questions. This person often performs the tableside food preparations. This position may be combined with the  chef de rang  in smaller establishments. [52] 
 
 
 Chef de vin 
 
 Wine server
 
 Manages wine cellar by purchasing and organizing as well as preparing the wine list. Also advises the guests on wine choices and serves the wine. [11] : 33  
 
 
 Sommelier 
 
 
 chef sommelier 
 
 In larger establishments, this person will manage a team of sommeliers. [11] : 33  
 
 
 chef caviste 
 
 
 Serveur de restaurant 
 
 Server
 
 This position found in smaller establishments performs the multiple duties of various positions in the larger restaurants in the service of food and drink to the guests. [11] : 33  
 
 
 Responsable de bar 
 
 Bar manager
 
 Manages the bar in a restaurant, which includes ordering and creating drink menus; they also oversee the hiring, training and firing of barmen. Also manages multiple bars in a hotel or other similar establishment. [11] : 33  
 
 
 Chef de bar 
 
 
 Barman 
 
 Bartender
 
 Serves alcoholic drinks to guests. [11] : 33  
 
 
 Dame du vestiaire 
 
 Coat room attendant who receives and returns guests' coats and hats. [11] : 33  
 
 
 Voituriers 
 
 Valet
 
 Parks guests' cars and retrieves them when the guests leave. [11] : 33  
 
 See also [ edit ] 
 
 France portal Food portal 
 
 Cuisine of Quebec 
 Acadian cuisine 
 Cajun cuisine 
 French Americans 
 French Canadians 
 French paradox 
 Larousse Gastronomique 
 Le Répertoire de la Cuisine 
 List of French cheeses 
 List of French desserts 
 List of French dishes 
 List of French restaurants 
 List of French soups and stews 
 List of restaurants in Paris 
 References [ edit ] 
 
 
 ^   Miller, Norman (October 2014).  "The ABCs of AOC: France's Most Prized Produce" .  FrenchEntree Magazine . Retrieved  13 May  2021 . 
 
 ^   Bon appétit: Your meal is certified by the UN   Archived  20 November 2010 at the  Wayback Machine  Dallas Morning News 
 
 ^   UNESCO (16 November 2010).  "Celebrations, healing techniques, crafts and culinary arts added to the Representative List of the Intangible Cultural Heritage" . UNESCO . Retrieved  4 June  2012 . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   e   f   g   h   i   j   k   l   m   Wheaton, Barbara Ketcham (1996).  Savoring the Past: The French Kitchen and Table from 1300 to 1789 . New York: First Touchstone.  ISBN   978-0-684-81857-3 . 
 
 ^  a   b   Brace, Richard Munthe (1946). "The Problem of Bread and the French Revolution at Bordeaux".  The American Historical Review .  51  (4): 649–667.  doi : 10.2307/1843902 .  JSTOR   1843902 . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   e   f   g   h   i   Mennell, Stephen (1996).  All Manners of Food: eating and taste in England and France from the Middle Ages to the present, 2nd ed . Chicago: University of Illinois Press.  ISBN   978-0-252-06490-6 . 
 
 ^   Escoffier, Georges Auguste (2002).  Escoffier: The Complete Guide to the Art of Modern Cookery . New York: John Wiley and Sons. pp. Foreword.  ISBN   978-0-471-29016-2 . 
 
 ^   Joyeuse encyclopédie anecdotique de la gastronomie ,  Michel Ferracci-Porri  and Maryline Paoli, Preface by Christian Millau, Ed. Normant 2012, France  ISBN   978-2-915685-55-8 
 
 ^   Hewitt, Nicholas (2003).  The Cambridge Companion to Modern French Culture . Cambridge: The Cambridge University Press. pp. 109–110.  ISBN   978-0-521-79465-7 . 
 
 ^   "French Country Cooking."   Archived  18 June 2011 at the  Wayback Machine   French-country-decor-guide.com   Archived  3 July 2011 at the  Wayback Machine . Accessed July 2011. 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   e   f   g   h   i   j   k   l   m   n   o   p   q   r   s   t   u   v   w   x   y   z   aa   ab   ac   ad   ae   af   ag   ah   ai   aj   ak   al   am   an   ao   ap   aq   ar   as   at   au   av   aw   Dominé, André (2004).  Culinaria France . Cologne: Könemann Verlagsgesellschaft mbh.  ISBN   978-3-8331-1129-7 . 
 
 ^   "25 Authentic French Foods Everyone Must Try!" .  Travel Food Atlas . 29 March 2020 . Retrieved  29 December  2020 . 
 
 ^   "Bibliothèque dauphinoise : La cuisine dauphinoise, René Fonvieille" .  www.bibliotheque-dauphinoise.com . Retrieved  25 November  2022 . 
 
 ^   Arces, Amicie d'; Cheylard, A. Vallentin du (1997).  Cuisine du Dauphiné: Drôme, Hautes-Alpes, Isère : de A à Z  (in French). La Fontaine de Siloë.  ISBN   978-2-86253-216-5 . 
 
 ^   "Lyon Sausage - : Whats on the menu?" .  menus.nypl.org . Retrieved  10 June  2021 . 
 
 ^   "Véritable Saucisson de Lyon" .  Spécialités Lyonnaises  (in French). Archived from  the original  on 26 February 2018 . Retrieved  10 June  2021 . 
 
 ^   "The culinary heritage of the French mountains" .  uk.france.fr . Retrieved  10 June  2021 . 
 
 ^   "10 fromages de montagne incontournables" .  www.hardloop.fr  (in French) . Retrieved  10 June  2021 . 
 
 ^   Maier, Thomas, A. (2012).  Hospitality Leadership Lessons in French Gastronomy: The Story of Guy and Franck Savoy . Authorhouse.  ISBN   9781468541083 .p.19.   https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=MTts8MF4CRwC&pg=PA19&lpg=PA19&dq=Lyon+gastronomy&source=bl&ots=XXkyv-EdAm&sig=boHw6EN2Ap6mSB_hEK0h8dRdXJw&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwivk87336DYAhXiLMAKHUcEA-g4HhDoAQgyMAI#v=onepage&q=Lyon%20gastronomy&f=false  retrieved 12-23-2017. 
 
 ^   Buford, Bill. (2011). "Why Lyon is the Food Capital of the World".  The Guardian , 13 February 2011.  https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2011/feb/13/bill-buford-lyon-food-capital  retrieved 12-23-2017 
 
 ^   "Nice Cooking" . La Cuisine Niçoise. Archived from  the original  on 11 October 2017 . Retrieved  29 December  2015 . 
 
 ^   "Christmas traditions" . Provenceweb.fr . Retrieved  4 June  2012 . 
 
 ^   "Gastronomy" .  Île de la Réunion Tourisme . Retrieved  26 February  2023 . 
 
 ^   rund3v.  "The dishes and dishes of Reunion" .  Reunion Island . Retrieved  26 February  2023 . 
 
 ^   "Discover the cuisine of Reunion Island" .  www.france.fr . Retrieved  26 February  2023 . 
 
 ^  a   b   "Gastronomy of Martinique" .  AZ Martinique.com . Retrieved  26 February  2023 . 
 
 ^   Rabikowska, Suzy (30 March 2015).  "Top 10 Martinican Dishes You Just Have to Try" .  Culture Trip . Retrieved  26 February  2023 . 
 
 ^  a   b   "Gastronomy Of Guadeloupe Island" .  Alliance Française de San Francisco . Retrieved  26 February  2023 . 
 
 ^  a   b   "Région Guadeloupe-Guadeloupe, a land of cultures and flavours" .  www.regionguadeloupe.fr . Retrieved  26 February  2023 . 
 
 ^  a   b   "Culinary Postcard: Noumea, New Caledonia" .  Food . 13 October 2022 . Retrieved  26 February  2023 . 
 
 ^   "New Caledonia - Kanak cooking" .  www.newcaledonia.travel . Retrieved  26 February  2023 . 
 
 ^   "New Caledonia, a breeding ground of flavors - Elle & Vire Professionnel" .  Elle & Vire . Retrieved  26 February  2023 . 
 
 ^   "Tahitian Food | French Polynesian Food | Tahitian Food Specialties" .  Tahiti Tourisme . Retrieved  2 March  2023 . 
 
 ^  a   b   "Food in French Polynesia" .  YESTAHITI . Retrieved  2 March  2023 . 
 
 ^   "What's Eaten Where: Mayotte | Cyprus Mail" .  https://cyprus-mail.com/ . Retrieved  2 March  2023 .   {{ cite web }} :  External link in  |website=  ( help ) 
 
 ^   Le Petit Futé .  "MAYOTTE, Cuisine locale, guide touristique Petit Futé" .  www.petitfute.com  (in French).  Archived  from the original on 3 November 2020 . Retrieved  5 October  2020 . 
 
 ^   "Discovery Mayotte : Gastronomy" .  www.petitfute.co.uk . Retrieved  2 March  2023 . 
 
 ^   Imported crayfish are unrestricted, and many arrive from Pakistan. 
 
 ^   Larousse Gastronomique . New York: Clarkson Potter. 2009. p. 780.  ISBN   978-0-307-46491-0 . 
 
 ^   Larousse, Éditions.  "Définitions : mouillette - Dictionnaire de français Larousse" .  www.larousse.fr . Retrieved  6 July  2017 . 
 
 ^  a   b   Steele, Ross (2001).  The French Way, 2nd ed . New York: McGraw-Hill. 
 
 ^  a   b   Fodor's (2006).  See It. France. 2nd ed . New York: Fodor's Travel Publications. 
 
 ^   "10 traditions de Noël françaises - Cheznoscousins.com" . 30 December 2014. Archived from  the original  on 9 October 2016 . Retrieved  6 July  2017 . 
 
 ^   "Noel dans le monde" . Archived from  the original  on 9 October 2016 . Retrieved  6 October  2016 . 
 
 ^   [1] [ dead link ] 
 
 ^   "LES FETES DE NOEL EN FRANCE" .  referat.clopotel.ro . Retrieved  6 July  2017 . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   Spang, Rebecca L. (2001).  The Invention of the Restaurant, 2nd Ed . Harvard University Press.  ISBN   978-0-674-00685-0 . 
 
 ^   Boudou, Evelyne; Jean-Marc Boudou (2003).  Les bonnes recettes des bouchons lyonnais . Seyssinet: Libris.  ISBN   978-2-84799-002-7 . 
 
 ^   Ribaut, Jean-Claude (8 February 2007).  Le Monde .  "Les brasseries ont toujours l'avantage d'offrir un service continu tout au long de la journée, d'accueillir les clients après le spectacle et d'être ouvertes sept jours sur sept, quand les restaurants ferment deux jours et demi par semaine." "Brasseries have the advantage of offering uninterrupted service all day, seven days a week, and of being open for the after-theatre crowd, whereas restaurants are closed two and a half days of the week." 
 
 ^   "Les Estaminets - Taverns" .  www.leershistorique.com . Archived from  the original  on 3 March 2016 . Retrieved  6 July  2017 . 
 
 ^   Wytteman, JP, ed. (1988).  Le Nord de la préhistoire à nos jours  (in French). Bordessoules.  p. 260. 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   e   f   g   h   i   j   k   l   m   The Culinary Institute of America  (2006).  The Professional Chef  (8th ed.).  Hoboken, New Jersey :  John Wiley & Sons .  ISBN   978-0-7645-5734-7 . 
 
 
 Further reading [ edit ] 
 Patrick Rambourg,  Histoire de la cuisine et de la gastronomie françaises , Paris, Ed. Perrin (coll. tempus n° 359), 2010, 381 pages.  ISBN   978-2-262-03318-7 
 Bryan Newman, " Behind the French Menu ", 
 External links [ edit ] 
 France stages first-ever Gastronomy Day  Radio France Internationale in English 
 French cuisine  at Wikipedia's  sister projects : Media  from Commons Recipes  from Wikibooks Travel guides  from Wikivoyage 
 v t e France   topics History Overviews 
 History 
 Timeline 
 Military history 
 Language 
 Economic 
 Foreign relations 
 Journalism 
 Liberalism and radicalism in France 
 Regions 
 History of Brittany 
 History of Normandy 
 Ancient 
 Prehistory 
 Greek colonies 
 Celtic Gaul 
 Roman Gaul 
 Middle Ages 
 Visigothic Kingdom 
 Francia 
 West Francia 
 Middle Ages 
 Early Modern 
 Early modern era 
 House of Bourbon 
 Absolute monarchy 
 Ancien Régime 
 French Wars of Religion 
 Thirty Years' War 
 Peace of Westphalia 
 Second Hundred Years' War 
 Louis XIV 
 War of the Spanish Succession 
 Diplomatic Revolution of 1756 
 Seven Years' War 
 Revolution 
 French Revolution 
 Napoleonic era 
 First Republic 
 First Empire 
 Late Modern 
 Long nineteenth century 
 Kingdom of France 
 Bourbon Restoration 
 July Monarchy 
 French Revolution of 1848 
 Second Republic 
 1851 French coup d'état 
 Second Empire 
 Government of National Defense 
 Third Republic 
 Belle Époque 
 France in World War I 
 France in World War II 
 Vichy France 
 Free France 
 Liberation of France 
 Post-liberation 1944-1946 
 Contemporary 
 Fourth Republic 
 Fifth Republic 
 1900 to present 
 May 68 
 2005 French riots 
 2021 French labor protests 
 Geography 
 Administrative divisions 
 Cities 
 Climate change 
 Islands 
 Lakes 
 Mountains 
 Rivers 
 World Heritage Sites 
 Politics 
 Constitutions 
 Elections 
 presidential 
 Foreign relations 
 Politics 
 Human rights 
 Intersex 
 LGBT 
 Judiciary 
 Law 
 history 
 enforcement 
 criminal law 
 Military 
 Parliament 
 Political parties 
 Economy 
 Agriculture 
 Automotive industry 
 Banking 
 Central bank 
 Economic history 
 Energy 
 Euro 
 Exports 
 Franc  (former currency) 
 French subdivisions by GDP 
 Stock exchange 
 Science and technology 
 Taxation 
 Telecommunications 
 Tourism 
 Trade unions 
 Transport 
 Society 
 Crime 
 Demographics 
 Education 
 Health care 
 Homelessness 
 People 
 Poverty 
 Religion 
 secularism 
 Racism 
 Social class 
 Welfare 
 Culture 
 Anthem 
 Architecture 
 Art 
 Coat of arms 
 Cinema 
 Cuisine 
 Cultural icons 
 Fashion 
 Flag 
 Gardens 
 Language 
 Literature 
 Media 
 Music 
 Philosophy 
 Public holidays 
 Sport 
 Symbols 
 Theatre 
 
 Outline 
 
 Category 
 Portal 
 WikiProject 
 v t e Cuisines Continental 
 African 
 North 
 West 
 list 
 Americas 
 Caribbean 
 North 
 South 
 list 
 Asian 
 Caucasian 
 Central 
 Indian subcontinent 
 Levantine 
 list 
 European 
 Balkan 
 Central 
 Eastern 
 list 
 Oceanic 
 Intercontinental
 Global 
 Latin American 
 Mediterranean 
 Middle Eastern 
 National  and regional 
 Afghan 
 Albanian 
 Algerian 
 American 
 Californian 
 Floribbean 
 Hawaiian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Lowcountry (South Carolina) 
 New England 
 New Mexico 
 Pacific Northwest 
 Pennsylvania Dutch 
 Puerto Rican 
 Southern US 
 Southwest US 
 Texas 
 Angolan 
 Argentine 
 Armenian 
 Australian 
 Austrian 
 Azerbaijani 
 Bahraini 
 Bangladeshi 
 Barbadian 
 Belarusian 
 Belgian 
 Belizean 
 Beninese 
 Bhutanese 
 Bolivian 
 Bosnian-Herzegovinian 
 Botswana 
 Brazilian 
 British 
 Channel Islands 
 English 
 Gibraltarian 
 Northern Irish 
 Saint Helena 
 Scottish 
 Welsh 
 Bruneian 
 Bulgarian 
 Burkinabé 
 Burmese 
 Burundian 
 Cambodian 
 Cameroonian 
 Canadian 
 Acadian 
 Québécois 
 Central African Republic 
 Chadian 
 Chilean 
 Chinese 
 Cantonese 
 Hong Kong 
 Macanese 
 Tibetan 
 Xinjiang 
 Colombian 
 Congolese 
 Corsican 
 Croatian 
 Cuban 
 Cypriot 
 Czech 
 Danish 
 Faroese 
 Greenlandic 
 Djiboutian 
 Dominican 
 Dominican Republic 
 Dutch 
 East Timorese 
 Ecuadorian 
 Egyptian 
 Emirati 
 Equatorial Guinean 
 Eritrean 
 Estonian 
 Ethiopian 
 Fijian 
 Filipino 
 Finnish 
 French 
 Occitan 
 French Guianan 
 Gabonese 
 Gambian 
 Georgian 
 German 
 Ghanaian 
 Greek 
 Cretan 
 Epirotic 
 Greek Macedonian 
 Heptanesean 
 Guatemalan 
 Guinea-Bissauan 
 Guinean 
 Haitian 
 Honduran 
 Hungarian 
 Icelandic 
 Indian 
 Arunachalese 
 Assamese 
 Bengali 
 Bihari 
 Goan 
 Gujarati 
 Himachal Pradesh 
 Kashmiri 
 Jharkhandi 
 Karnataka 
 Kerala 
 Maharashtrian 
 Manipuri 
 Meghalayan 
 Mizo 
 Naga 
 Odia 
 Punjabi 
 Rajasthani 
 Sikkimese 
 Sindhi 
 Tamil 
 Telangana 
 Telugu 
 Indonesian 
 Acehnese 
 Balinese 
 Banjar 
 Batak 
 Betawi 
 Indo 
 Javanese 
 Madurese 
 Makassar 
 Minahasan 
 Minangkabau 
 Palembangese 
 Sundanese 
 Iranian 
 Iraqi 
 Irish 
 Israeli 
 Italian 
 Abruzzese 
 Ligurian 
 Lombard 
 Lucanian 
 Neapolitan 
 Roman 
 Sardinian 
 Sicilian 
 Venetian 
 Ivorian 
 Jamaican 
 Japanese 
 Okinawan 
 Jordanian 
 Kazakh 
 Kenyan 
 Korean 
 North Korean 
 South Korean 
 Kosovan 
 Kuwaiti 
 Kyrgyz 
 Lao 
 Latvian 
 Lebanese 
 Lesotho 
 Liberian 
 Libyan 
 Liechtensteiner 
 Lithuanian 
 Luxembourg 
 Macedonian 
 Malagasy 
 Malawian 
 Malaysian 
 Sabahan 
 Sarawakian 
 Maldivian 
 Malian 
 Maltese 
 Mauritanian 
 Mauritian 
 Mexican 
 Moldovan 
 Monégasque 
 Mongolian 
 Montenegrin 
 Moroccan 
 Mozambican 
 Namibian 
 Nauruan 
 Nepalese 
 New Zealand 
 Nicaraguan 
 Niger 
 Nigerian 
 Niuean 
 Norwegian 
 Omani 
 Pakistani 
 Palestinian 
 Panamanian 
 Peruvian 
 Polish 
 Portuguese 
 Qatari 
 Romanian  (incl.  Transylvanian Saxon ) 
 Russian 
 Bashkir 
 Chechen 
 Circassian 
 Komi 
 Mordovian 
 Sakha 
 Tatar 
 Udmurt 
 Yamal 
 Rwandan 
 Saint Lucian 
 Salvadoran 
 Sammarinese 
 São Tomé and Príncipe 
 Saudi Arabian 
 Senegalese 
 Serbian 
 Seychellois 
 Sierra Leonean 
 Singaporean 
 Slovak 
 Slovenian 
 Somali 
 South African 
 Spanish 
 Andalusian 
 Asturian 
 Balearic 
 Basque 
 Canarian 
 Cantabrian 
 Catalan 
 Extremaduran 
 Galician 
 Manchegan 
 Valencian 
 Sri Lankan 
 Sudanese 
 Swazi 
 Swedish 
 Swiss 
 Syrian 
 Taiwanese 
 Tajik 
 Tanzanian 
 Zanzibari 
 Thai 
 Togolese 
 Tunisian 
 Turkish 
 Turkmen 
 Trinidadian and Tobagonian 
 Ugandan 
 Ukrainian 
 Uruguayan 
 Uzbek 
 Venezuelan 
 Vietnamese 
 Western Saharan 
 Yemeni 
 Zambian 
 Zimbabwean 
 Ethnic 
 Ainu 
 Arab 
 Indonesian 
 Aromanian 
 Assyrian 
 Balochi 
 Berber 
 Cajun 
 Chinese 
 American 
 Canadian 
 Chifa 
 Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Crimean Tatar 
 Greek American 
 Hazaragi 
 Indian 
 Anglo-Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Indigenous American 
 Inuit 
 Italian American 
 Kurdish 
 Livonian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Malay 
 Ossetian 
 Parsi 
 Pashtun 
 Peranakan 
 Romani 
 Sámi 
 Soul food 
 Sylheti 
 Transylvanian Saxon 
 Yup'ik 
 Religious 
 Buddhist 
 Christian 
 Goan Catholic 
 Mangalorean Catholic 
 Mennonite 
 Hindu 
 Islamic 
 Chinese 
 Ital 
 Jain 
 Jewish 
 American 
 Ashkenazi 
 Bukharan 
 Ethiopian 
 Mizrahi 
 Sephardic 
 Syrian 
 Ritual slaughter 
 Sikh 
 Historical 
 Ancient Egyptian 
 Ancient Greek 
 Ancient Israelite 
 Ancient Roman 
 Antebellum America 
 Aztec 
 Byzantine 
 Early modern European 
 Historical Chinese 
 Historical Indian subcontinent 
 Historical North Indian and Pakistani 
 History of agriculture 
 History of alcoholic drinks 
 History of bread 
 History of seafood 
 History of vegetarianism 
 Historical Argentine 
 Historical Japanese 
 Inca 
 Mayan 
 Muisca 
 Mughal 
 Medieval 
 Ottoman 
 Peasant 
 Soviet 
 Thirteen Colonies 
 Styles 
 Classique 
 Fast food 
 Fusion 
 New American 
 Eurasian 
 Haute 
 Molecular gastronomy 
 Note by Note 
 Nouvelle 
 Lists 
 List of cuisines 
 List of historical cuisines 
 Lists of prepared foods 
 Related 
 Cookbook 
 Cooking 
 Culinary arts 
 Drink 
 Food 
 history 
 Diet 
 Meal preparation 
 
   Food portal 
   Drink portal 
   Category 
   Commons 
   Cookbook 
   WikiProject 
   Outline 
 
 v t e European cuisine Sovereign states European Union 
 Austria 
 Belgium 
 Bulgaria 
 Croatia 
 Cyprus 
 Czech Republic 
 Denmark 
 Estonia 
 Finland 
 France 
 Germany 
 Greece 
 Hungary 
 Republic of Ireland 
 Italy 
 Latvia 
 Lithuania 
 Luxembourg 
 Malta 
 Netherlands 
 Poland 
 Portugal 
 Romania 
 Slovakia 
 Slovenia 
 Spain 
 Sweden 
 Other 
 Albania 
 Andorra 
 Armenia 
 Azerbaijan 
 Belarus 
 Bosnia and Herzegovina 
 Georgia 
 Iceland 
 Kazakhstan 
 Liechtenstein 
 Moldova 
 Monaco 
 Montenegro 
 North Macedonia 
 Norway 
 Russia 
 San Marino 
 Serbia 
 Switzerland 
 Turkey 
 Ukraine 
 United Kingdom 
 Vatican City 
 States with limited recognition 
 Abkhazia 
 Kosovo 
 Nagorno-Karabakh 
 Northern Cyprus 
 South Ossetia 
 Transnistria 
 Dependencies  and other territories 
 Faroe Islands 
 Gibraltar 
 Guernsey 
 Isle of Man 
 Jersey 
 
 v t e Mediterranean cuisine Regions Southern Maghrebi 
 Algerian 
 Chakhchoukha 
 Berber 
 Libyan 
 Bazin 
 Moroccan 
 Méchoui 
 Tajine 
 Tunisian 
 Shakshouka 
 Regional
 Couscous 
 Egyptian 
 Duqqa 
 Ful medames 
 Kushari 
 Mulukhiyah 
 Levant 
 Israeli 
 Hamin 
 Lebanese 
 Kibbeh 
 Palestinian 
 Musakhan 
 Syrian 
 Regional 
 Baba ghanoush 
 Hummus 
 Northern Turkish 
 Cheeses 
 Desserts 
 Kebabs 
 Rakı 
 Turkish tea 
 Greek 
 Gyros 
 Greek salad 
 Stifado 
 Feta 
 Skordalia 
 Loukaniko 
 Melomakarono 
 Ionian Islands 
 Bourdeto 
 Pastitsada 
 Crete 
 Dakos 
 Paximadi 
 Other Balkan 
 Albanian 
 Aromanian 
 Bosnia and Herzegovina 
 Croatian 
 Montenegrin 
 Slovenian 
 Regional
 Pita 
 Shish kebab 
 Yogurt 
 Baklava 
 Moussaka 
 Italian 
 Regional
 Pasta 
 Pizza 
 Abruzzese 
 Arrosticini 
 Mortadella di Campotosto 
 Maccheroni alla chitarra 
 Pizzelle 
 Timballo 
 Bocconotto 
 Parrozzo 
 Apulian 
 Arbëreshë 
 Ligurian 
 Ciuppin 
 Focaccia 
 Pesto 
 Ravioli 
 Lombard 
 Mantuan 
 Lucanian 
 Neapolitan 
 Neapolitan ragù 
 Pasta e fagioli 
 Roman 
 Carbonara 
 Sardinian 
 Pane carasau 
 Malloreddus 
 Mirto (liqueur) 
 Abbamele 
 Pecorino sardo 
 Culurgiònes 
 Bottarga 
 Seada 
 Sicilian 
 Cannoli 
 Caponata 
 Pasta alla Norma 
 Scaccia 
 Tuscan 
 Ribollita 
 Venetian 
 Carpaccio 
 Polenta 
 Risotto 
 French 
 Corsican 
 Brocciu 
 Occitan 
 Cassoulet 
 Brandade 
 Provencal 
 Bouillabaisse 
 Ratatouille 
 Salade niçoise 
 Spanish 
 Andalusian 
 Gazpacho 
 Sherry 
 Balearic 
 Caldereta 
 Tombet 
 Catalan 
 Escalivada 
 Escudella 
 Ollada 
 Valencian 
 Paella 
 Other 
 Gibraltarian 
 Monégasque 
 Islands 
 Cypriot 
 Afelia 
 Halloumi 
 Maltese 
 Staples 
 Wheat 
 Bread 
 Couscous 
 Pasta 
 Pizza 
 Semolina 
 Olive 
 Olive oil 
 Grape 
 Wine 
 Shared 
 Anise spirits 
 Bottarga 
 Lamb 
 Exemplars 
 Elizabeth David 
 A Book of Mediterranean Food 
 
 Category 
 
 Authority control : National libraries  
 France 
 BnF data 
 Israel 
 United States 
 Japan 
 
  
NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw2314
Cached time: 20230310193832
Cache expiry: 1814400
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc, no‐toc‐conversion]
CPU time usage: 2.097 seconds
Real time usage: 2.482 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 42786/1000000
Post‐expand include size: 398538/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 21567/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 54/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 260108/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.940/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 25090063/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/400
 
 
Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 2018.825      1 -total
 22.80%  460.339     78 Template:Rp
 21.92%  442.582     78 Template:R/superscript
 18.51%  373.709     13 Template:Navbox
 16.15%  326.092      1 Template:Reflist
 11.05%  223.154    234 Template:R/where
  8.15%  164.456     30 Template:Cite_web
  7.13%  143.856      1 Template:European_topic
  6.03%  121.717      1 Template:Culture_of_France
  5.94%  119.955      1 Template:Culture_of_region
 
  Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:idhash:11002-0!canonical and timestamp 20230310193830 and revision id 1142462433. Rendering was triggered because: page-view
  
 esi <esi:include src="/esitest-fa8a495983347898/content" />  
 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=French_cuisine&oldid=1142462433 " 
 Categories :  French cuisine French chefs Mediterranean cuisine Hidden categories:  Webarchive template wayback links CS1 French-language sources (fr) CS1 errors: external links All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from July 2017 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from August 2020 Articles needing additional references from February 2023 All articles needing additional references Articles containing French-language text Wikipedia articles needing clarification from March 2021 All accuracy disputes Articles with disputed statements from December 2017 All pages needing factual verification Wikipedia articles needing factual verification from September 2021 Articles needing additional references from August 2010 Articles needing additional references from July 2020 Articles with BNF identifiers Articles with J9U identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers Articles with NDL identifiers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  This page was last edited on 2 March 2023, at 14:34  (UTC) . 
 Text is available under the  Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0 ;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the  Terms of Use  and  Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the  Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. 
 
 
 Privacy policy 
 About Wikipedia 
 Disclaimers 
 Contact Wikipedia 
 Mobile view 
 Developers 
 Statistics 
 Cookie statement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
