
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Homepage Accessibility links Skip to content Accessibility Help BBC Account Notifications Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds Bitesize CBeebies CBBC Food Home News Sport Reel Worklife Travel Future Culture TV Weather Sounds More menu   Search BBC   Search BBC   Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds Bitesize CBeebies CBBC Food Home News Sport Reel Worklife Travel Future Culture TV Weather Sounds Close menu    Styling hook for shared modules only  
 
 Food Home Recipes In Season Occasions Cuisines Ingredients Dishes Collections Budget Recipes Chefs Stories Diets Programmes Techniques Your Favourites Galaktoboureko with orange syrup Loading Preparation time less than 30 mins Cooking time 30 mins to 1 hour Serves Serves 8 Dietary   Vegetarian The Greeks love their sweets, and this one is almost as central to their cooking culture as baklava or rice pudding. It is quite common to add an orange sauce to galaktoboureko. I made this one typically sweet and sticky. By   Rick Stein From   Rick Stein: From Venice to Istanbul Share Share this with Facebook Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp Yummly Copy link Read more about sharing. Loading     Shopping list Print recipe Preparation time less than 30 mins Cooking time 30 mins to 1 hour Serves Serves 8 Dietary   Vegetarian Ingredients For the custard pastry 100g/3½oz unsalted  butter , melted, plus extra for greasing 3 free-range  eggs , separated 125g/4½oz golden  caster sugar ½ tsp  vanilla extract 90g/3¼oz  semolina 1 litre/1¾ pint full-fat  milk , warmed 7 sheets  filo pastry For the oranges in syrup 3  oranges 440g/15½oz  caster sugar 2 tbsp  lemon juice How-to-videos Method Preheat the oven to 180C/160C Fan/Gas 4. Lightly grease a 20cm/8in springform cake tin. In a large bowl, whisk together the egg yolks, golden caster sugar and vanilla extract with an electric whisk until pale and creamy. Gradually beat in the semolina and the warmed milk. Put this mixture into a clean pan and cook over a low heat for up to 10 minutes until thickened, stirring constantly. In a clean bowl, whisk the egg whites using an electric whisk until stiff but not dry peaks form when the whisk is removed. Loosen the semolina custard with a spoonful of the egg whites, then fold in the rest. Brush each sheet of filo pastry with the melted butter and lay in the springform tin, alternating the direction the excess will drape over the sides (don’t trim it off), until you’ve used 6 sheets.  Pour the custard mixture into the pastry-lined tin and fold the overhanging sheets over the top, tucking in the ends. Place the final sheet of filo, buttered and folded in half, on top. Tuck in the sides and butter the top.  Bake for 45–50 minutes until the custard mixture has set. Check after 30 minutes and cover with foil if the top is getting too brown. Zest the oranges, then peel them and cut the fruit across into thin slices, removing excess pith.  Heat the caster sugar and 190ml/6¾fl oz water in a pan. When the sugar has dissolved, add the orange zest and lemon juice and simmer for 8–10 minutes until you have a thick syrup. Add the orange slices to the syrup, then set aside. Allow the pie to cool to room temperature before releasing from the tin. Cut into slices using a serrated knife and serve with the oranges in syrup. How-to videos Whisking egg whites How to separate eggs Budget Recipes     Related Recipes Pear cake (Torta di pere e mandorle) By   Elisabetta Ludica See more   World baking  recipes     (30) Apple palm pies By   Nadiya Hussain See more   filo pastry  recipes     (79) This recipe is from... Rick Stein: From Venice to Istanbul 5. Rick Stein: From Venice to Istanbul BBC Two Recipes from this episode Gigantes with tomatoes and greens Halloumi saganaki Follow  BBC Food Like  BBC Food Follow  BBC Food FAQs  about BBC Food Find us here 
 
   Explore the BBC Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds Bitesize CBeebies CBBC Food Home News Sport Reel Worklife Travel Future Culture TV Weather Sounds Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Accessibility Help Parental Guidance Contact the BBC Make an editorial complaint BBC emails for you Advertise with us AdChoices / Do Not Sell My Info Copyright © 2023 BBC.  The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites.  Read about our approach to external linking.                 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
