
 
 
 Jump to content 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle sidebar 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Create account Log in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Personal tools 
 
 
 
 
   Create account   Log in 
 
 
 
 
		Pages for logged out editors  learn more 
 
 
 Contributions Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Navigation 
 
 
 Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate 
 
 
 
 
 Contribute 
 
 
 Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file 
 
 
 
 
 Tools 
 
 
 What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item 
 
 
 
 
 Print/export 
 
 
 Download as PDF Printable version 
 
 
 
 
 In other projects 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons Wikibooks Wikivoyage 
 
 
 
 
 Languages 
 
 On this Wikipedia the language links are at the top of the page across from the article title.  Go to top . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CentralNotice  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Contents 
 move to sidebar 
 hide 
 
 
 
 
 (Top) 
 
 
 
 
 
 1 Regional traditional cuisines 
 
 
				Toggle Regional traditional cuisines subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 1.1 Abkhazia 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.2 Adjara 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.3 Guria 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.4 Imereti 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.5 Kakheti 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.6 Kartli 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.7 Lazeti 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.8 Samegrelo 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.9 Mtianeti, Khevi, Khevsureti, Pshavi and Tusheti 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.10 Racha-Lekhchumi 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.11 Samtskhe-Javakheti 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.12 Svaneti 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 Appetizers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 Breads 
 
 
				Toggle Breads subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 3.1 Khachapuri 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4 Cheeses 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5 Salads 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6 Soups and stews 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 7 Fish 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8 Meat 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 9 Sauces and spices 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 10 Vegetarian dishes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 11 Desserts 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 12 Wine 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 13 See also 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 14 References 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 15 External links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
						Toggle the table of contents
					 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle the table of contents 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Georgian cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 39 languages 
 
 
 
 العربية Արեւմտահայերէն Azərbaycanca বাংলা Башҡортса Čeština Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Jawa ქართული Қазақша Kurdî Кыргызча Македонски მარგალური Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Русский Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Svenska Tagalog Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 
 Edit links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Article Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 English 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 More 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
 
 
 Culinary traditions of Georgia 
 This article is about the cuisine of a country in  Eastern Europe . For the cuisine of the  US state , see  Lowcountry cuisine . 
 Part of  a series  on the Culture of Georgia (country) 
 History 
 People 
 Languages 
 Mythology 
 Cuisine 
 Festivals 
 Religion 
 Art 
 Literature 
 Music 
 Media 
 Television 
 Cinema 
 
 Sport 
 Monuments 
 World Heritage Sites 
 
 Symbols 
 Flag 
 Coat of arms 
 National anthem 
 
   Georgia (country) portal v t e 
 Georgian cuisine   ქართული სამზარეულო 
 Dishes & sauces 
 Georgian bread 
 Georgian cheese 
 Abkhazian cheese 
 Ajapsandali 
 Badrijani 
 Chakapuli 
 Chakhokhbili 
 Chanakhi 
 Chashushuli 
 Chicken tabaka 
 Chikhirtma 
 Chkmeruli 
 Churchkhela 
 Gozinaki 
 Ispanakhi Matsvnit 
 Khachapuri 
 Kharcho 
 Khashi 
 Khinkali 
 Kubdari 
 Kuchmachi 
 Kupati 
 Lobiani 
 Lobio 
 Matsoni 
 Mchadi 
 Mujuji 
 Pelamushi 
 Pkhali 
 Satsivi 
 Shotis puri 
 Sulguni 
 Tolma 
 Tklapi 
 Tonis puri 
 sauces:   Ajika 
 Satsebeli 
 Tkemali 
 
 Wines & drinks 
 Georgian wine 
 Akhasheni 
 Alazani 
 Aleksandrouli 
 Badagoni 
 Barakoni 
 Chinuri 
 Khvanchkara 
 Kindzmarauli 
 Mtevandidi 
 Mtsvane 
 Mujuretuli 
 Mukuzani 
 Rkatsiteli 
 Saperavi 
 Tavkveri 
 Tsinandali 
 Tsolikouri 
 Tvishi 
 Usakhelauri 
 Vazisubani 
 other drinks:   Borjomi 
 Chacha 
 Eristoff 
 Lagidze water 
 Nabeglavi 
 Sairme 
 Tarkhuna 
 
 Other 
 Kvevri 
 Kantsi 
 Keipi 
 Rtveli 
 Supra 
 Tamada 
 Utskho suneli 
 Khmeli suneli 
 v t e 
 Georgian cuisine  ( Georgian :  ქართული სამზარეულო ,  romanized :   kartuli samzareulo ) consists of cooking traditions, techniques, and practices of  Georgia . Georgian cuisine has a distinct character, while bearing some similarities with various national cuisines of the  Caucasus  and the  wider Eastern Europe . Every region of Georgia has its own distinct style of food preparation. Eating and  drinking  are important parts of  Georgian culture .
 Georgia was one of the countries on the  Silk Road , which resulted in travelers influencing Georgian cuisine. The Georgian love of family and friends is one of the reasons why the  supra  (tablecloth) is so important in Georgia.  Supra  is offered spontaneously to relatives, friends or guests. Every  supra  has its  tamada  ( toastmaster ), who gives the toast and entertains the guests.
 In 2010 Georgian cuisine was described as having had an exotic appeal to Russians that  The Independent  compared to that of  Indian cuisine  to the British. [1] 
 
 
 Regional traditional cuisines [ edit ] 
 Abkhazia [ edit ] 
 Abkhazian  cuisine uses many  spices  and  walnuts . 
 
 The most popular dishes from Abkhazia are Abysta (Абыста -  porridge  made of corn, similar to the Mingrelian  Ghomi ), Apyrpylchapa (Апырпылчапа - pepper skin stuffed with walnut sauce), Achma (Ачма - a variation of  Khachapuri ), Aritsvmgeli (Арицвмгели - corn bread with walnut), Achash (Ачаш - Abkhaz chudu, with cheese), Achapa (Ачапа - kidney beans with walnut) and Akutaghchapa (Акутагьчапа - hard boiled eggs filled with walnuts, similar to  deviled eggs ). 
 The most popular dessert is Akuarkuar, a cookie with honey. 
 Ajika  is a hot, spicy, but subtly flavored  dip , often used to flavor food. Ajika is also sold as a dry spice blend.  [2] [3] 
 Abkhazian wines  include Lykhny, Apsny, and Anakopia. 
 Adjara [ edit ] 
 Adjarian  cuisine is considered a very diversified cuisine, which has been influenced by its geography (seaside, mountainous part) and by its history.
 
 In the mountainous Adjara, the main products are  dairy products  and the dishes are more fat and heavy and on the other side, in the seaside of the region, dishes are mostly spiced, and use many fresh herbs. 
 The most popular dishes in Adjara are  Adjaruli Khachapuri  ( აჭარული ხაჭაპური ), Borano ( ბორანო  - chopped cheese fried in  ghee ), Chirbuli ( ჩირბული  - omelette with walnuts and tomato), Malakhto ( მალახტო  - mashed kidney beans with walnuts and crude grape juice), Iakhni  ( იახნი  - stew similar to  Kharcho , traditionally made in and around  Kobuleti ) Khavitsi ( ხავიწი  - porridge of corn with  ghee ), Sinori ( სინორი  - made of Nadughi and unleavened dough),  Pakhlava  ( პახლავა  - a version of the  Turkish Baklava ) and Shaqarlama ( შაქარლამა  - a biscuit). 
 Guria [ edit ] 
 The cuisine of  Guria  is based mostly on poultry (especially  chicken  meat), corn-bread ( Mchadi ) and on walnuts, like the cuisine of  Imereti .
 
 The most popular dishes from Guria are  Satsivi  ( საცივი  - meat, mostly of chicken/turkey in walnut sauce called  bazhe ),  Mchadi  ( მჭადი  - Cornbread),  Kupati  ( კუპატი  - sausage made from pork meat),  Badrijani Nigvzit  ( ბადრიჯანი ნიგვზით  - fried  eggplant  with walnut sauce),  Gurian Ghvezeli  ( გურული ღვეზელი  - crescent shaped kind of khachapuri filled with cheese and hard boiled egg which is usually eaten on Christmas Day), Brinjula ( ბრინჯულა  - a sort of cheese omelette "with a dough base" similar to khachapuri)  Pkhali  ( ფხალი ) and Kuchmachi ( კუჭმაჭი  - Beef or poultry livers with walnut sauce and pomegranate). 
 Imereti [ edit ] 
 The cuisine of  Imereti  shares many affinities with the neighbouring region of  Guria  and is known for its plentiful use of   walnuts .
 
 The most famous Imeretian dishes include  Imeruli Khachapuri  ( იმერული ხაჭაპური  - the most common version of the Georgian cheese bread),  Mchadi  ( მჭადი  - Cornbread),  Pkhali  ( ფხალი ),  Kuchmachi  ( კუჭმაჭი  - beef or poultry livers with walnut sauce and pomegranate), Soko ( სოკო  - fried mushrooms), Lobio ( ლობიო  - mashed red beans with spices),  Badrijani Nigvzit  ( ბადრიჯანი ნიგვზით  - fried eggplant with walnut sauce),  Chakhokhbili  ( ჩახოხბილი  -  tomato -based soup with poultry meat), Mtsnili ( მწნილი  - pickled vegetables such as cucumbers, cabbage, beets, and jonjoli), Ekala ( ეკალა  - pkhali made from  smilax ) Kupati  ( კუპატი  - pork sausage),  Satsivi  ( საცივი  - meat, mostly of chicken/turkey in walnut sauce called  bazhe ), and Tsitsila Isrim-Maqvalshi ( წიწილა ისრიმ-მაყვალში  - roasted chick in a blackberry and grape based sauce) 
 Imereti  is also famous [ according to whom? ]  for its cheeses such as Chkinti ( ჭყინტი  - Salty cheese), Imeruli Kveli ( იმერული ყველი ) and also  Sulguni  ( სულგუნი ). 
 Kakheti [ edit ] 
 Kakhetian  cuisine is considered to be a more meat-based cuisine and the region itself is called the "Region of Wine". [ by whom? ]  It is also known as the birth-place of one type of Georgian bread,  Tonis Puri . 
 
 Notable dishes from Kakheti include  Mtsvadi  ( მწვადი  - meat cooked on fire),  Chakapuli  ( ჩაქაფული  - soup made of fresh herbs such as  tarragon  and meat of sheep or lamb),  Khinkali  ( ხინკალი  - dumplings filled with meat and seasoned with herbs),  Khashlama  ( ხაშლამა  - boiled meat of beef or lamb),  Khashi  ( ხაში  - boiled meat, often eaten after Supra),  Chanakhi  ( ჩანახი  - soup made of lamb and tomatoes),  Chikhirtma  ( ჩიხირთმა  - soup made of chicken meat), and  Ajapsandali  ( აჯაფსანდალი  - kind of ragout made of eggplants, potatoes and tomatoes). 
 In Kakheti, they make famous desserts such as  Churchkhela  ( ჩურჩხელა  - Candy made of grape juice and walnuts), and  Pelamushi  ( ფელამუში  - Dessert made of grape juice). 
 Kakheti is also well known for its  wines , with wine growing regions such as the Alazani valley, Tsinandali and Kindzmarauli and many indigenous grape varieties including Saperavi, Rkatsiteli, and Mtsvane. 
 Kartli [ edit ] 
 Kartli  is known as a very rich region in terms of fruits (especially apples, apricots, figs, and peaches) and vegetables (especially cucumbers, tomatoes, and onions).
 
 Kartlian dishes include Puris Kharcho ( პურის ხარჩო  - a kind of soup made of bread), Shechamandi ( შეჭამანდი  - soup made of dogwood or docks),  Jonjoli  ( ჯონჯოლი  - pickles made of Bladdernuts), Chakhrakina ( ჭახრაკინა  - a kind of  Khachapuri  filled with cheese and beetroot leaves), Khabizgina ( ხაბიზგინა  -  Ossetian   Khachapuri  filled with cheese and potatoes), and  Chakapuli  ( ჩაქაფული  - soup made of fresh herbs and meat of lamb or beef). 
 Lazeti [ edit ] 
 Though most of the historical part of  Lazeti  is located in  Turkey , Lazes in Georgia, especially in  Sarpi , still continue to carry their traditional dishes, some of them being :
 
 Bureği / Paponi  ( ბურეღი/ფაფონი ): Baked sweet pastry filled with milk pudding. 
 Gresta ( გრესტა ): Chicken or beef with melted cheese and mushrooms. 
 Kapça Tağaney ( ქაფშია ტაღანეჲ ): Fried  anchovies  and vegetables. 
 Kapça Princoni ( ქაფშა ფრინჯონი ) : Anchovy  pilaf . 
 Kapçoni Mç̌kudi ( ქაფშონი მჭკუდი ): Fried  cornbread  with sliced anchovies,  pkhali  and herbs. 
 Lu Dudey ( ლუ დუდეჲ ):  Navy beans  mixed with red  Pkhali , onions and  leeks . 
 Lu Ncaxeyi ( ლუ ნჯახეჲ ): Sort of porridge made from different vegetables mostly cabbage, kidney beans, potato which are mixed with cornmeal. 
 Muhlama  ( მუჰლამა ):  Cornmeal  with cheese. 
 Samegrelo [ edit ] 
 The regional cuisine of  Samegrelo  can be considered the most famous in  Georgia . It uses many spices and walnuts.
 
 Famous Megrelian dishes include Ghomi ( ღომი  -  porridge  made of  corn meal ), Elarji ( ელარჯი  - ghomi with  Sulguni ), Gebzhalia ( გებჟალია  - rolls of cheese seasoned with mint),  Megrelian Khachapuri  ( მეგრული ხაჭაპური  -  Khachapuri  with cheese added on the top),  Kupati  ( კუპატი  - sausage made from pork organs and belly meat), Tabaka ( ტაბაკა  - chicken cooked with  Ajika ), and  Kharcho  ( ხარჩო  - soup with beef). 
 Sulguni  ( სულგუნი ) is traditionally made in the region. 
 Ajika  ( აჯიკა ) is a sauce made of pepper and spices. It is made traditionally in  Samegrelo  and in  Abkhazia . 
 Mtianeti, Khevi, Khevsureti, Pshavi and Tusheti [ edit ] 
 These cuisines are often considered as one due to their similarities.
 
 Famous dishes include  Khinkali  ( ხინკალი  - dumplings filled with meat, potatoes or cottage cheese), Gordila ( გორდილა  - boiled dough), Qaghi ( ყაღი  - dried and salted meat), Kaurma ( ყაურმა  - a kind of soup made from meat), Kotori ( კოტორი  -  Khachapuri  filled with cottage cheese), Khachoerbo ( ხაჭოერბო  - dried cottage cheese in a ball shape) and Khavitsi ( ხავიწი  - melted cheese) 
 Tusheti  also produces a goat / sheep based cheese, called Guda ( გუდა ). [ original research? ] 
 These regions are also well known for their beer ( ლუდი ) and alcohol, Zhipitauri ( ჟიპიტაური ). 
 Racha-Lekhchumi [ edit ] 
 The cuisines of  Racha  and of  Lechkhumi  share most of their dishes and are often grouped into one cuisine as a consequence.
 
 Notable dishes include Shkmeruli ( შქმერული  - chicken in a sauce made of cream and garlic), Lori ( ლორი  - pork  bacon ),  Lobiani  ( ლობიანი  - a kind of  Khachapuri  filled with kidney beans and lori),  Lobio  ( ლობიო  - mashed kidney beans with spices),  Rachuli Khachapuri  ( რაჭული ხაჭაპური  - a kind of  Khachapuri  made into a square form). 
 Samtskhe-Javakheti [ edit ] 
 The Cuisine of  Samtskhe-Javakheti  consists of two regional cuisines:  Meskhetian  and  Javakhetian . Due to their similarities, they are often considered one regional cuisine. This cuisine differs significantly from other regional cuisine of Georgia, partly because of its heavy use of goose meat and historical Turkish rule of the region.
 
 Famous dishes from Samtskhe-Javakheti include Batis Shechamandi ( ბატის შეჭამანდი  - soup made of  goose ),  Meskhuri Khinkali  ( მესხური ხინკალი  -  Khinkali  filled with goose), Apokhti ( აპოხტი  - dried meat of lamb, beef, goose and duck), Tatarboragi ( თათარბორაგი  - boiled dough), and Rdzis Korkoti ( რძის კორკოტი  - wheat grains boiled in milk). 
 Snails  or  Lokokina  ( ლოკოკინა ) are also a very common dish in the region due to the presence of  French  Catholics in the past. 
 Samtskhe-Javakheti is also famous for its Chiri ( ჩირი  - dried fruits), Tklapi ( ტყლაპი  - fruit roll-up) and  Tenili  ( ტენილი  - a preserved, hand-pulled cheese). 
 Svaneti [ edit ] 
 Main dishes from Svaneti include  Kubdari  ( კუბდარი  - also known as  Svan  Khachapuri ,  a kind of  Khachapuri  filled with seasoned beef or pork), P'etvraal ( ფეტვრაალი  -  Khachapuri  filled with cheese and  millet ), Chvishtari ( ჭვიშტარი  -  Mchadi  with  Sulguni  inside), Lutspeq ( ლუცფექ  - boiled  barley  grains seasoned with pepper and garlic), Kharshil ( ხარშილ  - soup of barley and  urtica ), Tashmijabi ( თაშმიჯაბი  - mashed potatoes with  Sulguni ). 
 Svaneti is also famous for its local  alcohol  made from fruits such as  elderberry , and even  honey . 
 Svanetian salt , a spiced salt [4] 
 Agasyllis  ( Svanetian  ღეჰი  Ghehi   / (Georgian: დუცი   Dootsi  ) is a local,  Angelica -like plant with medicinal properties that is also eaten raw, cooked and  pickled  as a delicacy considered to benefit the digestion. It is also taken to combat parasitic worms and to treat respiratory complaints. [5] 
 Appetizers [ edit ] 
 
 Abkhazura ( აფხაზურა ): Caul fat rolled meatballs from  Abkhazia . 
 Achma ( აჩმა ): A dish with multiple layers of cheese and bread. It bears resemblance to a sauceless  lasagna . 
 Ajapsandali  ( აჯაფსანდალი ): A traditional Georgian meal. Consists of  eggplants ,  potatoes ,  onions  and  spices . 
 Badrijnis Khizilala  ( ბადრიჯნის ხიზილალა ): Fried and chopped  eggplants . The name means "Eggplant Caviar". 
 Jonjoli ( ჯონჯოლი ): Pickled flowers of  bladdernut . 
 Khachapuri  ( ხაჭაპური ): Cheese-bread with regional variation. This dish is very popular outside  Georgia , especially in the  ex-USSR . 
 Kuchmachi  ( კუჭმაჭი ): Dish made of chicken livers. 
 Kupati  ( კუპატი ): Fried sausage from Western Georgia. 
 Kubdari  ( კუბდარი ): Meat-bread made from bread, meat ( lamb, kid or pork ), spices, and onions. 
 Lobiani  ( ლობიანი ): Bean-stuffed Khachapuri. 
 Lobio  ( ლობიო ): Mashed beans with spices. 
 Matsoni  ( მაწონი ): Dairy product, similar to yogurt or sour cream. 
 Mujuji  ( მუჟუჟი ): Pork jelly. 
 Nadughi ( ნადუღი ): Cream-like dairy product. 
 Nigvziani badrijani  ( ნიგზვიანი ბადრიჯანი ): Fried  eggplant  and  walnut  sauce. 
 Pkhali  ( ფხალი ): Minced and chopped vegetables, mostly made of  spinach ,  beets , and  cabbage . 
 Satsivi  ( საცივი ): Poultry in a special walnut sauce. 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ajapsandali 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Nigvziani Badrijani 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Spinach Pkhali 
 
 
 
 
 Breads [ edit ] 
 Traditional Georgian  breads  are varied, and include  Tonis Puri ,  Shotis Puri , Mesxuri Puri, Nazuki and  Mchadi .
 Georgian breads are traditionally baked in a large, round, well-shaped oven called a  tone .
 
 
 
 
 
 Shotis Puri  in Tone
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Traditional  Tonis Puri 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mchadi
 
 
 
 
 Khachapuri [ edit ] 
 Khachapuri Adjarian   khachapuri Type Pie Course appetizer / street food Place of origin Georgia Region or state Caucasus Serving temperature hot Main ingredients Cheese ,  eggs ,  bread Variations open, closed   Cookbook: Khachapuri     Media: Khachapuri 
 Khachapuri , also spelled as Hachapuri, is a traditional Georgian dish of  cheese  (fresh or aged, most commonly  sulguni ), eggs and other ingredients. [6] 
 There are several distinctive types of khachapuri in Georgian food from different regions of Georgia:
 
 Achma ( აჩმა ), from  Abkhazia , which has multiple layers and looks more like a sauceless lasagna. 
 Adjarian  (Adjaruli / ( აჭარული ) Khachapuri, in which the dough is formed into an open boat shape and the hot pie is topped with a raw egg yolk and a pat of butter before serving. 
 Chakhrakina ( ჭახრაკინა ) is a variation of Khachapuri made in  Kartli  and in  Racha . It is filled with cheese and  beets  leaves. 
 Kotori ( კოტორი ) is a Khachapuri made in  Tusheti . The dough should be as thin as possible; and the filling consists of Kalti ( კალტი  - a sort of  cottage cheese  made in the region) and  erbo . 
 Gurian  (Guruli / ( გურული ) Khachapuri has boiled eggs inside the dough and looks like a calzone. Arguably, it is not a type of khachapuri. Gurians make them for Christmas and call them simply 'Christmas pie'. In the rest of Georgia, it is called 'Gurian pie'. 
 Imeretian  (Imeruli / ( იმერული ) Khachapuri, which is circular and probably the most common type. [7] 
 Lemzira ( ლემზირა ) is a  Svanetian  ritual cheese bread mostly made in a round or triangular shape. 
 Mingrelian  Khachapuri also called "Megruli" ( მეგრული ), similar to Imeretian but with more cheese added on top. 
 Meskhuri Khachapuri ( მესხური ) is a Khachapuri made of puff pastry dough and cheese.  Lard  is added in the dough and filling which give it a distinct taste from the more widespread Penovani Khachapuri. it is made in  Meskheti . 
 Ossetian  Khachapuri also called "Osuri" ( ოსური ) or by its original name "Khabizgina" ( ხაბიზგინა ) is a version of Khachapuri which has potato, as well as cheese in its filling. 
 Petvraali ( ფეტვრაალი ) is a sort of Khachapuri filled with cheese and  millet , made in  Svaneti . 
 Penovani Khachapuri ( ფენოვანი ) is made with puff pastry dough, resulting in a flaky variety of the pie. It is often sold as street food in local bakeries. 
 Pkhlovana or Mkhlovana ( მხლოვანა / ფხლოვანა ) is a Khachapuri made in the mountainous areas of Georgia, especially  Khevi . It is similar to Chakhrakina but spinach is also added in the filling. 
 Rachuli Khachapuri also called “Bachuli” ( რაჭული / ბაჭული ) is a version of Khachapuri made in  Racha . It is filled with cheese and is of rectangular shape and puff pastry dough is used. 
 Cheeses [ edit ] 
   Dambalkhacho cheese. 
 Adjaruli Chechili ( აჭარული ჩეჩილი ): Cheese made in  Adjara  from cow milk, which is shaped into ropes. 
 Chogi ( ჩოგი ): Cheese made from sheep milk in  Tusheti . [8] 
 Chkinti' ( ჭყინტი ): Salty and juicy cheese made originally in  Imereti . 
 Dambalkhacho ( დამბალხაჭო ): Moldy cheese made in  Pshavi  and  Mtiuleti . It is considered one of the most ancient and expensive cheeses. 
 Dampali Kveli ( დამპალი ყველი ): Rare cheese with a butter filling inside. 
 Kartuli ( ქართული ): Cheese made from a mixture of around 50% cow milk and a mixture of sheep, goat or buffalo milk. 
 Guda ( გუდა ): Cheese made from sheep milk in  Tusheti . Its preparation lasts 20 days. 
 Imeruli ( იმერული ): Cheese made in the region of  Imereti  from cow milk. 
 Kalti ( კალტი ): Cheese made in mountainous regions of Georgia. It is often considered a shepherds' cheese because of its nutritional values. 
 Kobi ( კობი ): Mixed cow/sheep milk cheese, mostly eaten in Eastern Georgia. 
 Meskhuri Chechili ( მესხური ჩეჩილი ): Cheese made in  Meskheti  and same as the Adjarian one. 
 Narchvi ( ნარჩვი ): Cheese made in  Svaneti . It is shaped in curds. 
 Sulguni ( სულგუნი ): One of the most famous cheeses in Georgia, which comes from  Mingrelia . It is made from cow or buffalo milk. Outside Mingrelia, it is also made in  Svaneti . 
 Tenili ( ტენილი ): Cheese made in  Samtskhe-Javakheti . It is shaped in curds. 
 Salads [ edit ] 
 Kitri Pomidvris Salata ( კიტრი პომიდვრის სალათა ):  Cucumber  and  tomato  salad with Georgian herbs, greens and Kakhetian oil ( კახური ზეთი ). It is sometimes eaten with a walnut sauce. 
 Ispanakhis Salata ( ისპანახის სალათა ):  Spinach  salad. 
 Pkhali  ( ფხალი ): Minced vegetables in a ball shape. It is mainly made from  spinach ,  cabbage  or  beans  and is topped with  pomegranate  seeds. 
 Sagazapkhulo Salata ( საგაზაფხულო სალათა ): Salad made during  Spring . There is not a strict recipe but it is mostly made of fresh ingredients and boiled eggs. 
 Satatsuris Salata ( სატაცურის სალათა ): Salad made of  asparagus . 
 Tcharkhlis Salata ( ჭარხლის სალათა ): Salad made of  beets . 
 Soups and stews [ edit ] 
   Kharcho 
 Bozbashi  ( ბოზბაში ): Soup made of  mutton  and peas and chestnuts, mostly consumed in  Kakheti . 
 Chakapuli  ( ჩაქაფული ): Stew made of lamb or beef ( or veal ), tarragon and cherry plums in Eastern Georgia ( Kakheti  and  Kartli ). 
 Chakhokhbili  ( ჩახოხბილი ): Soup made of tomatoes and poultry meat ( mostly chicken or turkey ) which originated in Western Georgia. 
 Chikhirtma  ( ჩიხირთმა ): Soup made of turkey or chicken meat and eggs which is traditionally made in  Kakheti . 
 Kharcho  ( ხარჩო ): Soup made of beef, rice, cherry plums and walnuts from  Mingrelia . 
 Kharshil ( ხარშილ ): Soup made of spinach in  Svaneti . 
 Khashi  ( ხაში ): Boiled cow or sheep parts in their juice. Mostly made in the Eastern regions, especially  Kakheti . 
 Lobio  ( ლობიო ): Stew made mostly from kidney beans. Popular in Western Georgia. 
 Matsvnis Supi ( მაწვნის სუპი ): Soup made mainly of  Matsoni . 
 Puris Kharcho ( პურის ხარჩო ): Soup made of bread. It originated in  Kartli . 
 Shechamandi ( შეჭამანდი ): Different sorts of soup made by a principle ingredients, mostly made in  Kartli . These soups can be made of spinach,  malva , garlic,  dogwood , grains,  sorrel , pink  peavine  and other ingredients. 
   Chakapuli 
 Fish [ edit ] 
 Though Georgian cuisine is not very fish-oriented, there are still some dishes mainly made of  trout ,  catfish  and  carp :
 
 Kalmakhi Tarkhunit ( კალმახი ტარხუნით ): Fried  trout  with tarragon. 
 Kalmakhis Kubdari ( კალმახის კუბდარი ):  Kubdari  filled with minced  trout , onions, coriander and  ajika . 
 Kapchoni Mchkudi ( ქაფჩონი მჭკუდი ): Cornbread made with  anchovy , which is made in  Adjara  by the  Lazs . 
 Kepali ( კეფალი ): Fried  flathead mullet . 
 Kibo Kindzit ( კიბო ქინძით ):  Lobster  cooked with coriander. 
 Kibo Mokharshuli ( მოხარშული კიბო ): Boiled  lobster . 
 Kibo Tetri Ghvinit ( კიბო თეთრი ღვინით ):  Lobster  cooked in white wine. 
 Kobri Nigvzit da Brotseulit ( კობრი ნიგვზით და ბროწეულით ): Fried  carp  with walnuts and pomegranates seeds. 
 Loko Kindzmarshi ( ლოქო ქინძმარში ): Boiled  catfish  with coriander and vinegar. 
 Loko Tsiteli Ghvinit ( ლოქო წითელი ღვინით ): Boiled  catfish  in red wine. 
 Tsotskhali ( ცოცხალი ): Boiled or fried local fish. 
 Tsvera Nigvzit da Brotseulit ( წვერა ნიგვზით და ბროწეულით ): Fried  common barbel  with walnuts and pomegranates seeds. 
 Zutkhi Kaklis Potolshi ( ზუთხი კაკლის ფოთოლში ):  sturgeon  cooked in a walnut leaf. 
 Meat [ edit ] 
   A plate of  khinkali 
   Chashushuli  with bread and salad 
 The most popular Georgian meat dishes include:
 
 Abkhazura ( აფხაზურა ): Fried meat, often offal, rolled in caul fat from  Abkhazia . 
 Apokhti ( აპოხტი ): Dried / Smoked meat ( beef, lamb, goose, duck ). 
 Batis Shechamandi ( ბატის შეჭამანდი ):  Meskhetian  soup made of goose meat. 
 Bozbashi : Soup of lamb meat with peas, chestnuts and tomatoes. 
 Chanakhi  ( ჩანახი ): Soup made of tomatoes and lamb. 
 Chakhokhbili  ( ჩახოხბილი ): Soup made of tomatoes and poultry meat ( chicken or turkey ). 
 Chakapuli  ( ჩაქაფული ): Stew made of cherry plums, tarragon and meat ( lamb, beef or veal ) from  Kakheti . 
 Chashushuli  ( ჩაშუშული ): Spicy beef stew with tomato base 
 Chikhirtma  ( ჩიხირთმა ): Soup made of chicken and eggs from  Kakheti . 
 Gupta : Georgian version of  Kefta  meatballs. 
 Kharcho  ( ხარჩო ): Soup made of beef, tomatoes, herbs and walnuts. 
 Khash  ( ხაში ): Boiled parts of cow or sheep in its juice. 
 Khashlama ( ხაშლამა ): Boiled meat. 
 Khinkali  ( ხინკალი ): Dumplings filled with beef, pork or lamb meat ( in  Meskheti  filled with goose ) herbs from Eastern Georgia. 
 Kubdari  ( კუბდარი ):  Khachapuri  filled with meat from  Svaneti . 
 Kuchmachi  ( კუჭმაჭი ): Fried chicken livers with walnuts and pomegranate seeds. 
 Kupati  ( კუპატი ) : Fried sausage made of pork. 
 Lori ( ლორი ): Smoked pork from  Racha . 
 Kababi  ( ქაბაბი ): Meat cooked on fire, with pomegranate seeds. 
 Mtsvadi  ( მწვადი ): Meat cooked on fire. 
 Muzhuzhi ( მუჟუჟი ): A kind of jelly filled with meat and vegetables ( specifically carrots and other herbs ). 
 Qaghi ( ყაღი ): Smoked meat. 
 Qaurma ( ყაურმა ): A kind of soup with chopped meat. 
 Satsivi  ( საცივი ): Poultry meat in a walnut sauce called  bazhe  which originated in Western Georgia. 
 Shilaplavi  ( შილაფლავი ):  Pilaf  made of lamb, spices, and vegetables. 
 Chkmeruli  ( შქმერული ): Chicken in a cream-based sauce. 
 Tabaka ( ტაბაკა ): Roasted chicken with  Adjika . 
 Tolma ( ტოლმა ): Georgian version of  Dolma . The filling is mostly meat and rolled in cabbage or grape leaf. 
 Ziskhora ( ზისხორა ):  Svanetian  boiled  blood sausage 
 Sauces and spices [ edit ] 
 Sauces and spices common in Georgian cuisine include:
 
 Adjika  ( აჯიკა ): Spicy paste or sauce seasoned with hot  chili peppers . 
 Khmeli-suneli  ( ხმელი სუნელი ): Powdered herb/spice mixture. 
 Blue fenugreek  ( ულუმბო, უცხო სუნელი ): Milder than regular fenugreek. 
 Bazhe  ( ბაჟე ): Walnut sauce. 
 Svanuri marili ( სვანური მარილი ): Salt from  Svaneti  mixed with spices. 
 Tkemali  ( ტყემალი ):  Cherry plum  sauce. 
 Vegetarian dishes [ edit ] 
   Lobio 
 Ajapsandali  ( აჯაფსანდალი ): Dish made of vegetables such as eggplant, potatoes, tomatoes, onions and herbs. 
 Badrijnis borani ( ბადრიჯნის ბორანი ): Chopped and fried eggplant with spices. 
 Badrijnis khizilala ( ბადრიჯნის ხიზილალა  - "eggplant caviar") :  Chopped eggplant with pomegranate seeds and herbs. 
 Badrijani mtsvanilit ( ბადრიჯანი მწვანილით ): Fried eggplant with fresh herbs (coriander, parsley and basil). 
 Ekala nigvzit ( ეკალა ნიგზვით ) :   Smilax  with walnuts. 
 Gogris gupta ( გოგრის გუფთა ):  Squash  balls (vegetarian  kefta ). 
 Lobiani  ( ლობიანი ):  Khachapuri  filled with kidney beans. 
 Lobio  ( ლობიო ): Mashed kidney beans with spices. 
 Lobio nigvzit ( ლობიო ნიგვზით ): Kidney beans with walnuts. 
 Pkhali  ( ფხალი ): Minced vegetables with pomegranates. 
 Qnashi ( ქნაში ): Boiled minced  pumpkin  seeds which are later spiced and formed into a circle. 
 Shechamandi ( შეჭამანდი ): Soup, mostly made in Kartli of spinach, malva, garlic, dogwood, grains, sorrel, pink peavine, and other plant ingredients. 
 Desserts [ edit ] 
   Churchkhela 
   muraba  made from walnut 
 Akuakuar (Аквакуар): Honey biscuits made in Abkhazia 
 Alaharuy or Alaharya ( ალაჰარუი  / Алаҳария): Roll-ups traditionally made in  Abkhazia  from figs. 
 Alvakhazi ( ალვახაზი ): Sweets of different shapes, made from honey and almonds in the region of  Kakheti . 
 Chiri  ( ჩირი ): Dried fruits mostly apricots, grapes, plums and figs. 
 Churchkhela  ( ჩურჩხელა ): Candy made of grape juice mixed with flour and walnuts. It originated in  Kakheti . 
 Janjukha  ( ჯანჯუხა ): Same as Churchkhela but instead of walnuts, chopped  hazelnuts  are used. It is made in  Guria . 
 Gozinaki  ( გოზინაყი ): Candy made mostly for  New Year . It is made from chopped walnuts and honey. 
 Meskhuri Qada ( მესხური ქადა ): A sort of bread filled with a mixture of lard and flour, traditionally made in  Meskheti . 
 Muraba ( მურაბა ): Sort of  jam  made mostly from fruits such as walnut, watermelon, quince, fig, berries and from flowers (especially wild rose). 
 Nazuki ( ნაზუქი ): Sweet bread with cinnamon, lemon curds and raisins. It is made mostly in  Shida Kartli , especially in  Surami . 
 Pachkhi ( ფაჩხი ):  Svanetian  dessert made from a dried pear powder that is later mixed with water. 
 Palustaki ( ფალუსტაკი ): Dessert made from the combination of wheat flour, honey,  erbo , similar to  Halva . 
 Pelamushi  ( ფელამუში ): Dessert made of grape juice and flour, similar to a sweet porridge. 
 Pakhlava  ( ფახლავა ):  Adjarian  version of the Turkish dessert  Baklava . 
 Shaqarlama ( შაქარლამა ): Biscuits made from sugar and honey. It is made in  Adjara . 
 Taplis Kveri ( თაფლის კვერი ): Candy made from honey. 
 Tklapi ( ტყლაპი ): Roll-ups made from fruits such as grapes, apricots, cherry plums, and figs. 
 Wine [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Georgian wine 
 Georgia is the oldest  wine-producing region  in the world. The fertile valleys and protective slopes of the  Transcaucasia  were home to  grapevine  cultivation and  neolithic  wine production ( Georgian :  ღვინო ,  ɣvino ) for at least 8000 years. [9] [10] [11] [12]  Due to the many millennia of wine in Georgian history and its prominent economic role, the traditions of wine are considered entwined with and inseparable from the national identity. [9] 
 Among the best-known Georgian wine regions are  Kakheti  (further divided into the micro-regions of  Telavi  and  Kvareli ),  Kartli ,  Imereti ,  Racha-Lechkhumi and Kvemo Svaneti ,  Adjara  and  Abkhazia .
 UNESCO  added the ancient traditional Georgian winemaking method using the  Kvevri  clay jars to the  UNESCO Intangible Cultural Heritage Lists . [13] [14] 
 Alcoholic drinks from Georgia include  chacha  and  wine  (especially  Georgian wine ). Some of the most well-known Georgian wines include Pirosmani,  Alazani ,  Akhasheni ,  Saperavi , and  Kindzmarauli . Wine culture in Georgia dates back thousands of years, and many  Georgian wines  are made from traditional Georgian grape varieties that are little known in the West, such as  Saperavi  and  Rkatsiteli .  Georgian wine  is well known throughout Eastern Europe, and is a significant national export, with exports of over 10 million bottles of wine per year. Georgia is also home to many  beer  brands, including Natakhtari, Kazbegi, Argo, Kasri, and Karva.
 Lagidze water  is a Georgian flavored  soda  drink, made with a variety of natural  syrups , sold bottled or mixed directly in a glass from a  soda fountain . Common types of mineral water from Georgia include  Borjomi ,  Nabeghlavi ,  Likani , and  Sairme .
 
 See also [ edit ] 
 Caucasian cuisine 
 Ossetian cuisine 
 European cuisine 
 References [ edit ] 
 
 
 ^   "Eating with the enemy: why Russia loves Georgian food" .  The Independent . 2010-03-10 . Retrieved  2023-01-03 . 
 
 ^   T. Burford (2008).  Georgia, Bradt Travel Guide . p. 69. 
 
 ^   Галина Григорьевна Копешавидзе (1989).  Абхазская кухня . Сухуми: Алашара. pp. 77–78.  [ Galina Kopeshavidze (1989).  Abkhazian cuisine  (in Russian). Sukhumi: Alashara. pp. 77–78. ] 
 
 ^   FAO ,  Atlas of Origin linked food Products in Georgia [ permanent dead link ] , Rome, 2020, pp. 83 
 
 ^   2017  Ethnobotany of the Caucasus , Rainer W. Bussmann Editor ISBN 978-3-319-49411-1 pps. 85-88. 
Part of the series  European Ethnobotany ,
Series Editors: Andrea Pieroni, Manuel Pardo-de-Santayana and Renata Sõukand
pub. Springer Reference. 
 
 ^   Goldstein, Darra (1999).  The Georgian feast: the vibrant culture and savory food of the Republic of Georgia . University of California Press. pp. 136–139.  ISBN   0-520-21929-5 . 
 
 ^   "About Food – Imeruli (Imeretian Khachapuri)" . July 27, 2012. 
 
 ^   "IPCG" .  www.sakpatenti.gov.ge . 
 
 ^  a   b   Miquel Hudin & Daria Kholodolina (2017),  Georgia: A guide to the cradle of wine ,  Vinologue , p. 300,  ISBN   978-1941598054 
 
 ^   "Traditional winemaking in Georgia - the oldest wine in the world - Cycloscope" . Archived from  the original  on 2015-04-15 . Retrieved  2015-04-15 . 
 
 ^   Watson, Ivan.  "Unearthing Georgia's wine heritage" . CNN . Retrieved  21 February  2018 . 
 
 ^   Spilling, Michael; Wong, Winnie (2008).  Cultures of The World Georgia . p. 128.  ISBN   978-0-7614-3033-9 . 
 
 ^   Gilby MW, Caroline (2013-12-06).  "Georgian winemaking method joins UNESCO heritage list" .  Decanter . Retrieved  2020-11-26 . 
 
 ^   "Ancient Georgian traditional Qvevri wine-making method" .  UNESCO . Retrieved  2020-11-26 . 
 
 
 External links [ edit ] 
 
 
 
 Wikivoyage has a travel guide for  Georgian cuisine . 
 
 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons has media related to  Cuisine of Georgia . 
 
 Georgian Cuisine: Gastronomic Association of Georgia   Archived  2021-10-03 at the  Wayback Machine 
 Forbes Georgia: Georgia's Gastronomy Can Boost Country's Tourism 
 Georgian Cuisine: 30 Traditional Foods to Try in Georgia 
 Article of Forbes about Khachapuri 
 Heritage site 
 Shkmeruli Recipe 
 Feast Like a Georgian ; BBC 
 v t e European cuisine Sovereign states European Union 
 Austria 
 Belgium 
 Bulgaria 
 Croatia 
 Cyprus 
 Czech Republic 
 Denmark 
 Estonia 
 Finland 
 France 
 Germany 
 Greece 
 Hungary 
 Republic of Ireland 
 Italy 
 Latvia 
 Lithuania 
 Luxembourg 
 Malta 
 Netherlands 
 Poland 
 Portugal 
 Romania 
 Slovakia 
 Slovenia 
 Spain 
 Sweden 
 Other 
 Albania 
 Andorra 
 Armenia 
 Azerbaijan 
 Belarus 
 Bosnia and Herzegovina 
 Georgia 
 Iceland 
 Kazakhstan 
 Liechtenstein 
 Moldova 
 Monaco 
 Montenegro 
 North Macedonia 
 Norway 
 Russia 
 San Marino 
 Serbia 
 Switzerland 
 Turkey 
 Ukraine 
 United Kingdom 
 Vatican City 
 States with limited recognition 
 Abkhazia 
 Kosovo 
 Nagorno-Karabakh 
 Northern Cyprus 
 South Ossetia 
 Transnistria 
 Dependencies  and other territories 
 Faroe Islands 
 Gibraltar 
 Guernsey 
 Isle of Man 
 Jersey 
 
 v t e Asian cuisine Sovereign states 
 Afghanistan 
 Armenia 
 Azerbaijan 
 Bahrain 
 Bangladesh 
 Bhutan 
 Brunei 
 Burma (Myanmar) 
 Cambodia 
 China 
 Cyprus 
 East Timor (Timor-Leste) 
 Egypt 
 Georgia 
 India 
 Indonesia 
 Iran 
 Iraq 
 Israel 
 Japan 
 Jordan 
 Kazakhstan 
 North Korea 
 South Korea 
 Kuwait 
 Kyrgyzstan 
 Laos 
 Lebanon 
 Malaysia 
 Maldives 
 Mongolia 
 Nepal 
 Oman 
 Pakistan 
 Philippines 
 Qatar 
 Russia 
 Saudi Arabia 
 Singapore 
 Sri Lanka 
 Syria 
 Tajikistan 
 Thailand 
 Turkey 
 Turkmenistan 
 United Arab Emirates 
 Uzbekistan 
 Vietnam 
 Yemen 
 States with limited recognition 
 Abkhazia 
 Artsakh 
 Northern Cyprus 
 Palestine 
 South Ossetia 
 Taiwan 
 Dependencies and other territories 
 British Indian Ocean Territory 
 Christmas Island 
 Cocos (Keeling) Islands 
 Hong Kong 
 Macau 
 
 v t e Cuisines Continental 
 African 
 North 
 West 
 list 
 Americas 
 Caribbean 
 North 
 South 
 list 
 Asian 
 Caucasian 
 Central 
 Indian subcontinent 
 Levantine 
 list 
 European 
 Balkan 
 Central 
 Eastern 
 list 
 Oceanic 
 Intercontinental
 Global 
 Latin American 
 Mediterranean 
 Middle Eastern 
 National  and regional 
 Afghan 
 Albanian 
 Algerian 
 American 
 Californian 
 Floribbean 
 Hawaiian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Lowcountry (South Carolina) 
 New England 
 New Mexico 
 Pacific Northwest 
 Pennsylvania Dutch 
 Puerto Rican 
 Southern US 
 Southwest US 
 Texas 
 Angolan 
 Argentine 
 Armenian 
 Australian 
 Austrian 
 Azerbaijani 
 Bahraini 
 Bangladeshi 
 Barbadian 
 Belarusian 
 Belgian 
 Belizean 
 Beninese 
 Bhutanese 
 Bolivian 
 Bosnian-Herzegovinian 
 Botswana 
 Brazilian 
 British 
 Channel Islands 
 English 
 Gibraltarian 
 Northern Irish 
 Saint Helena 
 Scottish 
 Welsh 
 Bruneian 
 Bulgarian 
 Burkinabé 
 Burmese 
 Burundian 
 Cambodian 
 Cameroonian 
 Canadian 
 Acadian 
 Québécois 
 Central African Republic 
 Chadian 
 Chilean 
 Chinese 
 Cantonese 
 Hong Kong 
 Macanese 
 Tibetan 
 Xinjiang 
 Colombian 
 Congolese 
 Corsican 
 Croatian 
 Cuban 
 Cypriot 
 Czech 
 Danish 
 Faroese 
 Greenlandic 
 Djiboutian 
 Dominican 
 Dominican Republic 
 Dutch 
 East Timorese 
 Ecuadorian 
 Egyptian 
 Emirati 
 Equatorial Guinean 
 Eritrean 
 Estonian 
 Ethiopian 
 Fijian 
 Filipino 
 Finnish 
 French 
 Occitan 
 French Guianan 
 Gabonese 
 Gambian 
 Georgian 
 German 
 Ghanaian 
 Greek 
 Cretan 
 Epirotic 
 Greek Macedonian 
 Heptanesean 
 Guatemalan 
 Guinea-Bissauan 
 Guinean 
 Haitian 
 Honduran 
 Hungarian 
 Icelandic 
 Indian 
 Arunachalese 
 Assamese 
 Bengali 
 Bihari 
 Goan 
 Gujarati 
 Himachal Pradesh 
 Kashmiri 
 Jharkhandi 
 Karnataka 
 Kerala 
 Maharashtrian 
 Manipuri 
 Meghalayan 
 Mizo 
 Naga 
 Odia 
 Punjabi 
 Rajasthani 
 Sikkimese 
 Sindhi 
 Tamil 
 Telangana 
 Telugu 
 Indonesian 
 Acehnese 
 Balinese 
 Banjar 
 Batak 
 Betawi 
 Indo 
 Javanese 
 Madurese 
 Makassar 
 Minahasan 
 Minangkabau 
 Palembangese 
 Sundanese 
 Iranian 
 Iraqi 
 Irish 
 Israeli 
 Italian 
 Abruzzese 
 Ligurian 
 Lombard 
 Lucanian 
 Neapolitan 
 Roman 
 Sardinian 
 Sicilian 
 Venetian 
 Ivorian 
 Jamaican 
 Japanese 
 Okinawan 
 Jordanian 
 Kazakh 
 Kenyan 
 Korean 
 North Korean 
 South Korean 
 Kosovan 
 Kuwaiti 
 Kyrgyz 
 Lao 
 Latvian 
 Lebanese 
 Lesotho 
 Liberian 
 Libyan 
 Liechtensteiner 
 Lithuanian 
 Luxembourg 
 Macedonian 
 Malagasy 
 Malawian 
 Malaysian 
 Sabahan 
 Sarawakian 
 Maldivian 
 Malian 
 Maltese 
 Mauritanian 
 Mauritian 
 Mexican 
 Moldovan 
 Monégasque 
 Mongolian 
 Montenegrin 
 Moroccan 
 Mozambican 
 Namibian 
 Nauruan 
 Nepalese 
 New Zealand 
 Nicaraguan 
 Niger 
 Nigerian 
 Niuean 
 Norwegian 
 Omani 
 Pakistani 
 Palestinian 
 Panamanian 
 Peruvian 
 Polish 
 Portuguese 
 Qatari 
 Romanian  (incl.  Transylvanian Saxon ) 
 Russian 
 Bashkir 
 Chechen 
 Circassian 
 Komi 
 Mordovian 
 Sakha 
 Tatar 
 Udmurt 
 Yamal 
 Rwandan 
 Saint Lucian 
 Salvadoran 
 Sammarinese 
 São Tomé and Príncipe 
 Saudi Arabian 
 Senegalese 
 Serbian 
 Seychellois 
 Sierra Leonean 
 Singaporean 
 Slovak 
 Slovenian 
 Somali 
 South African 
 Spanish 
 Andalusian 
 Asturian 
 Balearic 
 Basque 
 Canarian 
 Cantabrian 
 Catalan 
 Extremaduran 
 Galician 
 Manchegan 
 Valencian 
 Sri Lankan 
 Sudanese 
 Swazi 
 Swedish 
 Swiss 
 Syrian 
 Taiwanese 
 Tajik 
 Tanzanian 
 Zanzibari 
 Thai 
 Togolese 
 Tunisian 
 Turkish 
 Turkmen 
 Trinidadian and Tobagonian 
 Ugandan 
 Ukrainian 
 Uruguayan 
 Uzbek 
 Venezuelan 
 Vietnamese 
 Western Saharan 
 Yemeni 
 Zambian 
 Zimbabwean 
 Ethnic 
 Ainu 
 Arab 
 Indonesian 
 Aromanian 
 Assyrian 
 Balochi 
 Berber 
 Cajun 
 Chinese 
 American 
 Canadian 
 Chifa 
 Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Crimean Tatar 
 Greek American 
 Hazaragi 
 Indian 
 Anglo-Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Indigenous American 
 Inuit 
 Italian American 
 Kurdish 
 Livonian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Malay 
 Ossetian 
 Parsi 
 Pashtun 
 Peranakan 
 Romani 
 Sámi 
 Soul food 
 Sylheti 
 Transylvanian Saxon 
 Yup'ik 
 Religious 
 Buddhist 
 Christian 
 Goan Catholic 
 Mangalorean Catholic 
 Mennonite 
 Hindu 
 Islamic 
 Chinese 
 Ital 
 Jain 
 Jewish 
 American 
 Ashkenazi 
 Bukharan 
 Ethiopian 
 Mizrahi 
 Sephardic 
 Syrian 
 Ritual slaughter 
 Sikh 
 Historical 
 Ancient Egyptian 
 Ancient Greek 
 Ancient Israelite 
 Ancient Roman 
 Antebellum America 
 Aztec 
 Byzantine 
 Early modern European 
 Historical Chinese 
 Historical Indian subcontinent 
 Historical North Indian and Pakistani 
 History of agriculture 
 History of alcoholic drinks 
 History of bread 
 History of seafood 
 History of vegetarianism 
 Historical Argentine 
 Historical Japanese 
 Inca 
 Mayan 
 Muisca 
 Mughal 
 Medieval 
 Ottoman 
 Peasant 
 Soviet 
 Thirteen Colonies 
 Styles 
 Classique 
 Fast food 
 Fusion 
 New American 
 Eurasian 
 Haute 
 Molecular gastronomy 
 Note by Note 
 Nouvelle 
 Lists 
 List of cuisines 
 List of historical cuisines 
 Lists of prepared foods 
 Related 
 Cookbook 
 Cooking 
 Culinary arts 
 Drink 
 Food 
 history 
 Diet 
 Meal preparation 
 
   Food portal 
   Drink portal 
   Category 
   Commons 
   Cookbook 
   WikiProject 
   Outline 
 
 v t e Georgia   articles History Early 
 Prehistoric Georgia 
 Shulaveri-Shomu culture 
 Kura–Araxes culture 
 Trialeti culture 
 Colchian culture 
 Mushki 
 Diauehi 
 Colchis 
 Kingdom of Iberia 
 Lazica 
 Roman era 
 Sasanian Iberia 
 Christianization of Iberia 
 Middle 
 Principality of Iberia 
 Bagrationi dynasty 
 Arab rule 
 Emirate of Tbilisi 
 Kingdom of Abkhazia 
 Kingdom of the Iberians 
 Unification of the Georgian realm 
 Kingdom of Hereti 
 First Kingdom of Kakheti 
 Kingdom of Georgia 
 Byzantine wars 
 Seljuk wars 
 Battle of Didgori 
 Golden Age 
 Mongol invasions 
 Timur's invasions 
 Samtskhe atabegate 
 Turkmen incursions 
 Kingdom of Imereti 
 Principality of Abkhazia 
 Principality of Svaneti 
 Principality of Guria 
 Principality of Mingrelia 
 Kingdom of Kartli 
 Kingdom of Kakheti 
 Safavid Georgia 
 Shah Abbas I's invasions 
 Kingdom of Kartli-Kakheti 
 1795 Persian Invasion 
 Absorption by the Russian Empire 
 Modern 
 Democratic Republic of Georgia 
 Armenian War 
 Red Army invasion 
 Georgian Soviet Socialist Republic 
 April 9 tragedy 
 Independent Georgia 
 Civil War 
 War in Abkhazia 
 Rose Revolution 
 Russo-Georgian War 
 By topic 
 Names of Georgia 
 Monarchs 
 States 
 Military history 
 Wars 
 Battles 
 Timeline of Georgian history 
 more 
 Geography 
 Borders 
 Birds 
 Black Sea 
 Climate 
 Earthquakes 
 Environmental issues 
 Glaciers 
 Greater Caucasus 
 Lakes 
 Lesser Caucasus 
 Mammals 
 National parks 
 Protected areas 
 Rivers 
 Volcanoes 
 more 
 Subdivisions 
 Administrative divisions 
 Cities and towns 
 Tbilisi 
 Regions 
 more 
 Occupied territories 
 Abkhazia 
 South Ossetia 
 Politics 
 Constitution 
 Elections 
 Foreign relations 
 Government 
 Human rights 
 LGBT 
 Law enforcement 
 Military 
 Parliament 
 Political parties 
 President 
 Prime Minister 
 Economy 
 Agriculture 
 Central bank 
 Companies 
 Energy 
 Lari (currency) 
 Mining 
 Stock Exchange 
 Telecommunications 
 Tourism 
 Transport 
 more 
 Culture 
 Alphabet 
 Architecture 
 Art 
 Chokha 
 Cinema 
 Cuisine 
 Wine 
 Dance 
 Languages
 Georgian 
 Laz 
 Mingrelian 
 Svan 
 Media 
 Music 
 Mythology 
 Names 
 Public holidays 
 Religion 
 Sports 
 World Heritage sites 
 more 
 Demographics 
 Education 
 Ethnic minorities 
 Georgians 
 List 
 Diaspora 
 Health care 
 Women 
 more 
 Symbols 
 Anthem 
 Bolnisi cross 
 Borjgali 
 Coat of arms 
 Flag 
 Motto 
 Saint George 
 cross 
 Saint Nino 
 cross 
 Outline Index 
 Category 
 Portal 
 Portals :   Food   Georgia (country) 
 Authority control   National libraries 
 Israel 
 United States 
 Czech Republic 
 Other 
 IdRef 
 
  
NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw2414
Cached time: 20230311123404
Cache expiry: 1814400
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc, no‐toc‐conversion]
CPU time usage: 1.479 seconds
Real time usage: 1.763 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 39357/1000000
Post‐expand include size: 327093/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 31082/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 55/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 100187/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.742/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 20675034/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/400
 
 
Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1455.007      1 -total
 31.46%  457.675      6 Template:Navbox
 25.18%  366.378    246 Template:Lang
 12.97%  188.696    107 Template:Iso2country
 11.23%  163.326      1 Template:Asian_topic
 11.09%  161.419      1 Template:European_topic
 10.89%  158.426      1 Template:Reflist
  7.65%  111.337      2 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  7.46%  108.574      1 Template:Culture_of_Georgia_(country)
  7.36%  107.117      1 Template:Culture_of_region
 
  Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:idhash:10120183-0!canonical and timestamp 20230311123402 and revision id 1140372389. Rendering was triggered because: page-view
  
 esi <esi:include src="/esitest-fa8a495983347898/content" />  
 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Georgian_cuisine&oldid=1140372389 " 
 Categories :  Cuisine of Georgia (country) Caucasian cuisine Masterpieces of the Oral and Intangible Heritage of Humanity Georgian products with protected designation of origin Hidden categories:  CS1 Russian-language sources (ru) All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from December 2022 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Georgian-language text All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from November 2019 All articles that may contain original research Articles that may contain original research from November 2019 Commons category link is on Wikidata Webarchive template wayback links Region topic template using suffix Articles with J9U identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers Articles with NKC identifiers Articles with SUDOC identifiers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  This page was last edited on 19 February 2023, at 20:26  (UTC) . 
 Text is available under the  Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0 ;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the  Terms of Use  and  Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the  Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. 
 
 
 Privacy policy 
 About Wikipedia 
 Disclaimers 
 Contact Wikipedia 
 Mobile view 
 Developers 
 Statistics 
 Cookie statement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
