
 
 
 Jump to content 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle sidebar 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Create account Log in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Personal tools 
 
 
 
 
   Create account   Log in 
 
 
 
 
		Pages for logged out editors  learn more 
 
 
 Contributions Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Navigation 
 
 
 Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate 
 
 
 
 
 Contribute 
 
 
 Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file 
 
 
 
 
 Tools 
 
 
 What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item 
 
 
 
 
 Print/export 
 
 
 Download as PDF Printable version 
 
 
 
 
 In other projects 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons Wikibooks 
 
 
 
 
 Languages 
 
 On this Wikipedia the language links are at the top of the page across from the article title.  Go to top . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CentralNotice  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Contents 
 move to sidebar 
 hide 
 
 
 
 
 (Top) 
 
 
 
 
 
 1 Main staple foods 
 
 
				Toggle Main staple foods subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 1.1 Foods made with maize 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.2 Foods made with rice 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.3 Foods made with cassava 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.4 Foods made with beans 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.5 Foods made with yam 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 Soups and stews 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 Breakfast 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4 Sweet foods 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5 Beverages 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6 Street foods in Ghana 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 7 Common Ghanaian dishes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8 See also 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 9 References 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 10 Further reading 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 11 External links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
						Toggle the table of contents
					 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle the table of contents 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ghanaian cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 15 languages 
 
 
 
 العربية Čeština Deutsch Español Français 한국어 Hausa Italiano עברית Jawa ქართული Português Русский Twi Українська 
 Edit links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Article Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 English 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 More 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
 
 
 Overview of culinary traditions of Ghana 
 
 
 Part of  a series  on the Culture of Ghana 
 History 
 People 
 Languages 
 Traditions 
 Mythology 
 Cuisine 
 Festivals 
 Public holidays 
 
 Religion 
 Christianity 
 Methodist 
 Presbyterian 
 Catholicism 
 Islam 
 Ahmadiyya 
 Hinduism 
 
 Art 
 Literature Writers 
 
 Music 
 Media 
 Television 
 Cinema 
 
 Sport 
 Monuments 
 World Heritage Sites 
 Ghana’s material cultural heritage 
 
 Symbols 
 Flag 
 Coat of arms 
 National anthem 
 v t e 
   Vegetable side dishes in a Ghanaian restaurant including diced  pineapple  with sliced garlic and  taro  leaf salad. 
   Location of  Ghana 
 Ghanaian cuisine  is the  cuisine  of the  Ghanaian people . Ghanaian main  dishes  are organized around a starchy  staple food , which goes with a  sauce  or  soup  containing a  protein  source. The main ingredients for the vast majority of soups and stews are tomatoes, hot peppers and onions. As a result, most of the Ghanaian soups and stews are red or orange in appearance.
 
 
 Main staple foods [ edit ] 
   Ghanaian-style  banku 
 The typical  staple foods  in the southern part of  Ghana  include  cassava  and  plantain . In the northern part, the main staple foods include  millet  and  sorghum .  Yam , maize and  beans  are used across Ghana as staple foods.  Sweet potatoes  and  cocoyam  are also important in the Ghanaian  diet  and  cuisine . With the advent of  globalization , cereals such as rice and wheat have been increasingly incorporated into Ghanaian cuisine. The foods below represent Ghanaian dishes made out of these staple foods.
 
 Foods made with maize [ edit ] 
 Akple , a traditional meal of the  Ewe , is made with corn flour and can be eaten with pepper sauces, stews or any soup. It is typically served with okra soup ( fetridetsi ) or herring stew ( abɔbitadi ).  Akple  is never prepared in the same way as  banku . An important distinguishing factor between the two products is that  banku  requires the use of a special preformulated watery material called "Slightly-Fermented Corn-Cassava Dough Mix", cooked to a soft solid consistency of "Corn-Cassava Dough AFLATA", en route to a soft form of  Banku  with further cooking, and the "Slightly-Fermented Corn-Cassava Dough Mix" is never 'the signature material' of any form of the  Akple  product. 
 Banku  was formulated by the  Ga Dangme  (or Ga) tribe of the  Greater Accra Region , as a slight deviation from the process of preparation of Ga-Kenkey, requiring a different manipulation of 'THE AFLATA' mixed with cassava dough, but unlike Ga-Kenkey it does not require the use of corn husk. One particular Major-Clan of the GaDangme (or Ga) tribe is credited with the original recipe of the  banku  meal even though it may be argued among the major clans. [1]  Sometimes only  cornflour  is used but in many areas cassava dough is cooked together with the fermented corn dough. 
 Banku cooked with cassava and corn dough mixture is called agbelimorkple by the Ewe people while the one without cassava dough mixture is known as Kutornu-kple (Cotonou banku) [2] 
 Mmore  is cooked fermented corn dough without cassava, prepared like  banku  among the  Akan people . 
 Kenkey / komi / dokonu  is fermented corn dough, wrapped in corn originating from the  Ga  who call it  komi  or Ga  kenkey . Another variety originating from the  Fanti people  is  Fante dokono  or  Fanti kenkey  which is wrapped with  plantain  leaves that give it a different texture, flavour and colour as compared to the Ga  kenkey . Both are boiled for long periods into consistent solid balls. 
 Tuo zaafi  is a millet, sorghum or maize dish originating from Northern  Ghana . 
 Fonfom  is a maize dish popular in south-western Ghana. 
 Abolo-prepared by steaming corn dough and sugar mixture is a delicacy among the Ewes. It is eaten with various soups or sauces. 
 Yoroyoro is widely eaten across Dagbon and many parts of Northern Ghana. It is made by boiling maize till it is softened. The food is eaten with pepper and onions. 
 Foods made with rice [ edit ] 
 Waakye — a dish of rice and beans  with a purple-brown color. The color comes from the  indigenous  grass  Sorghum bicolor . [3]  This side dish bears striking similarities to West Indian rice and peas. The rice is cooked and steamed with an indigenous leaf, coconut and a pulse such as  black-eyed peas  or  kidney beans . 
 Omo Tuo /Rice ball—sticky mashed rice, normally eaten with groundnut soup. 
 Plain rice—boiled rice accompanies many of the variety of red stews. 
 Jollof rice —rice cooked in a stew consisting of stock, tomatoes, spices, and meat boiled together. This dish originated from the  Djolof  traders from  Senegal  who settled in the  Zongos  before the colonial period. Adapted for local Ghanaian tastes, it is typically eaten with goat, lamb, chicken or beef that has been stewed, roasted or grilled. 
 Fried rice—Chinese-style  fried rice  adapted to Ghanaian tastes. 
 Angwa moo —also referred to as "oiled rice". This is unlike  fried rice  which you cook the rice before frying. Oiled rice is cooked by first onion-frying the oil, then adding water after the onions have browned, giving the rice a different fragrance. The rice is then cooked in the water-oil mixture, to give the rice an oily feel when ready. It may be cooked with vegetables or minced meat, added to taste. It is mostly served with earthenware-ground pepper, with either tinned sardines or fried eggs complementing it. 
 Ngwo moo  (palm rice)—an alternative to the oiled rice, cooked with palm oil instead of cooking oil. The taste is determined by the type of palm oil used. 
 Foods made with cassava [ edit ] 
 Kokonte  or  abete— from dried peeled cassava powder usually served alongside groundnut soup, consisting of a variety of meat such as  tripe , lamb, or smoked  served 
 Fufu — pounded cassava and plantain, pounded  yam  and plantain, or pounded  cocoyam/taro . This side dish is always accompanied by one of the many varieties of Ghanaian soups. 
 Gari —made from cassava. Often served with  Red red , a fish and black-eyed pea stew, or  shito  and fish. 
 Attiéké  or  Akyeke— made from cassava and popular among the  Ahanta ,  Nzema  and Akan-speaking people of  Ivory Coast . 
 Plakali —made from cassava and popular among the  Ahanta ,  Nzema  and Akan-speaking people of Ivory Coast. 
 Yakayake - made from steamed grated cassava is a favourite among the Ewe people.It is eaten with various stews or soups. 
 Foods made with beans [ edit ] 
 A deviation to the starch and stew combination are  Red red  and  tubaani ,  primarily based on vegetable protein (beans). Red red is a popular Ghanaian bean and fish stew served with fried ripe plantain and often accompanied with  gari , fish and pulses. It earns its name from the  palm oil  that tints the bean stew and the bright orange color of the fried ripe plantain.  Tubaani  is a boiled bean cake, called  moin moin  in  Nigeria .
 
 
 Foods made with yam [ edit ] 
   Locally made  ampesie  (plantain and garden eggs stew) 
 Ampesie— boiled yam. It may also be made with plantain, cocoyam, potatoes, yams or cassava. This side dish is traditionally eaten with fish stew containing tomatoes, oil and spices. 
 Yam fufu— fufu  made with yam instead of cassava or plantain or cocoyam, this soft dough is traditionally eaten with Ghanaian soup. It is popular in Northern and southeastern Ghana. 
 Mpotompoto  (yam casserole or porridge)—slices of yam cooked with much water and pepper, onions, tomatoes, salt and preferred seasoning. 
 Soups and stews [ edit ] 
 Most Ghanaian side dishes are served with a  stew , soup or  mako  (a spicy condiment made from raw red and green  chilies , onions and tomatoes ( pepper sauce ). Ghanaian stews and soups are quite sophisticated, with liberal and delicate use of exotic ingredients, a wide variety of flavours, spices and textures.
 Vegetables such as palm nuts, peanuts,  cocoyam  leaves,  ayoyo ,  spinach , wild  mushroom ,  okra , garden eggs ( eggplant ), tomatoes and various types of pulses are the main ingredients in Ghanaian soups and stews and in the case of  pulses , may double as the main protein ingredient.
 Beef, pork, goat, lamb, chicken, smoked turkey,  tripe , dried  snails , and fried fish are common sources of protein in Ghanaian soups and stews, sometimes mixing different types of meat and occasionally fish into one soup. Soups are served as a main course rather than a starter. It is also common to find smoked meat, fish and seafood in Ghanaian soups and stews.
 
   Koobi is dried  tilapia  that has been  salted  They include crab,  shrimp ,  periwinkles , octopus,  snails , grubs,  duck ,  offal , and  pig's trotters . Also  oysters .
 Meat, mushrooms and seafood may be  smoked , salted or dried for flavour enhancement and preservation.  Salt fish  is widely used to flavour fish based stews. Spices such as  thyme , garlic, onions,  ginger ,  peppers ,  curry ,  basil ,  nutmeg ,  sumbala ,  Tetrapleura tetraptera  ( prekese ) and  bay leaf  are delicately used to achieve the exotic and spicy flavours that characterize Ghanaian cuisine.
 Palm oil , coconut oil,  shea butter ,  palm kernel oil  and  peanut oil  are important Ghanaian oils used for cooking or frying and may sometimes not be substituted for in certain Ghanaian dishes. For example, using palm oil in  okro  stew,  eto ,  fante fante , [4]   red red  or  Gabeans ,  egusi  stew and  mpihu/mpotompoto  (similar to  poi ). [5]  Coconut oil, palm kernel oil and shea butter have lost their popularity for cooking in Ghana due to the introduction of refined oils and negative  Ghanaian media  adverts targeted at those oils. They are now mostly used in few  traditional homes , for soap making and by commercial ( street food ) food vendors as a cheaper substitute to refined cooking oils.
 Common Ghanaian soups are  groundnut  soup, [6]   light (tomato) soup , [6]   kontomire  ( taro  leaves) soup,  palm nut soup , [7]   ayoyo  soup and  okra  soup.
 Ghanaian tomato stew or  gravy  is a stew that is often served with rice or  waakye . Other vegetable stews are made with  kontomire , garden eggs,  egusi  (pumpkin seeds),  spinach , okra, etc.
 
 
 Among the Ewes , some soups are prepared with gboma (solanum macrocarpa)and also yevugboma(European gboma. Water leaf) or ademe (jute mallow ). These are eaten with the various varieties of akple or abolo (steamed corn dough)or yakayake (steamed cassava dough).
 
 Breakfast [ edit ] 
   A bowl of tombrown with sausages, croissant pancakes, potatoes and an egg. 
   Making of koko (local porridge) 
 Most of the dishes mentioned above are served during lunch and supper in modern Ghana. However, those engaged in manual labour and a large number of urban dwellers still eat these foods for breakfast and will usually buy them from the streets. 
Another popular breakfast is called  huasa koko  (northern porridge). It is usually prepared in Northern Ghana, sweet, and often eaten with koose or bread with groundnut. 
 In large Ghanaian cities, working-class people would often take fruit, tea, chocolate drink,  oats , rice porridge/cereal(locally called rice water) or  kooko  (fermented maize porridge) and  koose/ akara  or  maasa  (beans, ripe plantain and maize meal fritters). [8]  Other breakfast foods include grits,  tombrown  (roasted maize porridge), and millet  porridge . [8] 
 Bread is an important feature in Ghanaian breakfast and  baked  foods. Ghanaian bread, which is known for its good quality, is baked with  wheat flour  and sometimes cassava flour is added for an improved texture. There are four major types of bread in Ghana. They are tea bread (similar to the  baguette ), sugar bread (which is a sweet bread), brown (whole wheat) bread, and butter bread. Rye bread, oat bread and malt bread are also quite common. [9] 
 
 Sweet foods [ edit ] 
   Etor  is a popular dish in south Ghana, prepared with plantain or with yam boiled and mashed, and mixed with palm oil. Groundnuts (peanuts) and eggs are used to garnish the dish. 
 There are many sweet local foods which have been marginalized due to their low demand and long preparation process. Ghanaian sweet foods (or confectionery) may be fried,  barbecued ,  boiled ,  roasted ,  baked  or  steamed .
 Fried sweet foods include cubed and spiced ripe plantain ( kelewele ) sometimes served with peanuts.  Koose  made from peeled beans (and its close twin  acarajé  or  akara  made from beans which are not peeled),  maasa , [10] [11]   pinkaaso , [12]  and  bofrot / Puff-puff [13]  (made from  wheat flour );   waakye   [14]   dzowey  and  nkate  cake (made from peanuts); [15]   kaklo  and  tatale [16]  (ripe plantain  fritters );  kube  cake and  kube  toffee (made from coconut);  bankye krakro ,  gari  biscuit, [17] [18]  and  krakye ayuosu  (made from cassava); condensed milk,  toffee , plantain chips (or  fried plantain ) [19]  and  wagashi [20]  (fried  farmer's cheese ) are fried Ghanaian savory foods (confectionery).
 Kebabs  are popular  barbecues  and can be made from beef, goat, pork,  soy flour ,  sausages  and  guinea fowl . Other  roasted  savoury foods include roasted plantain, maize, yam and  cocoyam .
 Steamed fresh maize,  yakeyake ,  kafa ,  akyeke ,  tubani,  moimoi  (bean cake),  emo dokonu  ( rice cake ) and  esikyire dokonu  (sweetened  kenkey ) are all examples of steamed and boiled foods whilst sweet bread, (plantain cake), and meat pie similar to  Jamaican patties  and  empanadas  are baked savoury foods.  Aprapransa ,  eto  (mashed yam) and  atadwe  milk ( tiger nut  juice) are other savory foods.  Gari  soakings is a modern favorite. It is a blend of  gari  (dried, roasted cassava), sugar, groundnut (peanut) and milk.
 
 
 Beverages [ edit ] 
   Ghanaian beverages at a convenience store in Ghana 
 In southern Ghana, Ghanaian drinks such as  asaana  (made from fermented maize) are common. Along  Lake Volta  and in southern Ghana,  palm wine  extracted from the  palm tree  can be found, but it ferments quickly and then it is used to distill  akpeteshie  (a local gin).  Akpeteshie  can be distilled from molasses too. In addition, a beverage can be made from  kenkey  and  refrigerated  into what is in Ghana known as  ice kenkey . In northern Ghana, bisaab/ sorrel ,  toose  and  lamujee  (a spicy sweetened drink) are common non-alcoholic beverages whereas  pitoo  (a local beer made of fermented millet) is an alcoholic beverage.
 In urban areas of Ghana drinks may include fruit juice,  cocoa  drinks, fresh coconut water,  yogurt ,  ice cream ,  carbonated  drinks,  malt  drinks and  soy milk . [21] [22]  In addition, Ghanaian distilleries produce alcoholic beverages from cocoa, malt,  sugar cane , local medicinal herbs and tree barks. They include  bitters ,  liqueur , dry  gins , beer, and  aperitifs . [23] [24] 
 
 Street foods in Ghana [ edit ] 
 Street food  is very popular in both rural and urban areas of Ghana. Most Ghanaian families eat at least three times a week from street food vendors, from whom all kinds of foods can be bought, including staple foods such as  kenkey ,  red red  and  waakye . Other savoury foods such as raw steak, boiled corn cob,  boflot  (ball-float) and roasted plantain are sold mainly by street food vendors.
 Ice kenkey  is a popular chilled dessert sold by street vendors in open-air markets. [25] 
 
 Common Ghanaian dishes [ edit ] 
 
 
 
 
 Banku  and grilled  tilapia  fish
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Red-red : bean and fish stew with fried plantain
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Beans, plantain, and chicken
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "One Man Thousand": cooked shrimp and fried  Tanganyika sardine 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ghanaian  Kɔkɔ a y'atoto  (nickname: Kofi Broke Man) charcoal-roasted ripe plantain
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ghanaian  Banku Ne Mako  ( banku  and pepper-tomato sauce)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ghanaian style  konkonte 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ghanaian  fufu  in palmnut soup with goat
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fufu  and light tomato soup with meat
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fried yam with spicy chicken and  kpakpo  shito  (ground green peppers)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Jollof rice  with coleslaw and barbecue chicken
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kenkey  with fried fish and chili pepper
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cooked yam and plantain, with "garden egg" ( aubergine ) stew and chicken
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ghanaian style spicy sauce
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ghanaian style spicy grilled kebab
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Waakye  (rice and beans) served with spaghetti and boiled egg
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ground red pepper, a Ghanaian delicacy, mainly an accompaniment for  banku  and  kenkey 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tubaani 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tubaani  wrapped in the leaves of  Ewe eran 
 
 
 
 
 See also [ edit ] 
 
 Africa portal Food portal 
 Chop bar 
 West African cuisine 
 List of African cuisines 
 La Tante DC10 Restaurant 
 References [ edit ] 
 
 
 ^   online reference, by J Dzeagu-Kudjodji and others; online publication : Banku, National of Ghana - EpersianFood ( Mar. 17, 2020 ) ; A grammatical sketch of Akra - or Ga-language ; etc. 
 
 ^   "How To Prepare Banku And Okro Stew In Ghana. » My Recipe Joint" .  My Recipe Joint . Retrieved  25 May  2020 . 
 
 ^   "Bicolor Sorghum" .  www.specialtyproduce.com . Retrieved  22 March  2018 . 
 
 ^   BetumiBlog: Search results for fante fante 
 
 ^   BetumiBlog: Search results for mpihu 
 
 ^  a   b   BetumiBlog: Search results for peanut butter soup 
 
 ^   BetumiBlog: Ghanaian Gourmet-Recipe No. 49, continued: Palmnut Soup   Archived  12 October 2016 at the  Wayback Machine . Betumiblog.blogspot.com (4 November 2010). Retrieved 30 November 2011. 
 
 ^  a   b   Kokoking: Food and nutrition   Archived  5 October 2016 at the  Wayback Machine .  "KOKO KING :: Purveyors of Fine Foods" . Archived from  the original  on 3 October 2013 . Retrieved  11 October  2013 . . Retrieved 11 October 2013. 
 
 ^   BetumiBlog: Ghana's Tea Bread Secrets   Archived  24 April 2016 at the  Wayback Machine . Betumi.com (5 March 2007). Retrieved 30 November 2011. 
 
 ^   Breads, Cakes and Pastries   Archived  23 March 2012 at the  Wayback Machine . Celtnet.org.uk (9 September 2007). Retrieved 30 November 2011. 
 
 ^   Snacks Maasa (Sweet Millet Fritters)   Archived  21 September 2012 at the  Wayback Machine . Celtnet.org.uk (9 September 2007). Retrieved 30 November 2011. 
 
 ^   selling pinkaso and kose | Flickr – Photo Sharing! . Flickr (16 September 2009). Retrieved 30 November 2011. 
 
 ^   "Alternative Bofroat (Ghanaian Doughnuts)" .  YouTube .  Archived  from the original on 22 December 2021 . Retrieved  24 August  2012 . 
 
 ^   BetumiBlog   Archived  4 March 2016 at the  Wayback Machine . Betumi.com (11 November 2006). Retrieved 30 November 2011. 
 
 ^   How To Make Ghanaian Peanut Brittle | Guide (4 Steps) « Wonder How To   Archived  12 April 2012 at the  Wayback Machine . Wonderhowto.com (9 June 2011). Retrieved 30 November 2011. 
 
 ^   Plantain Cakes (Tatale) Recipe from Ghana   Archived  14 August 2011 at the  Wayback Machine . Celtnet.org.uk (9 September 2007). Retrieved 30 November 2011. 
 
 ^   Gari Biscuits Recipe from Ghana   Archived  3 January 2012 at the  Wayback Machine . Celtnet.org.uk (9 September 2007). Retrieved 30 November 2011. 
 
 ^   Food in Ghana – Ghanaian Food, Ghanaian Cuisine   Archived  27 October 2016 at the  Wayback Machine . Foodbycountry.com. Retrieved 30 November 2011. 
 
 ^   "How It's Made 02 Plantain Chips" .  YouTube .  Archived  from the original on 22 December 2021 . Retrieved  24 August  2012 . 
 
 ^   Ghana foods   Archived  2 April 2012 at the  Wayback Machine .  bsas.org.uk . 
 
 ^   Fan Milk Limited |   Archived  8 September 2016 at the  Wayback Machine . Fanmilk-gh.net (30 June 2011). Retrieved 30 November 2011. 
 
 ^   THE DIVESTITURE IMPLEMENTATION OF GHANA : The Divestiture Program   Archived  2 February 2012 at the  Wayback Machine . Dic.com.gh. Retrieved 30 November 2011. 
 
 ^   Kasapreko Company Limited produces alcoholic and non-alcoholic beverages – an Accra, Ghana manufacturing company   Archived  3 September 2011 at the  Wayback Machine . Kasaprekogh.com. Retrieved 30 November 2011. 
 
 ^   Guinness Ghana Brewery Ltd. | Association of Alcohol Manufacturers and Importers [ permanent dead link ] . AAMI. Retrieved 30 November 2011. 
 
 ^   Atter, Amy; Ofori, Hayford; Anyebuno, George Anabila; Amoo-Gyasi, Michael; Amoa-Awua, Wisdom Kofi (2015). "Safety of a street vended traditional maize beverage, ice-kenkey, in Ghana".  Food Control .  55 : 200–205.  doi : 10.1016/j.foodcont.2015.02.043 . 
 
 
 Further reading [ edit ] 
 There are a some cookbooks which concentrate on Ghanaian food, including the following.
 
 Osseo-Asare, Fran and Baeta, Barbara.  2018.   The Ghana cookbook.  Hippocrene Books.  ISBN 978-0781813433 [1] 
 External links [ edit ] 
 Ghanaian food on Ghanaweb.com 
 v t e Ghana   articles History Historical timeline 
 Early history 
 Bono state 
 Ashanti Empire 
 Gold Coast 
 First Republic (1960–1966) 
 National Liberation Council 
 Kofi Busia 
 Ignatius Kutu Acheampong 
 Armed Forces Revolutionary Council 
 Hilla Limann 
 Provisional National Defence Council 
 Jerry Rawlings 
 John Kufuor 
 John Mills 
 John Mahama 
 Nana Akufo-Addo 
 By topic 
 Economic 
 Political 
 Postal 
 Geography 
 Borders 
 Cities 
 Climate  ( Climate change ) 
 Forests 
 Mountains 
 National parks 
 Protected areas 
 Rivers 
 Wildlife 
 Politics 
 Administrative divisions 
 Constitution 
 Cabinet 
 Elections 
 Foreign relations 
 Government 
 Human rights 
 Judiciary 
 Law enforcement 
 Military 
 Political parties 
 Parliament 
 President 
 Prime Minister 
 Economy 
 Agriculture 
 Cedi (currency) 
 Central Bank 
 Energy 
 Fishing 
 Labor 
 Manufacturing 
 Mining 
 Oil 
 Stock Exchange 
 Telecommunications 
 Tourism 
 Transport 
 Water and sanitation 
 Society 
 Crime 
 Cybercrime 
 Demographics 
 Education 
 Ethnic groups 
 Health 
 Languages 
 Religion 
 Squatting 
 Women 
 Culture 
 Cultural heritage 
 Cuisine 
 Festivals 
 Media 
 Music 
 National anthem 
 National pledge 
 Public holidays 
 Sport 
 Social conduct 
 Outline Index Bibliography 
 Category 
 v t e Cuisines Continental 
 African 
 North 
 West 
 list 
 Americas 
 Caribbean 
 North 
 South 
 list 
 Asian 
 Caucasian 
 Central 
 Indian subcontinent 
 Levantine 
 list 
 European 
 Balkan 
 Central 
 Eastern 
 list 
 Oceanic 
 Intercontinental
 Global 
 Latin American 
 Mediterranean 
 Middle Eastern 
 National  and regional 
 Afghan 
 Albanian 
 Algerian 
 American 
 Californian 
 Floribbean 
 Hawaiian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Lowcountry (South Carolina) 
 New England 
 New Mexico 
 Pacific Northwest 
 Pennsylvania Dutch 
 Puerto Rican 
 Southern US 
 Southwest US 
 Texas 
 Angolan 
 Argentine 
 Armenian 
 Australian 
 Austrian 
 Azerbaijani 
 Bahraini 
 Bangladeshi 
 Barbadian 
 Belarusian 
 Belgian 
 Belizean 
 Beninese 
 Bhutanese 
 Bolivian 
 Bosnian-Herzegovinian 
 Botswana 
 Brazilian 
 British 
 Channel Islands 
 English 
 Gibraltarian 
 Northern Irish 
 Saint Helena 
 Scottish 
 Welsh 
 Bruneian 
 Bulgarian 
 Burkinabé 
 Burmese 
 Burundian 
 Cambodian 
 Cameroonian 
 Canadian 
 Acadian 
 Québécois 
 Central African Republic 
 Chadian 
 Chilean 
 Chinese 
 Cantonese 
 Hong Kong 
 Macanese 
 Tibetan 
 Xinjiang 
 Colombian 
 Congolese 
 Corsican 
 Croatian 
 Cuban 
 Cypriot 
 Czech 
 Danish 
 Faroese 
 Greenlandic 
 Djiboutian 
 Dominican 
 Dominican Republic 
 Dutch 
 East Timorese 
 Ecuadorian 
 Egyptian 
 Emirati 
 Equatorial Guinean 
 Eritrean 
 Estonian 
 Ethiopian 
 Fijian 
 Filipino 
 Finnish 
 French 
 Occitan 
 French Guianan 
 Gabonese 
 Gambian 
 Georgian 
 German 
 Ghanaian 
 Greek 
 Cretan 
 Epirotic 
 Greek Macedonian 
 Heptanesean 
 Guatemalan 
 Guinea-Bissauan 
 Guinean 
 Haitian 
 Honduran 
 Hungarian 
 Icelandic 
 Indian 
 Arunachalese 
 Assamese 
 Bengali 
 Bihari 
 Goan 
 Gujarati 
 Himachal Pradesh 
 Kashmiri 
 Jharkhandi 
 Karnataka 
 Kerala 
 Maharashtrian 
 Manipuri 
 Meghalayan 
 Mizo 
 Naga 
 Odia 
 Punjabi 
 Rajasthani 
 Sikkimese 
 Sindhi 
 Tamil 
 Telangana 
 Telugu 
 Indonesian 
 Acehnese 
 Balinese 
 Banjar 
 Batak 
 Betawi 
 Indo 
 Javanese 
 Madurese 
 Makassar 
 Minahasan 
 Minangkabau 
 Palembangese 
 Sundanese 
 Iranian 
 Iraqi 
 Irish 
 Israeli 
 Italian 
 Abruzzese 
 Ligurian 
 Lombard 
 Lucanian 
 Neapolitan 
 Roman 
 Sardinian 
 Sicilian 
 Venetian 
 Ivorian 
 Jamaican 
 Japanese 
 Okinawan 
 Jordanian 
 Kazakh 
 Kenyan 
 Korean 
 North Korean 
 South Korean 
 Kosovan 
 Kuwaiti 
 Kyrgyz 
 Lao 
 Latvian 
 Lebanese 
 Lesotho 
 Liberian 
 Libyan 
 Liechtensteiner 
 Lithuanian 
 Luxembourg 
 Macedonian 
 Malagasy 
 Malawian 
 Malaysian 
 Sabahan 
 Sarawakian 
 Maldivian 
 Malian 
 Maltese 
 Mauritanian 
 Mauritian 
 Mexican 
 Moldovan 
 Monégasque 
 Mongolian 
 Montenegrin 
 Moroccan 
 Mozambican 
 Namibian 
 Nauruan 
 Nepalese 
 New Zealand 
 Nicaraguan 
 Niger 
 Nigerian 
 Niuean 
 Norwegian 
 Omani 
 Pakistani 
 Palestinian 
 Panamanian 
 Peruvian 
 Polish 
 Portuguese 
 Qatari 
 Romanian  (incl.  Transylvanian Saxon ) 
 Russian 
 Bashkir 
 Chechen 
 Circassian 
 Komi 
 Mordovian 
 Sakha 
 Tatar 
 Udmurt 
 Yamal 
 Rwandan 
 Saint Lucian 
 Salvadoran 
 Sammarinese 
 São Tomé and Príncipe 
 Saudi Arabian 
 Senegalese 
 Serbian 
 Seychellois 
 Sierra Leonean 
 Singaporean 
 Slovak 
 Slovenian 
 Somali 
 South African 
 Spanish 
 Andalusian 
 Asturian 
 Balearic 
 Basque 
 Canarian 
 Cantabrian 
 Catalan 
 Extremaduran 
 Galician 
 Manchegan 
 Valencian 
 Sri Lankan 
 Sudanese 
 Swazi 
 Swedish 
 Swiss 
 Syrian 
 Taiwanese 
 Tajik 
 Tanzanian 
 Zanzibari 
 Thai 
 Togolese 
 Tunisian 
 Turkish 
 Turkmen 
 Trinidadian and Tobagonian 
 Ugandan 
 Ukrainian 
 Uruguayan 
 Uzbek 
 Venezuelan 
 Vietnamese 
 Western Saharan 
 Yemeni 
 Zambian 
 Zimbabwean 
 Ethnic 
 Ainu 
 Arab 
 Indonesian 
 Aromanian 
 Assyrian 
 Balochi 
 Berber 
 Cajun 
 Chinese 
 American 
 Canadian 
 Chifa 
 Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Crimean Tatar 
 Greek American 
 Hazaragi 
 Indian 
 Anglo-Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Indigenous American 
 Inuit 
 Italian American 
 Kurdish 
 Livonian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Malay 
 Ossetian 
 Parsi 
 Pashtun 
 Peranakan 
 Romani 
 Sámi 
 Soul food 
 Sylheti 
 Transylvanian Saxon 
 Yup'ik 
 Religious 
 Buddhist 
 Christian 
 Goan Catholic 
 Mangalorean Catholic 
 Mennonite 
 Hindu 
 Islamic 
 Chinese 
 Ital 
 Jain 
 Jewish 
 American 
 Ashkenazi 
 Bukharan 
 Ethiopian 
 Mizrahi 
 Sephardic 
 Syrian 
 Ritual slaughter 
 Sikh 
 Historical 
 Ancient Egyptian 
 Ancient Greek 
 Ancient Israelite 
 Ancient Roman 
 Antebellum America 
 Aztec 
 Byzantine 
 Early modern European 
 Historical Chinese 
 Historical Indian subcontinent 
 Historical North Indian and Pakistani 
 History of agriculture 
 History of alcoholic drinks 
 History of bread 
 History of seafood 
 History of vegetarianism 
 Historical Argentine 
 Historical Japanese 
 Inca 
 Mayan 
 Muisca 
 Mughal 
 Medieval 
 Ottoman 
 Peasant 
 Soviet 
 Thirteen Colonies 
 Styles 
 Classique 
 Fast food 
 Fusion 
 New American 
 Eurasian 
 Haute 
 Molecular gastronomy 
 Note by Note 
 Nouvelle 
 Lists 
 List of cuisines 
 List of historical cuisines 
 Lists of prepared foods 
 Related 
 Cookbook 
 Cooking 
 Culinary arts 
 Drink 
 Food 
 history 
 Diet 
 Meal preparation 
 
   Food portal 
   Drink portal 
   Category 
   Commons 
   Cookbook 
   WikiProject 
   Outline 
 
 v t e African cuisine National cuisines 
 Algeria 
 Angola 
 Benin 
 Botswana 
 Burkina Faso 
 Burundi 
 Cameroon 
 Cape Verde 
 Central African Republic 
 Chad 
 Comoros 
 Democratic Republic of the Congo 
 Djibouti 
 Egypt 
 Equatorial Guinea 
 Eritrea 
 Eswatini (Swaziland) 
 Ethiopia 
 Gabon 
 Gambia 
 Ghana 
 Guinea 
 Guinea-Bissau 
 Ivory Coast 
 Kenya 
 Lesotho 
 Liberia 
 Libya 
 Madagascar 
 Malawi 
 Mali 
 Mauritania 
 Mauritius 
 Morocco 
 Mozambique 
 Namibia 
 Niger 
 Nigeria 
 Republic of the Congo 
 Rwanda 
 Saint Helena 
 São Tomé and Príncipe 
 Senegal 
 Seychelles 
 Sierra Leone 
 Somalia 
 South Africa 
 South Sudan 
 Sudan 
 Tanzania 
 Togo 
 Tunisia 
 Uganda 
 Western Sahara 
 Zambia 
 Zimbabwe 
 Ethnic and regional cuisines 
 Arab 
 Berber 
 Jewish 
 Ethiopian 
 Mizrahi 
 Sephardi 
 Mediterranean 
 North African 
 West African 
 Zanzibar 
 Lists 
 List of African cuisines 
 List of African dishes 
 
   Category 
 
 Authority control : National libraries  
 Israel 
 United States 
 
 
 ^   Osseo-Asare, Fran (2015).  The Ghana cookbook . Barbara Baeta. New York.  ISBN   978-0-7818-1343-3 .  OCLC   896840053 . 
 
 
  
NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw2392
Cached time: 20230310194425
Cache expiry: 1814400
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc, no‐toc‐conversion]
CPU time usage: 0.553 seconds
Real time usage: 0.766 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3230/1000000
Post‐expand include size: 153388/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 12199/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 45/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 87112/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.248/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 7673867/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/400
 
 
Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  615.440      1 -total
 22.23%  136.835      1 Template:Reflist
 17.39%  107.033      1 Template:Ghana_topics
 17.22%  105.967      1 Template:Culture_of_Ghana
 17.15%  105.538      1 Template:Country_topics
 16.95%  104.310      1 Template:Culture_of_region
 16.57%  101.999      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 11.44%   70.402      5 Template:Cite_web
  9.03%   55.564      1 Template:Short_description
  5.00%   30.767      4 Template:Navbox
 
  Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:idhash:4524846-0!canonical and timestamp 20230310194424 and revision id 1133533585. Rendering was triggered because: page-view
  
 esi <esi:include src="/esitest-fa8a495983347898/content" />  
 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ghanaian_cuisine&oldid=1133533585 " 
 Categories :  Ghanaian cuisine West African cuisine Hidden categories:  Webarchive template wayback links All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from December 2016 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from February 2020 Use Ghanaian English from September 2022 All Wikipedia articles written in Ghanaian English Articles with J9U identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  This page was last edited on 14 January 2023, at 07:55  (UTC) . 
 Text is available under the  Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0 ;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the  Terms of Use  and  Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the  Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. 
 
 
 Privacy policy 
 About Wikipedia 
 Disclaimers 
 Contact Wikipedia 
 Mobile view 
 Developers 
 Statistics 
 Cookie statement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
