
 
 
 Jump to content 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle sidebar 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Create account Log in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Personal tools 
 
 
 
 
   Create account   Log in 
 
 
 
 
		Pages for logged out editors  learn more 
 
 
 Contributions Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Navigation 
 
 
 Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate 
 
 
 
 
 Contribute 
 
 
 Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file 
 
 
 
 
 Tools 
 
 
 What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item 
 
 
 
 
 Print/export 
 
 
 Download as PDF Printable version 
 
 
 
 
 Languages 
 
 On this Wikipedia the language links are at the top of the page across from the article title.  Go to top . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CentralNotice  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Contents 
 move to sidebar 
 hide 
 
 
 
 
 (Top) 
 
 
 
 
 
 1 Heian period (794 to 1185) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 Kamakura period (1192-1333) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 Sengoku Jidai, Edo, Meiji 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4 See also 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5 Notes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6 References 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
						Toggle the table of contents
					 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle the table of contents 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 History of Japanese cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 5 languages 
 
 
 
 Français Հայերեն Italiano Русский Українська 
 Edit links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Article Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 English 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 More 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
 
 
 Overview of the history of Japanese cuisine 
 This article  may be expanded with text translated from  the corresponding article  in Japanese .   (April 2018)   Click [show] for important translation instructions. 
 View  a machine-translated version of the Japanese article. 
 Machine translation, like  DeepL  or  Google Translate , is a useful starting point for translations, but translators must revise errors as necessary and confirm that the translation is accurate, rather than simply copy-pasting machine-translated text into the English Wikipedia. 
 Consider  adding a topic  to this template: there are already 3,337 articles in the  main category , and specifying |topic=  will aid in categorization. 
 Do not translate text that appears unreliable or low-quality. If possible, verify the text with references provided in the foreign-language article. 
 You  must  provide  copyright attribution  in the  edit summary  accompanying your translation by providing an  interlanguage link  to the source of your translation. A model attribution edit summary is  Content in this edit is translated from the existing Japanese Wikipedia article at [[:ja:日本料理#歴史]]; see its history for attribution. 
 You should also add the template  {{Translated|ja|日本料理#歴史}}  to the  talk page . 
 For more guidance, see  Wikipedia:Translation . 
 This article  relies largely or entirely on a  single source .  Relevant discussion may be found on the  talk page . Please help  improve this article  by  introducing  citations to additional sources . Find sources:   "History of Japanese cuisine"  –  news   ·   newspapers   ·   books   ·   scholar   ·   JSTOR   ( May 2012 ) 
 This article is part of the series Japanese cuisine 日本料理 
 Regional cuisines Main article 
 Nagoya 
 Okinawa 
 Yōshoku 
 
 Ingredients 
 Bento 
 Main dishes 
 Desserts 
 Noodles 
 Sashimi 
 Sushi 
 
 Preparation and cooking 
 Stir frying 
 Double steaming 
 Red cooking 
 
 Utensils 
 List of Japanese cooking utensils 
 
 Rituals and festivals 
 Etiquette 
 Kaiseki 
 New Year 
 
   Japan portal   Food portal v t e 
 This article traces the history of  cuisine of Japan . Foods and food preparation by the early Japanese  Neolithic  settlements can be pieced together from  archaeological  studies, and reveals paramount importance of rice and seafood since early times.
 The  Kofun period  (3rd to 7th centuries) is shrouded in uncertainty. Some entries in Japan's earliest written chronicles hint at a picture of food habits from the time of the formation of the Yamato dynasty. When Buddhism became widely accepted with the rise of the  Soga clan , a taboo on the eating meat (especially mammals) began to be enforced, and became common practice, although wild game was still being taken by  mountain people , and would be eaten by townspeople when the opportunity arose.
 Treatises on ceremony, tax documents, and fiction allows one to make a list of food ingredients used, and basic preparation methods in the  Heian period . However anything like recipes from the Middle Ages are a rare commodity in Japan or any country.
 Records throughout Middle Ages may give some idea of the dishes being enjoyed, but do not give details such as to provide accurate recipes.
 Once Japan entered the  Edo period , there were rich records of foods and cuisine from commoners (i.e., non-samurai), who were largely literate, and produced a great deal of wood-block printed literature.
 
 
 Heian period (794 to 1185) [ edit ] 
 Following the  Jōmon period  (14,000–300 BCE), Japanese society shifted from semi- sedentary   hunter-gatherer  lifestyle to an  agricultural society . This was the period in which  rice  cultivation began, having been introduced by  China  around the third century BCE. [1]  Rice was commonly boiled plain and called  gohan  or  meshi , and, as cooked rice has since been the preferred staple of the meal, the terms are used as synonyms for the word "meal". Peasants often mixed  millet  with rice, especially in mountainous regions where rice did not proliferate. [2] 
 During the  Kofun period  (300 to 538 AD), Chinese culture was introduced into Japan from  Korea . As such,  Buddhism  became influential on Japanese culture. After the 6th century, Japan directly pursued the imitation of Chinese culture of the  Tang dynasty  (618 to 907). [3]  It was this influence that marked the taboos on the consumption of meat in Japan. In 675 AD,  Emperor Tenmu  decreed a prohibition on the consumption of  cattle ,  horses ,  dogs ,  monkeys , and  chickens  during the 4th-9th months of the year; to break the law would mean a death sentence. Monkey was eaten prior to this time, but was eaten more in a ritualistic style for medicinal purposes. Chickens were often domesticated as pets, [ citation needed ]  while cattle and horses were rare and treated as such. A cow or horse would be ritually sacrificed on the first day of rice paddy cultivation, a ritual introduced from China. Emperor Temmu's decree, however, did not ban the consumption of  deer  or  wild boar , which were important to the Japanese diet at that time. [4] 
 The Heian Period (794 to 1185) in the 8th century saw many additional decrees made by emperors and empresses banning the killing of any animals. In 752 AD,  Empress Kōken  decreed a ban on fishing, but made a promise that adequate rice would be given to fishermen whose livelihood would have otherwise been destroyed. In 927 AD, regulations were enacted that stated that any government official or member of nobility that ate meat was deemed unclean for three days and could not participate in  Shinto  observances at the imperial court. [5] 
 
   Chopsticks  on a  chopstick rest 
 It was also the influence of Chinese cultures through Korea that brought  chopsticks  to Japan early in this period. [6] [7] [8] [9] [10]  Chopsticks at this time were used by nobility at banquets; they were not used as everyday utensils however, as hands were still commonly used to eat. Metal spoons were also used during the 8th and 9th centuries, but only by the nobility. [11]   Dining tables were also introduced to Japan at this time.  Commoners used a legless table called a  oshiki , while nobility used a lacquered table with legs called a  zen . Each person used his own table. Lavish banquets for the nobility would have multiple tables for each individual based upon the number of dishes presented. [12] 
 Upon the decline of the Tang dynasty in the 9th century, Japan made a move toward its individuality in culture and cuisine. The abandonment of the spoon as a dining utensil – which was retained in  Korea  – is one of the marked differences, and commoners were now eating with chopsticks as well. Trade continued with China and Korea, but influence en masse from outside Japan would not be seen again until the 19th century.  The 10th and 11th centuries marked a level of refinement of cooking and etiquette found in the culture of the  Heian  nobility. Court chefs would prepare many of the vegetables sent as tax from the countryside.  Court banquets were common and lavish; garb for nobility during these events remained in the Chinese style which differentiated them from the plain clothes of commoners. [13] 
 The dishes consumed after the 9th century included grilled  fish  and  meat  ( yakimono ), simmered food ( nimono ), steamed foods ( mushimono ), soups made from chopped vegetables, fish or meat ( atsumono ), jellied fish ( nikogori ) simmered with seasonings, sliced raw fish served in a vinegar sauce ( namasu ),  vegetables ,  seaweed  or fish in a strong dressing ( aemono ), and pickled vegetables ( tsukemono ) that were cured in salt to cause lactic fermentation. Oil and fat were avoided almost universally in cooking. Sesame oil was used, but rarely, as it was of great expense to produce. [14] 
 Documents from the Heian nobility note that fish and wild fowl were common fare along with vegetables. Their banquet settings consisted of a bowl of  rice  and soup, along with chopsticks, a spoon, and three seasonings which were salt, vinegar and  hishio , which was a fermentation of soybeans, wheat, sake and salt. A fourth plate was present for mixing the seasonings to desired flavor for dipping the food. The four types of food present at a banquet consisted of dried foods ( himono ), fresh foods ( namamono ), fermented or dressed food ( kubotsuki ), and desserts ( kashi ). Dried fish and fowl were thinly sliced (e.g. salted  salmon ,  pheasant , steamed and dried  abalone , dried and grilled  octopus ), while fresh fish, shellfish and fowl were sliced raw in vinegar sauce or grilled (e.g.  carp ,  sea bream , salmon,  trout , pheasant).  Kubotsuki  consisted of small balls of fermented  sea squirt , fish or  giblets  along with  jellyfish  and  aemono . Desserts would have included Chinese cakes, and a variety of fruits and nuts including  pine nuts , dried  chestnuts ,  acorns ,  jujube ,  pomegranate ,  peach ,  apricot ,  persimmon  and  citrus . The meal would be ended with  sake . [15] 
 
 Kamakura period (1192-1333) [ edit ] 
 The  Kamakura period  marked a large political change in Japan. Prior to the Kamakura period, the  samurai  were guards of the landed estates of the nobility. The nobility, having lost control of the Japanese countryside, fell under the militaristic rule of the peasant class samurai, with a military government being set up in 1192 in  Kamakura  giving way to the period. Once the position of power had been exchanged, the role of the court banquets changed. The court cuisine which had prior to this time emphasized flavor and nutritional aspects changed to a highly ceremonial and official role. [16] 
 Minamoto no Yoritomo , the first  shōgun , punished other samurai who followed the earlier showy banquet style of the nobility. The shōgun banquet, called ōban, was attended by military leaders from the provinces. The ōban originally referred to a luncheon on festival days attended by soldiers and guards during the Heian period, and was attached to the warrior class. The menu usually consisted of dried  abalone , jellyfish  aemono , pickled  ume  called  umeboshi , salt and vinegar for seasoning, and rice. Later in the period, the  honzen-ryōri  banquet became popularized. [17] 
 The cuisine of the samurai came distinctly from their peasant roots. The meals prepared emphasized simplicity while being substantial. The cuisine avoided refinement, ceremony and luxury, and shed all further Chinese influence. One specific example is the change from wearing traditional Chinese garb to a distinct clothing style that combined the simple clothing of the common people. This style evolved into the  kimono  by the end of the  Middle Ages . [18] 
 The Buddhist vegetarian philosophy strengthened during the Kamakura period as it began to spread to the peasants. Those who were involved in the trade of slaughtering animals for food or leather came under discrimination. Those practicing this trade were considered in opposition to the Buddhist philosophy of not taking life, while under the  Shinto  philosophy they were considered defiled. This discrimination intensified, and eventually led  to the creation of a separate caste, the  burakumin . [19] 
 
 Sengoku Jidai, Edo, Meiji [ edit ] 
   A fruit market stand in Meiji-era Japan 
 Jesuit Catholic Portuguese missionary João Rodrigues said that Japanese refused to eat lard, hens, duck, pigs, cow, horse, and ass, and refused to eat their own livestock and only sometimes hunted wild animals during feasts, in contrast to the Chinese who ate geese, hens, domestic duck, bacon, lard, pork, cow, horse and ass. [20]  Catholic Christians visiting Japan were accused of eating dogs, horses and cattle by Japanese Buddhist monks. The book "comparison between European and Japanese Cultures" was written by  Luís Fróis  (1532-1597), a Jesuit Father in 1585. He said "Europeans relish hens, quails, pies, and blancmanges, Japanese prefer wild dogs, cranes, large monkeys, cats, and uncooked seaweed [for eating] ... We do not eat dog meat but beef; Japanese do not eat beef but dog meat as medicine". the Japanese also ate raw, sliced boar meat, unlike Europeans who cooked it in stew. [21]  Animal milk like cow milk was despised and abhorred and meat eating was avoided by the Japanese in the 19th century. When one Japanese, Marsukara wanted to feed cow milk to babies after he was told western babies were fed it, he imported from Shanghai milking equipment at the French consul's advice and purchased Nagasaki cows. He never drank it himself. [22]  Beef was not eaten as regular food in Japan until the Meiji restoration. [23] [24]  Meat eating was forbidden by Buddhism in Japan. [25]  Meat eating was an abhorred western practice, according to one Samurai family's daughter who never ate meat. [26] [27]  Shintoism and Buddhism both contributed to the vegetarian diet of medieval Japanese while 0.1 ounces of meat was the daily amount consumed by the average Japanese in 1939. Japan lacked arable land for livestock so meat eating was outlawed several times by Japan's rulers. In 675 a law was passed stating that from late spring to early autumn, dog, chicken, monkey and beef meat was not allowed for that period of time. Other bans were implemented. Japan mostly got meat from hunting wild animals but wild animals like boar and deer decreased as farmers cut down forests for farms since the population grew. Japan started adopting meat based diets from Europeans like the Dutch who were taller than them in the 18th century and then when the Meiji emperor ate meat in public on 24 January 1872. The Meiji emperor was described as " feminine-looking" and "poetry-writing". Then Japan started importing Korean beef with a 13 times increase in Tokyo's beef consumption in 5 years. Because the average Japanese conscript was weak, with the minimum height at 4 feet 11 inches with 16% of conscripts shorter than that height and were thin and small. Japan needed to boost its army strength at the time when it was modernizing. Japan then saw American soldiers eating bacon, steaks and hamburgers after the Second World War when America occupied Japan. Japan's McDonald's chief Den Fujita said "If we eat hamburgers for a thousand years, we will become blond. And when we become blond we can conquer the world." [28]  Beef was however eaten as medicine in both China and Japan as a special exemption to the ban before the 19th century. The ban originated in the 10th century AD.
 
 See also [ edit ] 
 History of sushi 
 Notes [ edit ] 
 
 
 ^   "Road of rice plant" .  National Science Museum of Japan . Archived from  the original  on 2015-04-05 . Retrieved  2011-03-24 . 
 
 ^   Kiple & Ornelas 2001  harvnb error: no target: CITEREFKipleOrnelas2001 ( help ) , 1176. 
 
 ^   Ishige 2001 , 46–48. 
 
 ^   Ishige 2001 , 53–54. 
 
 ^   Ishige 2001 , 55–56. 
 
 ^   Ishige 2001 , 67 "chopsticks originated in ancient China, spreading from the Yeelow River basin, which was then the center of Chinese civilization, to surrounding regions from about fifth century BCE." 
 
 ^   The International Institute of Hashi   Archived  2012-03-25 at the  Wayback Machine 
 
 ^   Osaka Kyoiku University 　箸の伝来 "Transmission of chopsticks" 
 
 ^   "[[University of Marketing and Distribution Sciences]] Mori Takayuki (professor of Department of Commercial Science)" . Archived from  the original  on 2012-09-14 . Retrieved  2012-05-05 . 
 
 ^   "[[Komazawa Women's University]] "箸と日本人 (Chopsticks and Japanese)" . Archived from  the original  on 2013-07-28 . Retrieved  2012-05-05 . 
 
 ^   Ishige 2001 , 67–69. 
 
 ^   Ishige 2001 , 71 
 
 ^   Ishige 2001 , 50–51. 
 
 ^   Ishige 2001 , 71–72. 
 
 ^   Ishige 2001 , 73–74. 
 
 ^   Ishige 2001 , 51. 
 
 ^   Ishige 2001 , 74–75. 
 
 ^   Ishige 2001 , 51–52. 
 
 ^   Ishige 2001 , 58. 
 
 ^   Cwiertka, Katarzyna Joanna (2006).  Modern Japanese Cuisine: Food, Power and National Identity  (illustrated ed.). Reaktion Books. p. 26.  ISBN   1861892985 .  ... by the late sixteenth century the eating of the meat of domesticated ... In keeping with their customs the Japanese abominate all this , for on no ... 
 
 ^   SHIMIZU, AKIRA (2010).  "4 Meat-eating in the Kōjimachi District of Edo" .  In Assmann, Stephanie; Rath, Eric C. (eds.).  Japanese Foodways, Past and Present  (illustrated ed.). University of Illinois Press. p. 94.  ISBN   978-0252077524 .  4 Especially notable is the eating of dog meat, to which Fróis added the statement: "We do not eat dog meat but beef; Japanese do not eat beef but dog meat ... 
 
 ^   Reischauer, Haru Matsukata (1986).  Samurai and Silk: A Japanese and American Heritage  (illustrated, reprint, revised ed.). Harvard University Press. p. 67.  ISBN   067478801X .  A Japanese and American Heritage Haru Matsukata Reischauer ... The Japanese of the time did not eat meat and abominated milk. In fact, Matsukata himself ... 
 
 ^   Amalgamated Meat Cutters and Butcher Workmen of North America (1904).  Official Journal, Volume 5 . p. 115.  The Japanese are not beef eaters . ... abominated , banned ? and American packers have never sold For , e'en as Judas in the days of old , bacon to any ... 
 
 ^   United States. Congress (1955).  Congressional Record: Proceedings and Debates of the ... Congress . U.S. Government Printing Office. p. 3796.  He proposed further that Japan form internal trade organizations to promote the exchange ... eat meat , be clad in new suits and enjoy drama and the movies ... 
 
 ^   New Japan, Volume 6 . Mainichi Newspapers. 1953. p. 315.  Festivals In Japan came in touch with Western natural science . ... Since the introduction of Buddhism which forbids meat - eating , the Japanese people ... 
 
 ^   Bulletin, Issue 31 . Bulletin, National Council for the Social Studies. Contributor National Council for the Social Studies. The Council. 1959. p. 73.  The daughter of an old Samurai family describes life and customs in a Japan so little touched by western ways as to abominate the eating of meat . {{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: others ( link ) 
 
 ^   National Council for the Social Studies (1955).  Bulletin - National Council for the Social Studies, Issues 29-31 . Bulletin - National Council for the Social Studies, National Council for the Social Studies. National Council for the Social Studies. p. 73.  The daughter of an old Samurai family describes life and customs in a Japan so little touched by western ways as to abominate the eating of meat . 
 
 ^   ZARASKA, MARTA (March 7, 2016).  "How Japan went from being an almost entirely vegetarian country to a huge consumer of meat" .  Business Insider India . 
 
 
 References [ edit ] 
 
 Heibonsha (1969) [1968].  世界百科事典(Sekai hyakka jiten) .  (world encyclopedia, in Japanese) 
 Ishige, Naomichi (2001).  The History and Culture of Japanese Food . New York: Columbia University Press.  ISBN   0710306571 . 
 Kiple, Kenneth F.; Ornelas, Kriemhild (2000).  The Cambridge World History of Food . Vol. 2. Cambridge, UK: ColuCambridge University Press.  ISBN   0521402166 . Archived from  the original  on 2012-05-04. 
 
 Portals :   Food   History   Japan 
 v t e Cuisines Continental 
 African 
 North 
 West 
 list 
 Americas 
 Caribbean 
 North 
 South 
 list 
 Asian 
 Caucasian 
 Central 
 Indian subcontinent 
 Levantine 
 list 
 European 
 Balkan 
 Central 
 Eastern 
 list 
 Oceanic 
 Intercontinental
 Global 
 Latin American 
 Mediterranean 
 Middle Eastern 
 National  and regional 
 Afghan 
 Albanian 
 Algerian 
 American 
 Californian 
 Floribbean 
 Hawaiian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Lowcountry (South Carolina) 
 New England 
 New Mexico 
 Pacific Northwest 
 Pennsylvania Dutch 
 Puerto Rican 
 Southern US 
 Southwest US 
 Texas 
 Angolan 
 Argentine 
 Armenian 
 Australian 
 Austrian 
 Azerbaijani 
 Bahraini 
 Bangladeshi 
 Barbadian 
 Belarusian 
 Belgian 
 Belizean 
 Beninese 
 Bhutanese 
 Bolivian 
 Bosnian-Herzegovinian 
 Botswana 
 Brazilian 
 British 
 Channel Islands 
 English 
 Gibraltarian 
 Northern Irish 
 Saint Helena 
 Scottish 
 Welsh 
 Bruneian 
 Bulgarian 
 Burkinabé 
 Burmese 
 Burundian 
 Cambodian 
 Cameroonian 
 Canadian 
 Acadian 
 Québécois 
 Central African Republic 
 Chadian 
 Chilean 
 Chinese 
 Cantonese 
 Hong Kong 
 Macanese 
 Tibetan 
 Xinjiang 
 Colombian 
 Congolese 
 Corsican 
 Croatian 
 Cuban 
 Cypriot 
 Czech 
 Danish 
 Faroese 
 Greenlandic 
 Djiboutian 
 Dominican 
 Dominican Republic 
 Dutch 
 East Timorese 
 Ecuadorian 
 Egyptian 
 Emirati 
 Equatorial Guinean 
 Eritrean 
 Estonian 
 Ethiopian 
 Fijian 
 Filipino 
 Finnish 
 French 
 Occitan 
 French Guianan 
 Gabonese 
 Gambian 
 Georgian 
 German 
 Ghanaian 
 Greek 
 Cretan 
 Epirotic 
 Greek Macedonian 
 Heptanesean 
 Guatemalan 
 Guinea-Bissauan 
 Guinean 
 Haitian 
 Honduran 
 Hungarian 
 Icelandic 
 Indian 
 Arunachalese 
 Assamese 
 Bengali 
 Bihari 
 Goan 
 Gujarati 
 Himachal Pradesh 
 Kashmiri 
 Jharkhandi 
 Karnataka 
 Kerala 
 Maharashtrian 
 Manipuri 
 Meghalayan 
 Mizo 
 Naga 
 Odia 
 Punjabi 
 Rajasthani 
 Sikkimese 
 Sindhi 
 Tamil 
 Telangana 
 Telugu 
 Indonesian 
 Acehnese 
 Balinese 
 Banjar 
 Batak 
 Betawi 
 Indo 
 Javanese 
 Madurese 
 Makassar 
 Minahasan 
 Minangkabau 
 Palembangese 
 Sundanese 
 Iranian 
 Iraqi 
 Irish 
 Israeli 
 Italian 
 Abruzzese 
 Ligurian 
 Lombard 
 Lucanian 
 Neapolitan 
 Roman 
 Sardinian 
 Sicilian 
 Venetian 
 Ivorian 
 Jamaican 
 Japanese 
 Okinawan 
 Jordanian 
 Kazakh 
 Kenyan 
 Korean 
 North Korean 
 South Korean 
 Kosovan 
 Kuwaiti 
 Kyrgyz 
 Lao 
 Latvian 
 Lebanese 
 Lesotho 
 Liberian 
 Libyan 
 Liechtensteiner 
 Lithuanian 
 Luxembourg 
 Macedonian 
 Malagasy 
 Malawian 
 Malaysian 
 Sabahan 
 Sarawakian 
 Maldivian 
 Malian 
 Maltese 
 Mauritanian 
 Mauritian 
 Mexican 
 Moldovan 
 Monégasque 
 Mongolian 
 Montenegrin 
 Moroccan 
 Mozambican 
 Namibian 
 Nauruan 
 Nepalese 
 New Zealand 
 Nicaraguan 
 Niger 
 Nigerian 
 Niuean 
 Norwegian 
 Omani 
 Pakistani 
 Palestinian 
 Panamanian 
 Peruvian 
 Polish 
 Portuguese 
 Qatari 
 Romanian  (incl.  Transylvanian Saxon ) 
 Russian 
 Bashkir 
 Chechen 
 Circassian 
 Komi 
 Mordovian 
 Sakha 
 Tatar 
 Udmurt 
 Yamal 
 Rwandan 
 Saint Lucian 
 Salvadoran 
 Sammarinese 
 São Tomé and Príncipe 
 Saudi Arabian 
 Senegalese 
 Serbian 
 Seychellois 
 Sierra Leonean 
 Singaporean 
 Slovak 
 Slovenian 
 Somali 
 South African 
 Spanish 
 Andalusian 
 Asturian 
 Balearic 
 Basque 
 Canarian 
 Cantabrian 
 Catalan 
 Extremaduran 
 Galician 
 Manchegan 
 Valencian 
 Sri Lankan 
 Sudanese 
 Swazi 
 Swedish 
 Swiss 
 Syrian 
 Taiwanese 
 Tajik 
 Tanzanian 
 Zanzibari 
 Thai 
 Togolese 
 Tunisian 
 Turkish 
 Turkmen 
 Trinidadian and Tobagonian 
 Ugandan 
 Ukrainian 
 Uruguayan 
 Uzbek 
 Venezuelan 
 Vietnamese 
 Western Saharan 
 Yemeni 
 Zambian 
 Zimbabwean 
 Ethnic 
 Ainu 
 Arab 
 Indonesian 
 Aromanian 
 Assyrian 
 Balochi 
 Berber 
 Cajun 
 Chinese 
 American 
 Canadian 
 Chifa 
 Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Crimean Tatar 
 Greek American 
 Hazaragi 
 Indian 
 Anglo-Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Indigenous American 
 Inuit 
 Italian American 
 Kurdish 
 Livonian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Malay 
 Ossetian 
 Parsi 
 Pashtun 
 Peranakan 
 Romani 
 Sámi 
 Soul food 
 Sylheti 
 Transylvanian Saxon 
 Yup'ik 
 Religious 
 Buddhist 
 Christian 
 Goan Catholic 
 Mangalorean Catholic 
 Mennonite 
 Hindu 
 Islamic 
 Chinese 
 Ital 
 Jain 
 Jewish 
 American 
 Ashkenazi 
 Bukharan 
 Ethiopian 
 Mizrahi 
 Sephardic 
 Syrian 
 Ritual slaughter 
 Sikh 
 Historical 
 Ancient Egyptian 
 Ancient Greek 
 Ancient Israelite 
 Ancient Roman 
 Antebellum America 
 Aztec 
 Byzantine 
 Early modern European 
 Historical Chinese 
 Historical Indian subcontinent 
 Historical North Indian and Pakistani 
 History of agriculture 
 History of alcoholic drinks 
 History of bread 
 History of seafood 
 History of vegetarianism 
 Historical Argentine 
 Historical Japanese 
 Inca 
 Mayan 
 Muisca 
 Mughal 
 Medieval 
 Ottoman 
 Peasant 
 Soviet 
 Thirteen Colonies 
 Styles 
 Classique 
 Fast food 
 Fusion 
 New American 
 Eurasian 
 Haute 
 Molecular gastronomy 
 Note by Note 
 Nouvelle 
 Lists 
 List of cuisines 
 List of historical cuisines 
 Lists of prepared foods 
 Related 
 Cookbook 
 Cooking 
 Culinary arts 
 Drink 
 Food 
 history 
 Diet 
 Meal preparation 
 
   Food portal 
   Drink portal 
   Category 
   Commons 
   Cookbook 
   WikiProject 
   Outline 
 
 Authority control : National libraries  
 Japan 
 
  
NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw2284
Cached time: 20230311124840
Cache expiry: 1814400
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc, no‐toc‐conversion]
CPU time usage: 0.721 seconds
Real time usage: 0.897 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2285/1000000
Post‐expand include size: 135889/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 4076/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 20/100
Expensive parser function count: 10/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 73475/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.417/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 10044018/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/400
 
 
Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  706.537      1 -total
 34.47%  243.537      1 Template:Reflist
 17.62%  124.466      2 Template:Ambox
 14.07%   99.432      1 Template:Japanese_cuisine
 13.73%   97.010      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 12.69%   89.631      1 Template:Expand_Japanese
 12.08%   85.363      1 Template:Expand_language
 11.86%   83.811      3 Template:Cite_web
 10.08%   71.205     11 Template:Cite_book
  8.37%   59.114      1 Template:Short_description
 
  Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:idhash:35722648-0!canonical and timestamp 20230311124839 and revision id 1121572354. Rendering was triggered because: api-parse
  
 esi <esi:include src="/esitest-fa8a495983347898/content" />  
 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=History_of_Japanese_cuisine&oldid=1121572354 " 
 Categories :  Japanese cuisine History of food and drink Buddhist cuisine Hidden categories:  Harv and Sfn no-target errors Webarchive template wayback links CS1 maint: others Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing translation from Japanese Wikipedia Articles needing additional references from May 2012 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2010 Articles with NDL identifiers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  This page was last edited on 13 November 2022, at 00:44  (UTC) . 
 Text is available under the  Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0 ;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the  Terms of Use  and  Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the  Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. 
 
 
 Privacy policy 
 About Wikipedia 
 Disclaimers 
 Contact Wikipedia 
 Mobile view 
 Developers 
 Statistics 
 Cookie statement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
