
 
 
 Jump to content 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle sidebar 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Create account Log in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Personal tools 
 
 
 
 
   Create account   Log in 
 
 
 
 
		Pages for logged out editors  learn more 
 
 
 Contributions Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Navigation 
 
 
 Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate 
 
 
 
 
 Contribute 
 
 
 Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file 
 
 
 
 
 Tools 
 
 
 What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item 
 
 
 
 
 Print/export 
 
 
 Download as PDF Printable version 
 
 
 
 
 In other projects 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons Wikibooks 
 
 
 
 
 Languages 
 
 On this Wikipedia the language links are at the top of the page across from the article title.  Go to top . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CentralNotice  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Contents 
 move to sidebar 
 hide 
 
 
 
 
 (Top) 
 
 
 
 
 
 1 General features 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 Spices 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 History 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4 Hungarian meals 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5 Special occasions 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6 Typical Hungarian dishes 
 
 
				Toggle Typical Hungarian dishes subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 6.1 Soups 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6.2 Main courses 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6.3 Sausage and cold cuts 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6.4 Sweets and cakes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6.5 Others 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 7 Drinks 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8 See also 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 9 References 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 10 External links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 11 Recipes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
						Toggle the table of contents
					 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle the table of contents 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hungarian cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 40 languages 
 
 
 
 Afrikaans العربية Azərbaycanca Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Boarisch Čeština Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa ქართული Kurdî Magyar Македонски Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Русский Simple English Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 
 Edit links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Article Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 English 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 More 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
 
 
 Culinary traditions of Hungary 
 Part of  a series  on the Culture of Hungary 
 History 
 People 
 Languages 
 Mythology 
 Cuisine 
 Festivals 
 Religion 
 Art 
 Literature 
 Music  and Performing arts 
 Dance 
 
 Media 
 Television 
 Cinema 
 
 Sport 
 Monuments 
 World Heritage Sites 
 
 Symbols 
 Flag 
 Coat of arms 
 National anthem 
 
   Hungary portal v t e 
   Pörkölt , also known as "goulash" 
   Hortobágyi palacsinta , a savoury crêpe filled with veal. 
   Chicken paprikash  ( csirkepaprikás ) simmered in thick creamy paprika sauce with homemade pasta called  nokedli . 
   Gundel palacsinta  filled with nuts and chocolate sauce. 
 Hungarian  or  Magyar cuisine  is the  cuisine  characteristic of the nation of  Hungary  and its primary ethnic group, the  Magyars . Traditional Hungarian dishes are primarily based on meats, seasonal vegetables, fruits, bread, and dairy products.
 
 
 General features [ edit ] 
 Hungarian cuisine is mostly continental  Central European , with some elements from Eastern Europe such as the use of  poppy , and the popularity of  kefir  and  quark .  Paprika  is often associated with Hungary and is used prominently in several dishes. Traditional Hungarian paprika is characterised by its bright colour and distinct heat, differentiating it from milder variations of paprika popular elsewhere in the world. [1]  Other herbs and spices commonly used in Hungarian cuisine include  garlic ,  marjoram ,  caraway seeds ,  celery seeds  and  dill seeds . [2]  Typical Hungarian food is heavy on dairy and meats, similar to that of neighboring  Czech , and  Slovak  cuisines.  Chicken ,  pork  and  beef  are common, while turkey, duck, lamb, fish and game meats are mostly eaten on special occasions. Hungary is also known for relatively inexpensive salamis and sausages it produces primarily from pork, but also poultry, beef and others.
 Bread is perhaps the most important and basic part of the Hungarian diet. It is eaten at all meals, accompanying main dishes. Before the fall of communism in 1990, white bread was a staple food. Numerous other types of baked goods, such as buns and pastries both salty and sweet, often creatively filled, have proliferated in recent years.
 Main dishes may "require" a side dish (köret) or not. It is unusual to violate this convention. The side dish is most commonly potato in various styles, but rice or steamed vegetables are also popular. Some foods have a customary side dish (e.g.,  csirkepaprikás  'paprika chicken' is almost always eaten with small dumplings similar to gnocchi ( nokedli ), while others may take any side dish (e.g.,  rántott sajt  'fried cheese'). Some dishes also have toppings or bread on the side considered almost mandatory, for example, the sour cream and bread with  töltött káposzta  'stuffed cabbage'.
 Recently, Hungarian chefs have become more creative, so Hungarian dishes prepared for tourists may seem unusual to Hungarians who are familiar with more traditional preparations.
 Goulash , often imagined as the quintessential Hungarian dish, is not eaten very frequently. [ by whom? ]  Other famous Hungarian meat stews include  paprikás , a thicker stew with meat simmered in thick, creamy, paprika-flavored gravy, and  pörkölt , a stew with boneless meat (usually beef or pork),  onion , and sweet  paprika  powder, both served with  nokedli  or  galuska  (small dumplings). In some old-fashioned dishes, fruits such as plums and apricots are cooked with meat or in piquant sauces/stuffings for game, roasts and other cuts. Various kinds of noodles, dumplings, potatoes, and rice are commonly served as a side dish. Hungarian dry sausages ( kolbász ) [3]  and  winter salami  are also widely eaten.
 Other characteristics of Hungarian cuisine are the  soups ,  casseroles ,  desserts , and  pastries  and stuffed  crêpes  ( palacsinta ), with fierce rivalries between regional variations on the same dish (such as the Hungarian hot fish soup called  fisherman's soup  or  halászlé , cooked differently on the banks of Hungary's two main rivers: the  Danube  and the  Tisza ),  palacsinta  (pancakes served flambéed in dark chocolate sauce filled with ground walnuts) and  Dobos Cake  (layered sponge cake, with chocolate buttercream filling and topped with a thin layer of crunchy caramel).
 Two elements of Hungarian cuisine that impress foreigners are the various vegetable  stews  called  főzelék [3]  as well as cold fruit soups, such as cold  sour cherry soup  ( Hungarian :  hideg meggyleves ).
 Hungarian cuisine uses a large variety of cheeses, but the most common are  túró  (a type of crumbly  quark ), cream cheeses, picante ewe-cheese  (juhtúró),  the most common Hungarian cheeses like Karaván,  Pannonia cheese  [ hu ] ,  Pálpusztai ,  Emmentaler ,  Edam  and  Trappista .
 There are many smoked pork products. Many dishes get their character from the smoky taste of one or more of these ingredients. A variety of Hungarian smoked sausages, smoked ham, and smoked lard are also consumed without further preparation. These are accompanied with bread and fresh vegetables, are often called 'cold dish', and mainly consumed for breakfast or dinner, but sometimes offered as starter in restaurants.
 Pickled (fermented) vegetables are often used. The most common is  savanyú káposzta  (lit: sour-cabbage,  sauerkraut ) and soured peppers, gherkins, but a mix of cauliflower, green tomatoes, baby water melon, and other vegetables is also frequent. These are traditionally consumed in the winter and often were the main source of vitamin-C throughout the cold months of winter. Some seasonal, hearty dishes such as  töltött káposzta ,  húsos káposzta  and  korhelyleves  are based on  savanyú káposzta . Classic Hungarian restaurants often offer some variations as side dish, a refreshing complement to heavy dishes.
 
 Spices [ edit ] 
   Paprika 
   Csaba sausage ( Csabai kolbász ) 
 Hungarian food uses selected spices judiciously to add flavor, and despite the association of  hot paprika  with Hungary, most Hungarian dishes do not feature hot chili peppers intrinsically, and one may request not to include them in the dishes that use it. Hot chilis are only sometimes given as a garnish in traditional Hungarian cuisine, although dried hot chilis or hot chili paste may be given on the side for added, optional spiciness. This is in stark contrast to other nations associated with the chili pepper, like Mexico or Thailand, which use the hot variety much more frequently and typically also serve it as a garnish. In Hungary, the sweet (mild) paprika is much more common and is featured prominently in most dishes. The use of a thick sour cream called  tejföl  as a topping is another common feature in many dishes . 
 In addition to various kinds of  paprika  and onions (raw, sweated, seared, browned or  caramelized ), other common flavor components include:  dill ,  bay leaf ,  black peppercorn ,  caraway ,  coriander ,  cinnamon ,  garlic ,  horseradish ,  lemon juice  and peel,  marjoram ,  mustard  (prepared),  tarragon ,  oregano ,  parsley ,  vinegar ,  poppy seeds , and  vanilla . Less used spices are  anise ,  basil ,  chervil ,  chives ,  cloves ,  juniper berries ,  lovage ,  nutmeg ,  rosemary ,  savory ,  thyme ,  creeping thyme , and  white peppercorn .
 
 History [ edit ] 
   Goulash ( gulyásleves ) in a traditional  cauldron  ( bogrács ). 
   Stuffed cabbage ( töltött káposzta ) served with dill, sour cream, and  sonka  (ham).  Töltött káposzta  is frequently also served in a tomato sauce with sauerkraut and  kolbász . 
   Bogrács 
 Hungarian cuisine has influenced the history of the  Magyar people , and vice versa. The importance of  livestock  and the nomadic lifestyle of the Magyar people, as well as a hearkening to their steppe past, is apparent in the prominence of meat in Hungarian food and may be reflected in traditional meat dishes cooked over the fire like  goulash  (in Hungarian "gulyás", lit. "cattleman's (meal)"), [4]   pörkölt  stew and the spicy fisherman's soup called  halászlé  are all traditionally cooked over the open fire in a  bogrács  (or cauldron). In the 15th century, King  Matthias Corvinus [5] [6]  and his  Neapolitan  wife  Beatrice , influenced by  Renaissance  culture, introduced new ingredients such as sweet chestnut and spices such as garlic, ginger, mace, saffron and nutmeg, [7]  onion and the use of fruits in stuffings or cooked with meat. [8]  Some of these spices such as ginger and saffron are no longer used in modern Hungarian cuisine. [9]  At that time and later, considerable numbers of  Saxons  (a German ethnic group), Armenians, Italians, Jews, Poles, Czechs and Slovaks settled in the Hungarian basin and in Transylvania, also contributing with different new dishes. Hungarian cuisine was influenced by  Austrian cuisine  under the  Austro-Hungarian Empire ; dishes and methods of food preparation have often been borrowed from Austrian cuisine, and vice versa. Some cakes and sweets in Hungary show a strong German-Austrian influence. All told, modern Hungarian cuisine is a synthesis of ancient Uralic components mixed with  West Slavic ,  Balkan ,  Austrian , and  German . The food of Hungary can be considered a melting pot of the continent, with a culinary base formed from its own, original Magyar cuisine.
 
 Hungarian meals [ edit ] 
   Hungarian lunch starts with soup. This is veal meat soup ( borjúhúsleves ). 
   Winter  salami  is made from cured pork and spices, smoked slowly. During the process a special noble-mold is formed on the surface. 
 In  Hungary , people usually have a large breakfast. Hungarian  breakfast  generally is an  open sandwich  with bread or toast, butter, cheese or different cream cheeses,  túró  cheese or  körözött  (Liptauer cheese spread), cold cuts such as ham, liver  pâté  (called  májkrém  or  kenőmájas ), bacon,  salami ,  mortadella , sausages such as  kabanos ,  beerwurst  or different Hungarian sausages or  kolbász . [10]  Traditionally fresh tomatoes and green peppers (sometimes scallion,  radish  and cucumber) are served with these when they are in season. Eggs (fried, scrambled or boiled) may also be part of breakfast.
 Some types of meat that were commonly eaten in the past (such as  beef tongue ,  disznósajt  ( head cheese ) or  véres hurka  (similar to  black pudding ) are now more associated with the countryside as people turn to healthier diets.
 Contemporary Hungarians do not always eat this typical breakfast. For many, breakfast is a cup of milk, tea or coffee with pastries, a  bun , a  kifli  or a  strudel [4]  with jam or honey, or cereal, such as  muesli  and perhaps fruit. Children can have rice pudding ( tejberizs ) or  Semolina  Cream ( tejbegríz ) for breakfast topped with cocoa powder and sugar or with fruit syrup. Hot drinks are preferred for breakfast.
 Villásreggeli  or brunch (literally 'breakfast with fork') is a more luxurious big breakfast given on special occasions or holidays. Often guests are invited. Deviled eggs, cold  steak , cold salads, salmon  omelettes , pancakes, a spicy cheese spread made with sheep milk cheese called  körözött ,  caviar ,  foie gras , fruit salads,  compote , fruit yogurts, fruit juices,  champagne  and pastries, cakes and cookies may be served.
 Lunch  is the major meal of the day, traditionally with several courses, but often just one course in modern times. Cold or hot  appetizers [11]  may be served sometimes (for example, fish, egg or liver), then soup. Soup is followed by a main dish. The main dish is a dish including meat, side dishes and  salad  (or  pickled vegetables  - paprika, cucumber, sauerkraut, etc.), which precedes the  dessert . Fruit may follow. In Hungary, pancakes (or rather, crepes) may be served as a main dish or as a dessert but not for breakfast. Salad is typically served with meat dishes, made of lettuce with tomatoes, cucumbers and onions, or some pickled variant of them. [11]  A simple thin sliced cucumber or tomato salad in  vinaigrette  is also typical. Salads such as  Salade Olivier  or potato salad are made of boiled potatoes, [3]  vegetables, hard-boiled eggs, mushrooms, fried or boiled meat or fish, in vinaigrette,  aspic  or  mayonnaise . These salads are eaten as appetizers or even as a main course.
 Some people and children eat a light meal in the afternoon, called  uzsonna , usually an open sandwich, pastry, slice of cake or fruit.
 Dinner is typically less important than lunch, and there is no typical Hungarian dinner. It may either be a lunch-type meal, with multiple courses and the same foods one would serve for lunch, or it could be the same as a traditional Hungarian breakfast, with bread, cold cuts, cheeses, tomatoes and peppers as described above. When dinner is an important occasion it will be prepared the same way and with the same courses a full lunch would be. When it's not an important occasion, it's a good time to eat leftovers.
 Hungarian meal times are somewhat flexible. Typical times are as follows: Breakfast 6-9 am; Lunch 12 noon-2 pm; Dinner 6-9 pm.
 
 Special occasions [ edit ] 
   Pörkölt  with  nokedli . 
 For Christmas, Hungarians have a fish soup called  halászlé . Other dishes may be served, such as  roast goose ,  roast turkey  or  roast duck , [12]   cabbage rolls   (töltött káposzta) . Pastry roll filled with walnut or poppy seed called  (bejgli)  is a usual Christmas food, and candies and sweets used to decorate the Christmas tree, such as  szaloncukor  are eaten during all Christmas, when everybody picks them and eats them directly from the tree. In some households, Lentil stew, also known as 'Lencse Fozelek', is consumed to bring good luck and health in the upcoming years.
 On  New Year's Eve  ( Szilveszter ), Hungarians traditionally celebrate with  virsli  ( Vienna sausage ) and  lentil soup . On  New Year's Day , it is common to eat either lentil soup or  korhelyleves , a meaty  sauerkraut  soup said to cure  hangovers . [13] 
 Easter  is considered a huge event ( Húsvét ) and is celebrated all over Hungary. The families and their friends have the Mom and daughter prepare meals such as Smoked Ham with boiled eggs and small sandwiches and drinks quite commonly to have  palinka  on the table and then wait for Fathers and sons to arrive and say a poem (Husvéti Vers) and then spray on their hair with a parfum, Once the Father and son water the Mom and daughters known as  Locsolkodás . They have a meal a drink then they go to the next family member until they visited all. In  Szabolcs County  make a special sweet yellow cheese,  Sárgatúró , made with  quark  (túró) and eggs. [14] [15] 
 
 Typical Hungarian dishes [ edit ] 
   Hungarian bread. Traditionally Hungarians buy their bread freshly made every second or third day from the local  bakery , not in plastic bags or frozen. 
   Dobos Cake 
 Soups [ edit ] 
 
 
 Name
 
 Image
 
 Description
 
 
 Gulyásleves 
 
 
 
 Goulash  soup; it is possible to cook gulyás like a stew as well (e.g.  Székelygulyás ).
 
 
 Halászlé 
 
 
 
 Famous hot and spicy fish soup with hot paprika. It is always made with the locally available freshwater fish selection (wider selection used, better the taste). There are some distinct recipes by which it is cooked slightly different, depending on the region of Hungary in which one makes it, and generally categorised based on the closest large body of water (river or large lake). The most famous versions are Szegedi, Bajai which are often part of the argument over this soup.
 
 
 Húsleves 
 
 
 
 By the classic recipe it is made of strong beef or hen, often with bones, but many popular version use chicken or veal. Some other type meat is also possible such as wild duck, pheasant, or pigeon. This is a slow cooked broth like soup with a selection of vegetables. The cooking time depends on the type of meat, it can take up to 2–3 hours. Often served with different levesbetét (additional noodles), small pasta dumplings called csipetke, csigatészta, angel-hair noodles, but grízgombóc (semolina dumplings) or a light májgombóc (chicken liver dumplings) also popular.
 
 
 Gyümölcsleves 
 
 
 
 A chilled, sweet soup with redcurrants, blackberries, sour cherries, apple, pear, quince or other seasonal fruit mix. It is fast cooked with cream or whole milk, some spices often accompanied with fruits, like cloves and cinnamon and sugar. This soup is often thickened with  crème fraîche  and flour mixture. It is served sometimes hot, but mainly cold from the refrigerator. It is very common throughout the summer with seasonal fruits, but the winter version can be made with oranges, clementines, or any sweet fruits available as either fresh or frozen.
 
 
 Meggyleves 
 
 
 
 A popular variant on the fruit soup, which is made only with sour cherries.
 
 
 Jókai bean soup 
 
 
 
 A rich bean soup, with many vegetables, smoked pork hock pieces and noodles. It is often made to be spicy or some sort of hot chili offered with it. Despite its richness it's served with and Hungarian sour cream on top and white bread, and in fact this soup is a lunch or dinner itself. Some households add some vinegar to it after serving it to the plate. This soup is named after the famous Hungarian writer  Mór Jókai  by  Károly Gundel , the founder of one of the most known restaurants of Hungary in 1937.
 
 
 Csontleves 
 
 
 
 A basic bone broth, usually served with  spaghetti  noodles,  carrots , and  turnips . It may also be served with stewed meat (usually pork), meat bones or parsley.
 
 
 Gombaleves
 
 
 
 A soup made from various wild mushrooms, sour cream is often added, but not necessarily the same amount as in  cream of mushroom soup .
 
 
 Palócleves 
 
 
 
 Similar to goulash, except lighter in color, sourer in taste (due to the sour cream), and with dill added. It is named after  Mikszáth Kálmán 's nickname, and not after the  palóc  people in Hungary.
 
 
 Vadgombaleves
 
 
 
 A wild mushroom soup that originated in Southern Hungary, often without sour cream, but not necessarily the same as the  cream of mushroom soup .
 
 
 Zöldségleves 
 
 
 
 A soup with vegetables, such as  peas , carrots, turnips, and parsley.
 
 
 Sóskaleves 
 
 
 
 Made from sorrel leaves in a broth, often with boiled eggs as well. Similar to  green borscht , but thicker.
 
 
 Krumplileves
 
 
 
 Made from potatoes in a broth, frequently with slices of sausage, carrots, turnips or sour cream.
 
 
 Pacalleves 
 
 
 
 A  tripe soup  eaten primarily by Hungarians living in  Transylvania , usually seasoned with vinegar, sour cream, and garlic. May be eaten with bread and hot paprika on the side. Known as  ciorbă de burtă  for Romanians.
 
 
 Borleves
 
 
 
 A sweet wine soup, usually with cinnamon added and  raisins  and whipped egg whites on top.
 
 
 Köménymagleves
 
 
 
 A soup made from caraway seeds, often with pieces of stale bread.
 
 
 Tojásleves 
 
 
 
 Same as  köménymagleves , except with scrambled eggs added. Similar to the Slovenian national dish,  prežganka .
 
 
 Main courses [ edit ] 
 
 
 Name
 
 Image
 
 Description
 
 
 Csirkepaprikás 
 
 
 
 A chicken stew with much sweet paprika, cream or sour cream called  tejföl . Known as  chicken paprikash  or by some translated variant in many Central and Eastern European countries.
 
 
 Paprikás krumpli
 
 
 
 The same kind of stew as  csirkepaprikás , except with potatoes in place of chicken, and usually with spicy sausage ( kolbász ) added as well.
 
 
 Császármorzsa 
 
 
 
 Shredded, sweet crepe pieces with sugar sprinkled on top. Often served with  jam  ( apricot  or  peach , usually) as well. Originates from  Austria-Hungary , in Austria it is called  Kaiserschmarrn .
 
 
 Főzelék 
 
 
 
 A thinner, vegetable stew (almost like a soup, but thicker), similar to  pottage . It can be made with a variety of vegetable bases, such as  cabbage ,  potatoes ,  kidney beans ,  squash ,  spinach ,  lentils ,  tomatoes ,  sorrel ,  peas ,  dill , or some combination. Meatballs ( fasírozott ), spicy sausage ( kolbász ), or a  fried egg  ( tükörtojás ) may be added. It rarely appears in formal restaurants, and it usually eaten at home as a home-cooked meal.
 
 
 Lecsó 
 
 
 
 A mixed vegetable stew, made of primarily tomato and paprika, also found throughout the Balkans and Central Europe. It is somewhat similar to  ratatouille , but without squash and zucchini. A variety exists called  tojásos lecsó  (lecsó with eggs), which has scrambled eggs mixed in.
 
 
 Székelygulyás 
 
 
 
 A hearty pork and sauerkraut stew, often flavored with paprika, onion, and sour cream. It is named after the Hungarian writer, József Székely (a friend and contemporary of  Sándor Petőfi ), who apparently asked a  kocsmáros  (tavernman) to mix together leftover  savanyúkáposzta-főzelék  (sauerkraut pottage) and  sertéspörkölt  (pork stew) to create it. [16] 
 
 
 Fasírozott 
 
 
 
 Flat, pan-fried meatballs, made from minced meat (usually pork, veal or beef) with paprika and salt added for taste. Frequently eaten with  főzelék , or served with rice or french fries.
 
 
 Stefánia szelet 
 
 
 
 Hungarian  meatloaf  with hard boiled eggs in the middle. Makes decorative white and yellow rings in the middle of the slices, and is often served with potatoes.
 
 
 Pörkölt 
 
 
 
 A stew similar to  ragù , made with boneless meat (veal, pork, chicken, beef, lamb), sweet paprika, and some vegetables (always onions, though). Many variations exist throughout Hungary. One famous variation (pictured) is  pacalpörkölt , which is often quite spicy and made with  tripe . Some others are  kakaspörkölt  (made with  rooster ),  kakashere pörkölt  (made with rooster  testicles ), and ones using pork or chicken liver ( sertésmáj pörkölt  and  csirkemáj pörkölt , respectively).
 
 
 Palacsinta 
 
 
 
 A stuffed crêpe, usually filled with jam. Other fillings that exist are  sweet quark cheese  ( túró ) with raisins,  Nutella ,  vanilla pudding , or meat. Some more specific/elaborate variations on the  palacsinta  are listed in the next few rows.
 
 
 Csúsztatott palacsinta 
 
 
 
 Layered crêpes with sweet cottage cheese, raisins, jam, and walnuts, similar to the  Mille crêpe . A variation of Rakott palacsinta.
 
 
 Gundel palacsinta 
 
 
 
 Literally named  Gundel crêpe . It was created by and named after Hungarian restaurateur  Károly Gundel . They are stuffed with walnuts and served in chocolate sauce, and often  flambéed  (with rum). They traditionally also come with candied orange peels.
 
 
 Hortobágyi palacsinta 
 
 
 
 A thin savory pancake, filled and covered with a meat stew, typically made from veal, onions, and spices. Often also topped with sour cream.
 
 
 Rakott palacsinta 
 
 
 
 Layered  crêpes  with sweet cottage cheese, raisins, jam, and walnuts.
 
 
 Liptai túró 
 
 
 
 A spicy cheese spread with paprika,  caraway , and onions.
 
 
 Rántott sajt
 
 
 
 A flat cheese  croquette ; cheese rolled in breadcrumbs and  deep-fried . It is frequently served with french fries, mashed potatoes, rice,  rizi-bizi  (green peas and rice mixed together, as shown in the picture), or vegetables.
 
 
 Rántott hús 
 
 
 
 Originally from Austria. Meat that is tenderized, covered in eggs, flour, and breadcrumbs, then fried. Also known as  Wiener schnitzel .
 
 
 Rántott csirke
 
 
 
 A chicken breast rolled in breadcrumbs and deep-fried; similar to Wiener Schnitzel. A rarer dish,  rántott galamb , is made the same way, except with pigeon.
 
 
 Rakott krumpli 
 
 
 
 A potato casserole made with some combination of eggs, paprika, spicy sausage, thick bacon ( szalonna ), quark cheese ( túró ), onions, sour cream or breadcrumbs.
 
 
 Rakott káposzta
 
 
 
 A layered cabbage dish that consists of cabbage,  pörkölt , rice, sour cream, and spices. The dish comes from the Hungarians in Transylvania ( Erdélyi ).
 
 
 Sólet 
 
 
 
 A Jewish-Hungarian stew made with kidney beans, barley, onions, paprika, and perhaps meat and eggs as well. It is similar to  cholent .
 
 
 Szilvásgombóc 
 
 
 
 Sweet plum dumplings, rolled in sweet, fried, buttered breadcumbs or  streusel . May also be served with  nudli , which are made from the leftover dumpling dough.
 
 
 Túrógombóc 
 
 
 
 Unlike  szilvásgombóc,  this sweet quark cheese ( túró ) dumpling has no filling, and is normally served with sour cream and icing sugar.
 
 
 Töltött káposzta 
 
 
 
 A  cabbage roll  made from pickled cabbage, filled with a light minced pork meat and rice mix. It may contain minced paprika and be served in a tomato sauce with sour cream, but this is not always the case (as in the picture). It is frequently eaten around Christmas and New Year's, but can still be eaten year-round.
 
 
 Töltött tojás 
 
 
 
 Literally translates as  stuffed egg  or  casino egg , respectively.  Deviled eggs  served cold (in mayonnaise) or warm (baked in the oven with sour cream), with parsley, green onions, or paprika powder added to taste.
 
 
 Töltött paprika 
 
 
 
 Stuffed peppers  filled with pork mince and rice mixture, served in a tomato sauce with salty boiled potatoes. Also found throughout the  Balkans , where it is often known as  punjena paprika .
 
 
 Pecsenye 
 
 
 
 A thin pork steak served with cabbage or in the dish  fatányéros  (pictured), a Hungarian mixed grill on wooden platter. [17] 
 
 
 Cigánypecsenye 
 
 
 
 A variant on pecsenye which literally translates as  Gypsy  roast.  Consists of fried or spit-roasted pork cutlets, with thick bacon as well, which are spiced with paprika, salt or pepper. Usually served with roasted potatoes or french fries or perhaps  savanyúság  ( pickled vegetables ) (pictured).
 
 
 Vesepecsenye 
 
 
 
 Beef tenderloins , usually seasoned with paprika and salt.
 
 
 Szűzpecsenye 
 
 
 
 Literally means  virgin roast .  pork tenderloins , which are usually prepared the same as above. May also be made into  szűzérme  (lit.  virgin medallions ; pork medallions) or  szűztekercs  ( rouladen ; thinly-cut tenderloins, stuffed with minced meat, vegetables or other things).
 
 
 Brassói aprópecsenye  [ hu ] 
 
 
 
 This dish is clearly named after  Brassó , the former Hungarian name for  Brașov , but it is unclear how, and various legends have arisen as explanation. It consists of diced pieces of pork and potatoes, which are pan-fried with onions, bacon, and seasoning (salt, pepper or paprika). This dish, despite the simple ingredients, needs some practice to master.
 
 
 Mákos tészta
 
 
 
 Very famous and common, an easy egg noodle dish, made with ground and sweetened  poppy seeds . It has a distinct look and taste.
 
 
 Diós tészta
 
 
 
 Boiled egg noodle dish served with ground  walnuts  and sugar, often with  lekvár  (jam) or honey.
 
 
 Gránátos kocka
 
 
 
 A home-cooked, simple egg noodle dish, made with potatoes and paprika powder. Often served with pickled  gherkins  or other  pickled vegetables  on the side.
 
 
 Túrós csusza 
 
 
 
 An egg noodle dish, made with quark cheese ( túró ) and served savory (with bacon) or sweet (with sugar).
 
 
 Vadas
 
 
 
 Literally translates as with venison. Also known as vadas mártás (vadas sauce). Originally cooked with venison, such as wild boar, deer, wild duck or hare. But often made with beef, veal, rabbit and rarely with chicken. The meat (pre-cooked, in case of red meat) ready cooked in a brown or dark orange coloured vegetable ragout with carrots and other root vegetables. It is typically served with  bread dumplings . In some cases the ragout is made separate and served on side of roast venison or beef slices. The venison version often accompanied with mushrooms.
 
 
 Pásztortarhonya
 
 
 
 Literally translates as  shepherd egg barley.  A hearty dish consisting of  egg barley , potatoes, onion,  kolbász , and paprika, sometimes also with bacon and other vegetables.
 
 
 Tarhonyás hús 
 
 
 
 Egg barley  with pieces of minced meat (usually pork), but sometimes potato and  kolbász  as well, along with various spices.
 
 
 Sausage and cold cuts [ edit ] 
   Various Hungarian sausages at the Csaba Sausage Festival in  Békéscsaba , Hungary. 
 Hurka  (boiled sausage, three main types: liver sausage called  májas hurka , made of pork liver, meat and rice; a liverless variant of the  májas hurka  called  húsos hurka  and black sausage called  véres hurka , which is equivalent to the  black pudding ) 
 Téliszalámi  (or  Winter salami , salami made of spiced meat, cold smoked, and dry ripened, the most famous brand made by  Pick Szeged ) 
 Herz Szalámi 
 Csabai szalámi  and  kolbász  (spicy salami and smoked sausage, made in the town of  Békéscsaba ) 
 Gyulai kolbász  (spicy sausage, made in the town of  Gyula ) 
 Debreceni kolbász  (Debrecener sausage) 
 Disznósajt  ( pig cheese , cooked meat, for example, from the pig's head, coarsely chopped, stuffed into a pig's stomach) 
 Szalonna  (Hungarian bacon,  fatback , back bacon rind, has more fat than usual breakfast bacon) 
 Virsli  (a  Frankfurter -like long and thin sausage, consumed boiled with bread and mustard) 
 Lókolbász  (Horse sausage) 
 Sweets and cakes [ edit ] 
   Bejgli , poppy seed roll 
 Dobos Cake  ( sponge cake  layered with chocolate paste and glazed with  caramel  and  nuts ) 
 Linzer torta  (a tart with crisscross design of pastry strips on top) 
 Rigó Jancsi  (Cube-shaped sponge cake with dark chocolate glaze) 
 Gesztenyepüré  (cooked and mashed sweet  chestnuts  with sugar and rum, topped with whipped cream) 
 Bejgli [3]  (cake roll eaten at  Christmas  and  Easter ) 
 Kürtőskalács  Stove cake or Chimney cake, cooked over an open fire — a Transylvanian specialty, famous as Hungary's oldest pastry 
 Angel wings  (crispy, light Hungarian Angel Wing fry cookies, [3]  a twisted thin fried cookie made of yeast dough, dusted with powdered sugar) 
 Vaníliás kifli  (vanilla croissant, small, crescent shaped biscuits) 
 Piskóta  (thin, light, sweet delicate, crispy cookie) 
 Krémes  (Known as vanilla slice or custard slice, is a custard and chantilly cream cream cake dessert commonly associated with the former Austro-Hungarian Monarchy) 
 Rétes  (layered pastry with a filling that is usually sweet) 
 Csiga  (literally  snail  - a rolled pastry that comes in many different coatings and flavors, usually walnut, poppy seed, chocolate, and vanilla pudding) 
 Flódni  (cake with four different fillings, which are poppy seed, walnut, apple, and plum jam) 
 Képviselő Fánk  (Hungarian Cream Puff made from choux paste and filled with vanilla cream. Literal Translation - 'Ambassador Doughnut') 
 Kuglóf  (Kuglóf cake, a traditional Austro-Hungarian coffee party cake) 
 Lekváros Bukta  (a baked dessert filled with jam, túró or ground walnuts) 
 Lekváros tekercs  (rolled up soft sponge cake filled with jam) 
 Lekvár  (Thick Hungarian jam) 
 Birsalma sajt [18]  ( Quince cheese , or quince jelly made of  quince  fruits) 
 Törökméz [19]  (a sweet sticky white nougat paste cooked with sugar, eggwhites, honey, bits of walnuts, spread between two  wafer  sheets) 
 Halva  (a  Transylvanian  sweet confection, made with sunflower seeds, of Turkish origin) 
 Madártej  (Floating island, a dessert made of milk  custard  with eggwhite dumplings floating on top) 
 Túró Rudi  (sweet quark cheese - called  túró  - filled chocolate bar) 
 Szaloncukor  (flavoured candies that hang on the Christmas tree, eaten at  Christmas ) 
 Arany galuska  (dumplings, or dough balls rolled in butter, sugar, and nuts and packed together to make a pull-apart cake, with vanilla custard) 
 Vargabéles  (Hungarian strudel or Noodle Pie) 
 Eszterházy torta  (Consists of buttercream spiced with cognac or vanilla and walnuts) 
 Somlói galuska  [ hu ]  (Somló-style Sponge Cake) 
 Palacsinta  (crêpe-like variety of pancake) 
 Mákos guba  (a poppy seed-based dessert found throughout Central Europe; consists of slices of sweet(ened) kifli and poppy seeds boiled in milk with butter, often with various nuts and dried fruits as toppings) 
 Túrós lepény  or  túrós pite  (dessert bars made from sweetened  túró . A variant called  kapros-túrós lepény  also exists, which has dill added) 
 Others [ edit ] 
   Kifli , a crescent-shaped bread 
   Lángos 
 Lángos  (fried bread dough) 
 Pogácsa  (a type of  bun , round puffed pastry with bacon, traditionally cooked on the fire) 
 Zsemle  (round small breads, eaten cut in half, with butter, cold cuts or jam, often for breakfast) 
 Fánk  or  Bismarck Doughnuts 
 Kifli  (crescent-shaped bread. It can be made plain, salted, or sweet; see picture) 
 Perec  (Pretzel, salty crispy pasty) 
 Májgaluska  (small liver dumplings used in different soups, for example, liverball soup) 
 Grízgaluska  (Hungarian boiled  semolina  dumplings used in soup) 
 Tarhonya  (a kind of large Hungarian "couscous", big pasta grain, served as a side dish; also an ingredient of Tarhonyás hús, meat with egg barley) 
 Rizi-bizi  (white rice cooked with green peas, served as a side dish) 
 Vinetta  or  padlizsán krém  (Transylvanian mashed eggplant salad made of grilled, peeled and finely chopped eggplants) 
 Körözött  or  Liptai túró  (cheese spread with ground sweet paprika and onions) 
 Libamájpástétom  (Hungarian delicacy: foie gras - goose liver pâté) 
 French toast  (literally "bread with a fur", a savoury  French toast  or Gypsy toast or bread fritter, a breakfast food or sometimes as a side dish) 
 Bread  - (Hungarian bread that is baked fresh every morning in the bakeries. The traditional form called  cipó  is big, round and with a hard thick crust. The other bread type is  vekni : long loaves with crispy crust, thicker or thinner, like the  baguette .) 
 Kenyérlángos  (smaller piece of bread dough baked in a flat form, often topped with sour cream, bacon and onions; traditionally a snack for children on the day bread was baked at home, now sold mostly on festivals and markets) 
 Drinks [ edit ] 
   A cold bottle of Unicum 
 Hungarian wine  dates back to at least  Roman  times, and that history reflects the country's position between the  West Slavs  and the  Germanic peoples .
 The best-known wines are the white  dessert wine  called  Tokaji  Aszú   (after the North-Eastern region of Hungary, Tokaj) and the red wines from Villány (Southern part of Hungary). Famous is also the wine called  Bull's Blood  ( Egri Bikavér ), a dark, full-bodied red wine. Hungarian fruit wines, such as red-currant wine, are mild and soft in taste and texture.
 Hungary's most notable liquors are  Unicum , a herbal  bitters , and  Pálinka , a range of fruit  brandies  (plum and pear are popular). Also notable are the 21 brands of Hungarian mineral waters (for example,  Apenta  and  Kékkúti ). [20]  Some of them have therapeutic value, such as  Mira . [ citation needed ] 
 Traubi  or  Traubisoda , is a  soft drink  based on an Austrian license produced in  Balatonvilágos  since 1971.
Before soft drinks became widely available, Hungarians made their own soft drinks called  szörp , which is a concentrate created from sugar and fruits such as the raspberry, currant or elderberry. This concentrate is diluted in either fresh or carbonated water.
 
 See also [ edit ] 
 
 Hungary portal Food portal 
 New Brunswick 
 Hungarian Food Safety Office 
 List of Hungarian dishes 
 List of restaurants in Hungary 
 National symbols of Hungary 
 Romani cuisine 
 References [ edit ] 
 
 
 ^   Hultquist, Mike (2021-03-23).  "Hungarian Paprika: All About It" .  Chili Pepper Madness . Retrieved  2022-11-14 . 
 
 ^   Adriana (2022-08-07).  "4 Must-Have Hungarian Spices" .  Recipe Idea Shop . Retrieved  2022-11-14 . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   e   June Meyers Authentic Hungarian Heirloom Recipes Cookbook 
 
 ^  a   b   Gundel's Hungarian Cookbook, Karoly Gundel. 
 
 ^   A magyar konyha története   Archived  2011-07-19 at the  Wayback Machine 
 
 ^   "Hotdog.magazin" . Archived from  the original  on 2009-11-21. 
 
 ^   "Gourmandnet" . Archived from  the original  on 2009-06-04. 
 
 ^   "Hungarian Cuisine, History, Gastronomy, Legend, Memoires, Recipes and Lore" . Archived from  the original  on 2018-12-15 . Retrieved  2007-04-21 . 
 
 ^   "health-family" . Archived from  the original  on 2009-09-18 . Retrieved  2009-01-31 . 
 
 ^   Gundel's Hungarian Cookbook, Karoly Gundel, page34 
 
 ^  a   b   Gundel's Hungarian Cookbook, Karoly Gundel 
 
 ^   Hungarian cuisine, József Venesz  ISBN   963-13-0219-9 : Corvina Press 1977 
 
 ^   Korhelyleves   Archived  2013-12-29 at  archive.today , Chew.hu 
 
 ^   "Sárga túró (Yellow Cheese)" . Magyar News. 2013-02-28. Archived from  the original  on 2014-02-23. 
 
 ^   Ujváry Zoltán, Szathmáry V. Ibolya (1992).  Néprajzi tanulmányok: Prof. Ujváry Zoltán tiszteletére . Hajdú-Bihar Megyei Múzeumok Igazgatósága. p. 152. 
 
 ^   Magyar, Elek (1991).  Az Ínyesmester nagy szakácskönyve . Budapest: Gondolat. p. 129.  ISBN   963-282-498-9 . 
 
 ^   Gundel, Karoly (1992).  Gundel's Hungarian cookbook . Budapest: Corvina. p. 83.  ISBN   963-13-3600-X .  OCLC   32227400 . 
 
 ^   Quince-cheese 
 
 ^   Törökméz   Archived  2008-07-06 at the  Wayback Machine 
 
 ^   "Mineral Waters of the World" . Pmgeiser.ch. Archived from  the original  on 2009-02-26 . Retrieved  2014-03-12 . 
 
 
 External links [ edit ] 
 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons has media related to  Cuisine of Hungary . 
 
 Hungarian cuisine  at  Curlie 
 [1] 
 Recipes [ edit ] 
 
 
 
 Wikibooks  Cookbook  has a recipe/module on
 
  Hungarian cuisine 
 
 
 v t e Hungary   articles History 
 Hungarian prehistory 
 Pannonia 
 Principality 
 High Medieval Kingdom 
 Late Medieval Kingdom 
 Ottoman–Hungarian wars 
 Habsburg Kingdom 
 Principality of Transylvania 
 Rákóczi's War 
 Revolution of 1848 
 Austro-Hungarian Empire 
 World War I 
 First Republic 
 Treaty of Trianon 
 Interwar Kingdom of Hungary 
 World War II 
 Second Republic 
 People's Republic 
 Revolution of 1956 
 Third Republic 
 
 Christianity 
 Economic 
 Military 
 List of wars 
 Árpád dynasty 
 Monarchs 
 Holy Crown 
 Nobility 
 Flag 
 Coat of arms 
 Geography 
 Administrative divisions 
 Counties 
 Cities and towns 
 Climate 
 Extreme points 
 Geology 
 Hydrology 
 Islands 
 Lakes 
 Rivers 
 Mountains 
 National parks 
 Regions 
 Politics 
 Cabinet 
 Constitution 
 Elections 
 Foreign relations 
 Human rights 
 Intelligence 
 Law 
 Law enforcement 
 Military 
 Nationality 
 Parliament 
 Speaker 
 Political parties 
 President 
 list 
 Prime Minister 
 list 
 Economy 
 Agriculture 
 Banks 
 Hungarian National Bank 
 Companies 
 Energy 
 Forint    (currency) 
 Industry 
 Science and technology 
 Stock exchange 
 Taxation 
 Telecommunications 
 Tourism 
 Trade unions 
 Transport 
 Unemployment 
 Society 
 Anti-Hungarian sentiment 
 Crime 
 Demographics 
 Education 
 Universities and colleges 
 Family policy 
 Health 
 Healthcare 
 Hungarians 
 Hungarian diaspora 
 Irredentism 
 International rankings 
 Languages 
 LGBT 
 Public holidays 
 Religion 
 Women 
 Culture 
 Architecture 
 Castles 
 Palaces and mansions 
 Art 
 Cinema 
 Cuisine 
 Wine 
 Beer 
 Dishes 
 Sausages 
 Dance 
 Fashion 
 Festivals 
 Folklore 
 Inventions 
 Hungarian language 
 Literature 
 Media 
 Music 
 Names 
 Spa culture 
 Sport 
 Symbols 
 Television 
 Theatre 
 World Heritage Sites 
 Outline Index 
 Category 
 Portal 
 v t e European cuisine Sovereign states European Union 
 Austria 
 Belgium 
 Bulgaria 
 Croatia 
 Cyprus 
 Czech Republic 
 Denmark 
 Estonia 
 Finland 
 France 
 Germany 
 Greece 
 Hungary 
 Republic of Ireland 
 Italy 
 Latvia 
 Lithuania 
 Luxembourg 
 Malta 
 Netherlands 
 Poland 
 Portugal 
 Romania 
 Slovakia 
 Slovenia 
 Spain 
 Sweden 
 Other 
 Albania 
 Andorra 
 Armenia 
 Azerbaijan 
 Belarus 
 Bosnia and Herzegovina 
 Georgia 
 Iceland 
 Kazakhstan 
 Liechtenstein 
 Moldova 
 Monaco 
 Montenegro 
 North Macedonia 
 Norway 
 Russia 
 San Marino 
 Serbia 
 Switzerland 
 Turkey 
 Ukraine 
 United Kingdom 
 Vatican City 
 States with limited recognition 
 Abkhazia 
 Kosovo 
 Nagorno-Karabakh 
 Northern Cyprus 
 South Ossetia 
 Transnistria 
 Dependencies  and other territories 
 Faroe Islands 
 Gibraltar 
 Guernsey 
 Isle of Man 
 Jersey 
 
 v t e Cuisines Continental 
 African 
 North 
 West 
 list 
 Americas 
 Caribbean 
 North 
 South 
 list 
 Asian 
 Caucasian 
 Central 
 Indian subcontinent 
 Levantine 
 list 
 European 
 Balkan 
 Central 
 Eastern 
 list 
 Oceanic 
 Intercontinental
 Global 
 Latin American 
 Mediterranean 
 Middle Eastern 
 National  and regional 
 Afghan 
 Albanian 
 Algerian 
 American 
 Californian 
 Floribbean 
 Hawaiian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Lowcountry (South Carolina) 
 New England 
 New Mexico 
 Pacific Northwest 
 Pennsylvania Dutch 
 Puerto Rican 
 Southern US 
 Southwest US 
 Texas 
 Angolan 
 Argentine 
 Armenian 
 Australian 
 Austrian 
 Azerbaijani 
 Bahraini 
 Bangladeshi 
 Barbadian 
 Belarusian 
 Belgian 
 Belizean 
 Beninese 
 Bhutanese 
 Bolivian 
 Bosnian-Herzegovinian 
 Botswana 
 Brazilian 
 British 
 Channel Islands 
 English 
 Gibraltarian 
 Northern Irish 
 Saint Helena 
 Scottish 
 Welsh 
 Bruneian 
 Bulgarian 
 Burkinabé 
 Burmese 
 Burundian 
 Cambodian 
 Cameroonian 
 Canadian 
 Acadian 
 Québécois 
 Central African Republic 
 Chadian 
 Chilean 
 Chinese 
 Cantonese 
 Hong Kong 
 Macanese 
 Tibetan 
 Xinjiang 
 Colombian 
 Congolese 
 Corsican 
 Croatian 
 Cuban 
 Cypriot 
 Czech 
 Danish 
 Faroese 
 Greenlandic 
 Djiboutian 
 Dominican 
 Dominican Republic 
 Dutch 
 East Timorese 
 Ecuadorian 
 Egyptian 
 Emirati 
 Equatorial Guinean 
 Eritrean 
 Estonian 
 Ethiopian 
 Fijian 
 Filipino 
 Finnish 
 French 
 Occitan 
 French Guianan 
 Gabonese 
 Gambian 
 Georgian 
 German 
 Ghanaian 
 Greek 
 Cretan 
 Epirotic 
 Greek Macedonian 
 Heptanesean 
 Guatemalan 
 Guinea-Bissauan 
 Guinean 
 Haitian 
 Honduran 
 Hungarian 
 Icelandic 
 Indian 
 Arunachalese 
 Assamese 
 Bengali 
 Bihari 
 Goan 
 Gujarati 
 Himachal Pradesh 
 Kashmiri 
 Jharkhandi 
 Karnataka 
 Kerala 
 Maharashtrian 
 Manipuri 
 Meghalayan 
 Mizo 
 Naga 
 Odia 
 Punjabi 
 Rajasthani 
 Sikkimese 
 Sindhi 
 Tamil 
 Telangana 
 Telugu 
 Indonesian 
 Acehnese 
 Balinese 
 Banjar 
 Batak 
 Betawi 
 Indo 
 Javanese 
 Madurese 
 Makassar 
 Minahasan 
 Minangkabau 
 Palembangese 
 Sundanese 
 Iranian 
 Iraqi 
 Irish 
 Israeli 
 Italian 
 Abruzzese 
 Ligurian 
 Lombard 
 Lucanian 
 Neapolitan 
 Roman 
 Sardinian 
 Sicilian 
 Venetian 
 Ivorian 
 Jamaican 
 Japanese 
 Okinawan 
 Jordanian 
 Kazakh 
 Kenyan 
 Korean 
 North Korean 
 South Korean 
 Kosovan 
 Kuwaiti 
 Kyrgyz 
 Lao 
 Latvian 
 Lebanese 
 Lesotho 
 Liberian 
 Libyan 
 Liechtensteiner 
 Lithuanian 
 Luxembourg 
 Macedonian 
 Malagasy 
 Malawian 
 Malaysian 
 Sabahan 
 Sarawakian 
 Maldivian 
 Malian 
 Maltese 
 Mauritanian 
 Mauritian 
 Mexican 
 Moldovan 
 Monégasque 
 Mongolian 
 Montenegrin 
 Moroccan 
 Mozambican 
 Namibian 
 Nauruan 
 Nepalese 
 New Zealand 
 Nicaraguan 
 Niger 
 Nigerian 
 Niuean 
 Norwegian 
 Omani 
 Pakistani 
 Palestinian 
 Panamanian 
 Peruvian 
 Polish 
 Portuguese 
 Qatari 
 Romanian  (incl.  Transylvanian Saxon ) 
 Russian 
 Bashkir 
 Chechen 
 Circassian 
 Komi 
 Mordovian 
 Sakha 
 Tatar 
 Udmurt 
 Yamal 
 Rwandan 
 Saint Lucian 
 Salvadoran 
 Sammarinese 
 São Tomé and Príncipe 
 Saudi Arabian 
 Senegalese 
 Serbian 
 Seychellois 
 Sierra Leonean 
 Singaporean 
 Slovak 
 Slovenian 
 Somali 
 South African 
 Spanish 
 Andalusian 
 Asturian 
 Balearic 
 Basque 
 Canarian 
 Cantabrian 
 Catalan 
 Extremaduran 
 Galician 
 Manchegan 
 Valencian 
 Sri Lankan 
 Sudanese 
 Swazi 
 Swedish 
 Swiss 
 Syrian 
 Taiwanese 
 Tajik 
 Tanzanian 
 Zanzibari 
 Thai 
 Togolese 
 Tunisian 
 Turkish 
 Turkmen 
 Trinidadian and Tobagonian 
 Ugandan 
 Ukrainian 
 Uruguayan 
 Uzbek 
 Venezuelan 
 Vietnamese 
 Western Saharan 
 Yemeni 
 Zambian 
 Zimbabwean 
 Ethnic 
 Ainu 
 Arab 
 Indonesian 
 Aromanian 
 Assyrian 
 Balochi 
 Berber 
 Cajun 
 Chinese 
 American 
 Canadian 
 Chifa 
 Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Crimean Tatar 
 Greek American 
 Hazaragi 
 Indian 
 Anglo-Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Indigenous American 
 Inuit 
 Italian American 
 Kurdish 
 Livonian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Malay 
 Ossetian 
 Parsi 
 Pashtun 
 Peranakan 
 Romani 
 Sámi 
 Soul food 
 Sylheti 
 Transylvanian Saxon 
 Yup'ik 
 Religious 
 Buddhist 
 Christian 
 Goan Catholic 
 Mangalorean Catholic 
 Mennonite 
 Hindu 
 Islamic 
 Chinese 
 Ital 
 Jain 
 Jewish 
 American 
 Ashkenazi 
 Bukharan 
 Ethiopian 
 Mizrahi 
 Sephardic 
 Syrian 
 Ritual slaughter 
 Sikh 
 Historical 
 Ancient Egyptian 
 Ancient Greek 
 Ancient Israelite 
 Ancient Roman 
 Antebellum America 
 Aztec 
 Byzantine 
 Early modern European 
 Historical Chinese 
 Historical Indian subcontinent 
 Historical North Indian and Pakistani 
 History of agriculture 
 History of alcoholic drinks 
 History of bread 
 History of seafood 
 History of vegetarianism 
 Historical Argentine 
 Historical Japanese 
 Inca 
 Mayan 
 Muisca 
 Mughal 
 Medieval 
 Ottoman 
 Peasant 
 Soviet 
 Thirteen Colonies 
 Styles 
 Classique 
 Fast food 
 Fusion 
 New American 
 Eurasian 
 Haute 
 Molecular gastronomy 
 Note by Note 
 Nouvelle 
 Lists 
 List of cuisines 
 List of historical cuisines 
 Lists of prepared foods 
 Related 
 Cookbook 
 Cooking 
 Culinary arts 
 Drink 
 Food 
 history 
 Diet 
 Meal preparation 
 
   Food portal 
   Drink portal 
   Category 
   Commons 
   Cookbook 
   WikiProject 
   Outline 
 
 v t e Lists of prepared foods Dishes by origin Africa 
 Angolan 
 Central African Republic 
 Chadian 
 Ethiopian and Eritrean 
 Gabonese 
 Libyan 
 Moroccan 
 Nigerian 
 Nigerien 
 Togolese 
 Tunisian 
 Western Saharan 
 São Tomé and Príncipe 
 Seychelles 
 North America 
 Mexican 
 United States 
 Italian-American 
 Jewish-American 
 New Orleans 
 Regional dishes 
 Regional beverages 
 Southern United States 
 South America 
 Argentine 
 Brazilian 
 Colombian 
 Ecuadorian 
 Paraguayan 
 Peruvian 
 Venezuelan 
 Asia 
 Arab 
 Bangladeshi 
 Burmese 
 Chinese 
 Beijing 
 Sichuan 
 Filipino 
 Indian 
 Iranian   (and Persian) 
 Indonesian 
 Israeli 
 Japanese 
 Jordan 
 Korean 
 North Korean 
 Malaysian 
 Nepalese 
 Pakistani 
 Palestinian 
 Singaporean 
 Thai 
 Tibetan 
 Turkish 
 Uzbek 
 Vietnamese 
 Peranakan 
 Europe 
 Caucasus 
 English 
 French 
 German 
 Greek 
 Hungarian 
 Typical Hungarian dishes 
 Irish 
 Italian 
 Sicilian 
 Liechtensteiner 
 Maltese 
 Norwegian 
 Polish 
 Portuguese 
 Romanian 
 Russian 
 Sami 
 Scottish 
 Spanish 
 Ukrainian 
 Oceania 
 Australian 
 Hawaiian 
 New Zealand 
 Caribbean 
 Anguillian 
 Cuban 
 Jamaican 
 Misc./Other 
 Azerbaijan 
 Crimean Tatar 
 Jewish 
 National dishes 
 By type and origin Breads 
 American 
 British 
 Indian 
 Pakistani 
 Swiss 
 Cheeses 
 American 
 British 
 Cornish 
 Dutch 
 English 
 French 
 German 
 Greek 
 Irish 
 Italian 
 Polish 
 Spanish 
 Swiss 
 Condiments 
 Filipino 
 French fry accompaniments 
 Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Japanese 
 Pakistani 
 Desserts  and sweets 
 American 
 Argentine 
 Bangladeshi 
 Brazilian 
 British 
 Chinese 
 Filipino 
 French 
 German 
 Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Italian 
 Japanese 
 Korean 
 Tteok 
 Pakistani 
 Polish 
 Romanian 
 Russian 
 Spanish 
 Sri Lankan 
 Taiwanese 
 Thai 
 Turkish 
 Soups and stews 
 Chinese 
 Filipino 
 French 
 German 
 Indonesian 
 Italian 
 Japanese 
 Pakistani 
 Spanish 
 Snack foods 
 Snack foods by country 
 Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Japanese 
 Pakistani 
 Misc. 
 American sandwiches 
 Foods with religious symbolism 
 Indonesian noodles 
 Vietnamese noodles 
 Puddings (savoury) 
 Vietnamese specialities 
 By type By cooking style 
 Baked goods 
 Twice-baked 
 Casseroles 
 Deep fried 
 Smoked 
 Steamed 
 By preparation  style 
 Dips 
 Dried 
 Fermented 
 Soy products 
 Food pastes 
 Garnishes 
 Gravies 
 Instant 
 Pickled 
 Pickled fruits 
 Rolled 
 Sauces 
 Dessert sauces 
 Fish sauces 
 Hot sauces 
 Instant sauces 
 Spreads 
 Stuffed dishes 
 Breads, grains  and seeds 
 Almond 
 Breads 
 bread dishes 
 Buns 
 Flatbreads 
 Quick breads 
 Rolls 
 Sourdough breads 
 Sweet breads 
 Buckwheat 
 Crackers 
 Dumplings 
 Fried dough 
 Legume 
 Chickpea 
 Peanut 
 Maize 
 Noodles 
 Noodle dishes 
 Fried noodle dishes 
 Ramen 
 Pancakes 
 Pasta 
 Pasta dishes 
 Rice 
 Fried rice 
 Rice cakes 
 Rice pudding 
 Rice and beans 
 Sesame seed 
 Toast 
 Dairy-based 
 Butter dishes 
 Cheese dishes 
 Fondues 
 Cheeses 
 Brined 
 Yogurt-based 
 Fruits  and  vegetables 
 Apple 
 Avocado 
 Banana 
 Cabbage 
 Carrot 
 Cassava 
 Cherry 
 Eggplant 
 Garlic 
 Grape 
 Lemon 
 Melon 
 Onion 
 Plum 
 Potato 
 French fry 
 Salads 
 Arab 
 Thai 
 Soy-based 
 Squash and pumpkin 
 Strawberry 
 Sweet potato 
 Tofu 
 Tomato 
 Fish  and  seafood 
 Clam 
 Cod 
 Crab 
 Fish head 
 Fish stews 
 Fried fish 
 Herring 
 Raw fish 
 Salmon 
 Shrimp 
 Sushi and sashimi 
 Tuna 
 Meat-based 
 Barbecue 
 Beef 
 Shredded beef 
 Steak 
 Veal 
 Chicken 
 Duck 
 Egg 
 Eggs Benedict 
 Scrambled eggs 
 Goat 
 Hamburgers 
 Hot dogs 
 Kebabs 
 Lamb 
 Meatball 
 Mixed grill 
 Pork 
 Bacon 
 Ham dishes 
 Hams 
 Sausages 
 Sausage dishes 
 Skewered foods 
 Soups  and  Stews 
 Bean 
 Blood 
 Cheese 
 Cream 
 Fish and seafood 
 Vegetable 
 Sweets 
 Cakes 
 Candies 
 Chocolate bars 
 Chocolate-covered 
 Cookies 
 Cookie sandwiches 
 Shortbread 
 Desserts 
 Custard 
 Doughnuts 
 Pastries 
 Choux pastry 
 Poppy seed 
 Pies, tarts and flans 
 Puddings 
 Misc. 
 Ancient 
 Bacon substitutes 
 Baozi 
 Brand name snacks 
 Breakfast 
 Beverages 
 Cereals 
 Brunch 
 Chifa 
 Christmas 
 Chutneys 
 Coconut 
 Coconut milk 
 Coffee 
 Comfort 
 Delicacies 
 Hangover foods 
 Hors d'oeuvre 
 Tapas 
 Made from maple 
 Military 
 Mushroom 
 Pastries 
 Pies, tarts and flans 
 Porridges 
 Relishes 
 Sandwiches 
 Soul 
 Spit-roasted 
 Street 
 Syrups 
 Tortilla-based 
 Traditional 
 
   Food portal 
   Category: Lists of foods 
 
 Authority control : National libraries  
 France 
 BnF data 
 Israel 
 United States 
 Japan 
 
  
NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw2284
Cached time: 20230311181807
Cache expiry: 1814400
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc, no‐toc‐conversion]
CPU time usage: 1.299 seconds
Real time usage: 1.658 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 19952/1000000
Post‐expand include size: 299596/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 24253/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 16/100
Expensive parser function count: 56/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 84226/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.523/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 19808270/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/400
 
 
Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1078.158      1 -total
 38.92%  419.637      8 Template:Navbox
 19.37%  208.810      1 Template:Reflist
 17.85%  192.432      1 Template:European_topic
 15.24%  164.270      1 Template:Culture_of_Hungary
 15.06%  162.357      1 Template:Culture_of_region
 14.76%  159.093      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 11.84%  127.658      8 Template:Cite_web
 11.03%  118.870     55 Template:Iso2country
 10.98%  118.406      1 Template:Hungary_articles
 
  Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:idhash:176565-0!canonical and timestamp 20230311181805 and revision id 1142517139. Rendering was triggered because: api-parse
  
 esi <esi:include src="/esitest-fa8a495983347898/content" />  
 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Hungarian_cuisine&oldid=1142517139 " 
 Category :  Hungarian cuisine Hidden categories:  Webarchive template wayback links Webarchive template archiveis links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from February 2021 Articles containing Hungarian-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2019 Commons link is on Wikidata Articles with Curlie links Articles with BNF identifiers Articles with J9U identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers Articles with NDL identifiers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  This page was last edited on 2 March 2023, at 21:15  (UTC) . 
 Text is available under the  Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0 ;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the  Terms of Use  and  Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the  Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. 
 
 
 Privacy policy 
 About Wikipedia 
 Disclaimers 
 Contact Wikipedia 
 Mobile view 
 Developers 
 Statistics 
 Cookie statement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
