
 
 
 Jump to content 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle sidebar 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Create account Log in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Personal tools 
 
 
 
 
   Create account   Log in 
 
 
 
 
		Pages for logged out editors  learn more 
 
 
 Contributions Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Navigation 
 
 
 Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate 
 
 
 
 
 Contribute 
 
 
 Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file 
 
 
 
 
 Tools 
 
 
 What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item 
 
 
 
 
 Print/export 
 
 
 Download as PDF Printable version 
 
 
 
 
 In other projects 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons Wikibooks 
 
 
 
 
 Languages 
 
 On this Wikipedia the language links are at the top of the page across from the article title.  Go to top . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CentralNotice  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Contents 
 move to sidebar 
 hide 
 
 
 
 
 (Top) 
 
 
 
 
 
 1 History 
 
 
				Toggle History subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 1.1 Medieval Iceland 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.1.1 Preservation methods 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.1.2 Cheese 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.1.3 Cooking and meals 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.2 Early modern period 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.2.1 Foreign trade 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.2.2 Cereals 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.2.3 Cooking and meals 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.3 Modernity 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.3.1 Danish influence 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.3.2 Vegetables 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.3.3 Girls' schools 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.3.4 The cooperatives 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.3.5 Fishing 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 Types of food 
 
 
				Toggle Types of food subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 2.1 Fish 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.1.1 Hákarl 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.2 Meat 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.2.1 Game 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.2.2 Limits on meat imports 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.3 Dairy products 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.4 Fruits and vegetables 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.5 Bread and pastry 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 Feasts 
 
 
				Toggle Feasts subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 3.1 Christmas dishes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.2 Þorramatur 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.3 Birthdays, weddings, baptisms and confirmations 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4 See also 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5 References 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6 External links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
						Toggle the table of contents
					 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle the table of contents 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Icelandic cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 24 languages 
 
 
 
 Беларуская Čeština Dansk Deutsch Español فارسی Français 한국어 Íslenska Italiano ქართული Kurdî Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Português Română Русский Suomi Svenska Tagalog Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 
 Edit links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Article Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 English 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 More 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
 
 
 Cuisine of Iceland 
 This article  needs additional citations for  verification .  Please help  improve this article  by  adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources:   "Icelandic cuisine"  –  news   ·   newspapers   ·   books   ·   scholar   ·   JSTOR   ( May 2010 )  ( Learn how and when to remove this template message ) 
   A fisherman's hut in  Reykjavík  in 1835 with fish hung outside for drying. Wind-dried fish remains popular in  Iceland . 
 Part of  a series  on the Culture of Iceland 
 History 
 People 
 Languages 
 Mythology  and  Folklore 
 Cuisine 
 Festivals 
 Religion 
 Art 
 Literature 
 Music 
 Media 
 Radio 
 Television 
 Cinema 
 
 Sport 
 Monuments 
 World Heritage Sites 
 
 Symbols 
 Flag 
 Coat of arms 
 National anthem 
 
   Iceland portal v t e 
 The cuisine of  Iceland , has a long history. Important parts of Icelandic cuisine are lamb,  dairy , and  fish , the latter due to the fact that Iceland has traditionally been inhabited only near its coastline. Popular foods in Iceland include  skyr ,  hangikjöt  (smoked lamb),  kleinur ,  laufabrauð , and  bollur .  Þorramatur  is a traditional  buffet  served at midwinter festivals called  Þorrablót ; it includes a selection of traditionally  cured meat  and fish products served with  rúgbrauð  (dense dark and sweet rye bread) and  brennivín  (an Icelandic  akvavit ). The flavors of this traditional country food originate in its  preservation  methods; pickling in fermented  whey  or brine, drying, and smoking.
 Modern Icelandic chefs usually emphasise the quality of available ingredients rather than age-old cooking traditions and methods. Numerous restaurants in Iceland specialise in  seafood . At the annual  Food and Fun  chef's competition (held since 2004), competitors create innovative dishes with fresh ingredients produced in Iceland. Points of pride are the quality of the lamb meat, seafood, and (more recently) skyr. Other local ingredients include seabirds and waterfowl (including their eggs), salmon and trout,  crowberry , blueberry, rhubarb,  Iceland moss , wild mushrooms, wild thyme,  lovage ,  angelica , and dried seaweed, as well as a wide array of  dairy  products.
 Because of the history of settlement in a harsh climate, animal products dominate Icelandic cuisine. Popular taste has been developing, however, to become closer to the European norm. As an example, consumption of vegetables has greatly increased in recent decades while consumption of fish has diminished, yet is still far higher than any other developed country at about quadruple the average. [1] 
 
 
 History [ edit ] 
 The roots of Icelandic cuisine are to be found in the traditions of Scandinavian cuisine, as  Icelandic culture , from its  settlement  in the 9th century onwards, is a distinctly  Nordic  culture with a traditional economy based on  subsistence farming . Several events in the  history of Iceland  were of special significance for its cuisine. With  Christianisation  in 1000 came the tradition of  fasting  and a ban on  horse meat  consumption. More significantly in terms of farming and food supply was the onset of the  Little Ice Age  in the 14th century. Farmers were not able to grow  barley  anymore and had to rely on imports for any kind of cereal grains. The cooling of the climate also led to important changes in housing and heating: the  longhouse  of the early settlers, with its spacious hall, was replaced by the  Icelandic turf houses  with many smaller rooms, including a proper kitchen. This type of dwelling was used well into the 20th century.
 Historians often use the  Reformation  beginning in 1517 as the transition between the Middle Ages and the  early modern period  in Icelandic history. Farming in Iceland continued with traditional practices from the 14th century to the late 18th century, when reforms were made due to the influence of the  Enlightenment . A  trade monopoly  instituted by the Danish king in 1602 had a certain effect on culinary traditions. But the  cuisine of Denmark  had the most influence in the 19th century and the beginning of the 20th, when the country had close relations with Iceland. In the early 20th century, an economic boom based on commercial fishing and processing resulted in a slow transition from traditional dairy and meat-based foods to consumption of fish and root vegetables. Preserved foods began to be replaced with greater emphasis on fresh ingredients.
 
 Medieval Iceland [ edit ] 
   Interior of a recreated medieval longhouse at  L'Anse aux Meadows  in  Newfoundland 
 When Iceland was  settled  by immigrants from  Scandinavia  and  Viking  colonies in the British Isles, they brought their farming methods and food traditions of the  Norse  world. Research indicates that the  climate of Iceland  was much milder during the Middle Ages than it is now, and sources tell of cultivation of barley and oats. Most of this would have been consumed as  porridge  or gruel or used for making beer. Cattle was the dominant farm animal, but farms also raised poultry, pigs, goats,  horses  and  sheep . The poultry, horse, sheep and goat stocks first brought to Iceland have since developed in isolation, unaffected by modern selective breeding. Therefore, they are sometimes called the "settlement breed" or "viking breed".
 
 Preservation methods [ edit ] 
   Fermented shark,  hákarl , is an example of a culinary tradition that has continued from the settlement of Iceland in the 9th century to this day. 
 Fish was stored in salt, and before the  Black Death , Iceland exported  stockfish  to the fish market in  Bergen . However, salt seems to have been less abundant in Iceland than in  Norway . Saltmaking, which was mostly done by boiling sea water or burning seaweed, gradually disappeared when overgrazing caused a shortage of firewood in most parts of the country in the 14th century. Instead of curing with salt, the people of Iceland began to preserve meat in fermented  whey . This method was also known from Norway but acquired little significance there.
 Archeological digs in medieval farms have revealed large round holes in storage rooms where the barrel containing the lactic acid was kept. Two medieval stories tell of men who saved their lives in a burning house by staying submerged inside the acid barrel. Medieval Icelanders used  fermentation  for preserving both fish and meat, a method that greatly alters the taste of the food, making it similar to very strong cheese. Fermentation is still used to cure shark (see  hákarl ), skate and herring. Fermented eggs are a regional delicacy, rarely found nowadays. Smoking and drying meat and fish was also practiced, although the drying of meat was seen as something of a last resort.
 
 Cheese [ edit ] 
 Cheese was made from goat and sheep milk as well as cow milk.  Skyr , a soft yogurt-like cheese eaten with spoons, was originally a tradition brought to Iceland from Norway. It has survived only in Iceland. The  whey  left over when making skyr was made to go sour and used for storing meat. It is likely that the predominance of skyr in Icelandic cuisine caused the disappearance of other cheesemaking traditions in the modern era, until industrial cheesemaking started in the first half of the 20th century. Cheesemaking was part of  seter -farming ( seljabúskapur ), living in mountain huts in the highlands in late spring. Here farmers could separate the kids/lambs from their mothers in order to milk the adults. They often made cheese while still in the highlands. Flavors would reflect the new grasses.
 
 Cooking and meals [ edit ] 
   Two Icelandic drinking horns from around 1600 in the  Danish National Museum . 
 The  longhouses  of the first settlers usually included a long fire in the center to warm the house. Around it, holes were dug in the floor to be used as earth ovens for baking bread and cooking meat. Women would place dough or meat in the hole along with hot embers from the fire, and cover it tightly for the time needed. They boiled liquids in wooden staved churns by putting hot stones from the fire directly into the liquid (a practice that continued to the modern age). Low stone hearths surrounded the fire, but mostly the cooking was done on the floor.
 In the 14th century,  Icelandic turf houses  were developed and gradually replaced the longhouses. They had a kitchen with a raised stone hearth for cooking called  hlóðir.  The cooling of the climate during the Little Ice Age made it impossible to grow barley, and sheep replaced the more expensive cattle as predominant livestock. Iceland became dependent on imports for all cereals. Due to a shortage of firewood, the people turned to  peat , dung, and dried heather for fuels.
 In medieval Iceland the people ate two meals during the day, the lunch or  dagverður  at noon, and supper or  náttverður  at the end of the day. Food was eaten from bowls. Wooden staved  tankards  with a hinged lid were used for drinking. Later these were developed into the bulging casks, called  askar  used for serving food. The upper class used elaborately carved  drinking horns  on special occasions. Spoons were the most common eating utensil, made of horn or bone, and often decorated with carvings. Except for feasts, where tables would be laid, people ate their food from their laps, while sitting on their beds, which lined the outer wall of the house. In addition to processing crops and meats and cooking, the farmer's wife apportioned the food among the family and friends. In richer households this role was entrusted to a special butler called  bryti. 
 
 Early modern period [ edit ] 
 Icelandic  subsistence farming  from the Middle Ages well into the 20th century was restricted by the short production period (summer) compared to the long cold period. Apart from occasional game, the food produced in the three months of summer (including preserving meats and cheeses) had to suffice for nine months of winter. Researchers have estimated that, based on these methods of subsistence, Iceland could support a population of around 60,000. For centuries, farming methods changed very little, and fishing was done by men using hooks and lines from rowboats constructed from driftwood. Farmers also owned the boats, so fishing was limited to periods when the farmhands were not needed for farm work. Fish was not just a food, but a trade good, and it was exchanged for products brought by foreign merchant ships. The people were dependent on trade for cereals, such as rye and oats, transported to Iceland by Danish merchants. Until the 19th century, the vast majority of Icelandic farmers were  tenant farmers  on land owned by the Icelandic landowner elite, the Catholic church, or (especially after the confiscation of church lands during the  Reformation ) the king of Denmark. Tenant farmers used surplus fish,  tallow , and butter to pay the landowner his dues.
 Considerable regional variation in subsistence farming developed according to whether people lived close to the ocean or inland. Also, in the north of the country, the main fishing period coincided with the haymaking period in the autumn. This resulted in underdevelopment of fishing because labor was devoted to haymaking. In the South, by contrast, the main fishing period was from February to July. Some historians have described Icelandic society as a highly conservative farming society. Because of the demand for farmhands in the short summers, tenant farmers and landowners opposed the formation of fishing villages. Fishing was considered risky compared to farming, and the  Alþingi  passed many resolutions restricting or forbidding landless tenants from living in coastal villages to pursue fishing.
 
 Foreign trade [ edit ] 
   Cooking eggs and small game and even baking in  hot springs  is a peculiar feature of Icelandic cuisine. 
 Given the dominance of subsistence farming in Iceland, there was a lack of specialisation and commerce among farms. As testified in some of the  Icelandic sagas , domestic trade seems to have been suspect as a type of  usury  from the  age of settlement . Trade with foreign merchant ships was lively, however, and vital for the economy, especially for cereals and honey, alcohol, and (later) tobacco. Fishing ships from the coastal areas of Europe stopped for provisions in Icelandic harbors and traded what they had with the local people. This would include stale beer, salted pork, biscuits, and chewing tobacco, sold for knitted wool mittens, blankets, etc. Merchant ships put in occasionally from Holland, Germany, England, Scotland, Ireland, France and Spain, to sell their products, mainly for  stockfish . A ship is prominently displayed in the royal seal of Iceland.
 In 1602 the Danish king, worried about the activities of English and German ships in what he considered to be territorial waters, instituted a trade monopoly in Iceland, restricting commerce to Danish merchants. They were required to regularly send merchant ships to Iceland carrying trade goods needed by the country. While illegal trade flourished in the 17th century, from 1685 the government instituted stricter measures to enforce the monopoly. It flourished until 1787. As a result, Iceland farmers grew a type of rye predominant in Denmark, and  brennivín , an  akvavit  produced from rye, was introduced. These products displaced other cereals and beer.
 
 Cereals [ edit ] 
   A quern-stone from Scotland. Similar stones were used in Iceland for grinding corn into flour. 
 Different types of bread were considered a luxury among common people, although they were not uncommon. Corn bought from the merchant would be ground using a  quern-stone  (called  kvarnarsteinn  in Icelandic) and supplemented with dried  dulse  (seaweed) and  lichens . Sometimes it was boiled in milk and served as a thin porridge. The porridge could be mixed with skyr to form  skyrhræringur . The most common type of bread was a pot bread called  rúgbrauð , a dark and dense rye bread, reminiscent of the German  pumpernickel  and the Danish  rugbrød , only moister. This could also be baked by burying the dough in special wooden casks in the ground close to a hot spring and picking it up the next day. Bread baked in this manner has a slightly sulphuric taste. Dried fish with butter was served with all meals of the day, serving the same purpose as the "daily bread" in Europe.
 
 Cooking and meals [ edit ] 
 From the 14th century, food was prepared in the kitchen on a raised stone  hlóðir  or hearth. Hooks were placed above in order to hold the pots at the desired height above the fire. Ovens were rare, as these required much firewood for heating. Baking, roasting and boiling were all done in  cast iron  pots, usually imported.
 The two meals of the medieval period were replaced by three meals in the early modern period; the  breakfast  ( morgunskattur ) at around ten o'clock, lunch ( nónmatur ) at around three or four in the afternoon, and supper ( kvöldskattur ) at the end of the day. [2]  In the  Icelandic turf houses  people ate sitting on their beds, which lined the room. Food was served in  askar , low and bulging wooden staved casks with a hinged lid and two handles, often decorated. Spoon food was served from the cask, and dry food placed on the open lid. Each household member had a personal askur for eating from and was responsible for keeping it clean.
 
 Modernity [ edit ] 
   Women producing stockfish for export in Reykjavík in the 1910s. 
 Móðuharðindin , arguably the greatest natural disaster to have hit Iceland after its settlement, took place in 1783. Ten years earlier, a ban on Danish merchants residing in Iceland had been lifted and five years later the trade monopoly was ended. Some of the Danish merchants became residents, and some Icelanders became merchants themselves.
 During the  Napoleonic Wars  (1803–1815), there was a shortage of trade goods as merchant ships were diverted by war. Forced into self-reliance, Icelanders began to emphasize production and consumption of local vegetables raised during the short growing season. In the 19th century, nationalism and schools for women were influential in formalising traditional methods and shaping modern Icelandic cuisine.
 
 Danish influence [ edit ] 
 The first written cookbooks to be published in  Icelandic  were collections of Danish recipes published in the 18th century. They were intended to introduce the upper-class cuisine from  Denmark-Norway  to their peers in Iceland. The recipes sometimes had a "commoner version", using less expensive ingredients for farmhands and maids. The  cuisine of Denmark  influenced Iceland well before that through trade.
 In addition, Danish merchants who settled in Iceland, after the ban was lifted in 1770, often ran large households characterised by a mixture of Danish and Icelandic customs. Reykjavík, which developed as village by the end of the 18th century, began to grow and became a center of a melting pot of Icelandic and Danish culinary traditions. Fishing villages formed in the 19th century, many located by the trading harbours, which previously had featured little more than a natural harbour and a locked warehouse nearby. The Danish influence was most pronounced in pastry-making, as there were few native traditions in this craft. Ethnic Danish bakers began to operate around the start of the 20th century in both Reykjavík and  Akureyri . Some Danish pastry-making traditions have survived longer in Iceland than in Denmark.
 
 Vegetables [ edit ] 
 In the late 17th century, some farmers cultivated the first vegetable gardens, but growing vegetables did not become common until the early 19th century, when the  Napoleonic Wars  resulted in the merchant ships staying away. Resident Danes, who brought the tradition of vegetable gardens with them, were usually the first to start growing vegetables. Popular early garden vegetables included hardy varieties of cabbage, turnip,  rutabaga , and potato. They were generally prepared in Iceland as boiled accompaniments to meats and fish, and sometimes mashed with butter.
 
 Girls' schools [ edit ] 
 In the first half of the 20th century, many  home economics  schools, intended as  secondary education  for girls, were instituted around Iceland. Within these schools, during a time of  nationalistic  fervor, many Icelandic culinary traditions were formalised and written down by the pupils. They were published in large recipe compendia a few years later. Later emphasis on  food hygiene  and the use of fresh ingredients was a novelty in a country where culinary traditions had been based on preserving food for long term use.
 The modern economy began to expand, based on commercial export of  seafood . The modern generation rejected many traditional foods, embracing the concepts of "freshness" and "purity" associated with ingredients from the sea, especially when marketed abroad. During the urbanisation boom of the late 1940s, many Icelanders formed regional associations in Reykjavík. As fraternites, they revived some old culinary and other rural traditions. These associations organised midwinter festivals, where they started serving "Icelandic food", traditional country foods served in a  buffet . This was later called  Þorramatur .
 
 The cooperatives [ edit ] 
 In the beginning of the 20th century, farmers living near the towns would sell their products to shops and directly to households, often under a  subscription  contract. (This is similar to the concept of  Community Supported Agriculture  in some United States cities since the late 20th century.) To deal with the  Great Depression  in 1930, the Iceland government instituted state monopolies on various imports, including vegetables. They granted the regional farmers'  cooperatives , most of them founded around the start of the 20th century, a monopoly on dairy and meat production for the consumer market. This meant that smaller private producers were out of business.
 The large cooperatives were believed able to implement  economies of scale  in agricultural production. They invested in production facilities meeting modern standards of  food hygiene . These cooperatives still dominate agricultural production in Iceland and are almost unchallenged. They pioneered new cheesemaking techniques based on popular European varieties of  gouda ,  blue cheese ,  camembert , etc. Cheesemaking (apart from skyr) had been nearly extinct in Iceland since the 18th century. The cooperatives have driven product development, especially in dairy products. For instance, they market whey-based sweet drinks and variations of traditional products. One of these is "Skyr.is", a creamier, sweeter skyr, which has boosted the popularity of this age-old staple.
 
 Fishing [ edit ] 
 Fishing on an industrial scale with  trawlers  started before  World War I . Fresh fish became a cheap commodity in Iceland and a staple in the cuisine of fishing villages around the country. Until around 1990, studies showed that Icelanders were consuming much more fish per capita than any other European nation. Since then, however, steeply rising fish prices have caused a decline in consumption.
 
 Types of food [ edit ] 
 Fish [ edit ] 
 Icelanders consume fish caught in the waters of the North Atlantic Ocean. Fresh fish can be had all year round. Icelanders eat mostly  haddock ,  plaice ,  halibut ,  herring , and  shrimp .
 
 Hákarl [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Hákarl 
 Hákarl (meaning 'shark' in  Icelandic ) is putrescent  shark meat , which has been preserved. It is part of the  þorramatur , the traditional seasonal Icelandic foods. It is often accompanied by  brennivín , a local  schnapps .
 
 Meat [ edit ] 
   An Icelandic sheep. 
 Traditionally, domestic  sheep , the most common farm animal in Iceland, was the primary source of meat. Sheep were also used for their  milk  and  wool , and were worth more alive than dead. When a sheep was slaughtered (usually the young rams and infertile ewes), most or all of the carcass was used for making food, which was carefully preserved and consumed. Traditionally lambs are slaughtered in the autumn, when they are more than three months old and have reached a weight of almost 20 kg. After  Christianisation , horses were eaten only as a last resort. After the middle of the 18th century, attitudes changed. Horse meat, usually salted and served boiled or in  bjúgu,  a form of smoked sausage, has been common in Iceland since the 19th century.
 Icelandic  beef  is usually of top quality with good marbling due to the cold climate. Icelandic cattle are grass-fed and raised without  growth hormones  and  drugs . However, the lack of tradition for eating beef has resulted in sales of lower quality meat, forcing buyers to be careful.
 
 Game [ edit ] 
   A puffin hunter in  Vestmannaeyjar . 
 Small game in Iceland consists mostly of  seabirds  ( puffin ,  cormorant  and  great black-backed gull ) and  waterfowl  ( mallard ,  greylag goose  and  pink-footed goose ). The meat of some seabirds contains  fish oil . It is placed in a bowl of milk overnight to extract the oil before cooking.  Ptarmigan  is also found in Iceland, but hunting of them has been banned because of dramatically declining stocks since the late 20th century. Ptarmigan, served with a creamy sauce and jam, has been a traditional Christmas main course in many Icelandic households.
 Seal  hunting, especially the more common  harbor seal , was common everywhere farmers had access to seal breeding grounds. Seal was considered an important commodity. Whereas mutton was almost never eaten fresh,  seal meat  was usually eaten immediately, washed in seawater, or conserved for a short time in brine. Seal meat is not commonly eaten anymore and is rarely found in stores.
 Systematic  whaling  was not possible in Iceland until the late 19th century, due to the lack of ocean-going ships. Small whales were hunted close to the shore with the small rowboats used for fishing. Beached whales were also eaten. The Icelandic word for beached whale,  hvalreki,  is still used to mean a stroke of good luck. When Iceland started commercial whaling (mostly  minke whales ) in the early 20th century,  whale meat  became popular as a low-priced red meat. It can be prepared in much the same manner as the more expensive  beef . When Iceland withdrew from the  International Whaling Commission  in 1992, commercial whaling stopped. Some whale meat was still sold in specialised stores, coming from small whales that had beached or been accidentally caught in nets. In 2002 Iceland rejoined the IWC, and commercial whaling recommenced in 2006. Whale meat is commonly available again, although the price has gone up due to the cost of whaling.
 Reindeer  were introduced in Iceland in the late 18th century and live wild on the  moorlands  in the eastern farthing. A small number are killed by hunters each autumn. Their meat is sold in stores and prepared  in restaurants most of the year. Reindeer meat is considered a special delicacy and is usually very expensive.
 
 Limits on meat imports [ edit ] 
   Minke whale  on a stick, at the Sea Baron restaurant in Reykjavik Harbour area, Iceland 
 Importing raw meat to Iceland is strictly regulated and dependent on specific licenses issued to importers. The government has feared contamination. Due to Iceland's isolation, most of the stocks of domestic animals raised in Iceland have no resistance to some diseases common in neighboring countries. For this reason, tourists are banned from bringing in even cured ham or sausage with them; these are confiscated by customs officers.
 
 Dairy products [ edit ] 
 Dairy  products are very important to Icelanders. The average Icelander consumes about 400 litres (100 US gallons) of dairy products in one year.
 
 Fruits and vegetables [ edit ] 
 Vegetable production and consumption is steadily growing, with production going from around 8,000 tonnes in 1977 to almost 30,000 tonnes in 2007. [3]  The cold climate reduces the need for farmers to use  pesticides . Vegetables such as  rutabaga , cabbage and  turnips  are usually started in greenhouses in the early spring, and  tomatoes  and  cucumbers  are entirely produced indoors. Iceland relies on imports for almost any type of sweet  fruit  except for  berries.  Since the early 20th century, it has again been possible to grow  barley  for human consumption in a few places, for the first time since the Middle Ages. [ citation needed ] 
 
 Bread and pastry [ edit ] 
 See also:  List of Icelandic desserts 
   Kleina 
   Snúður 
 Modern Icelandic bakeries offer a wide variety of  breads  and  pastry . The first professional bakers in Iceland were Danish and this is still reflected in the professional traditions of Icelandic bakers. Long-time local favorites include  snúður , a type of  cinnamon roll , usually topped with  glaze  or melted  chocolate , and  skúffukaka , a single-layer  chocolate cake  baked in a roasting pan, covered with chocolate glaze and sprinkled with ground  coconut .
 A variety of  layer cake  called  randalín ,  randabrauð  or simply  lagkaka  has been popular in Iceland since the 19th century. These come in many varieties that all have in common five layers of  1 ⁄ 2 -inch-thick (13 mm) cake alternated with layers of  fruit  preserve,  jam  or  icing . One version called  vínarterta , popular in the late 19th century, with layers of  prunes , became a part of the culinary tradition of Icelandic immigrants in the U.S. and Canada. [4] 
 Traditional breads, still popular in Iceland, include  rúgbrauð , a dense, dark and moist  rye  bread, traditionally baked in pots or special boxes used for baking in holes dug near  hot springs , and  flatkaka , a soft brown rye  flatbread . A common way of serving  hangikjöt  is in thin slices on flatkaka. Other breads include skonsur which are soft breads, and Westfjord Wheatcakes (Vestfirskar hveitikökur).
 Traditional pastries include  kleina , a small  fried dough  bun where the dough is flattened and cut into small trapezoids with a special cutting wheel ( kleinujárn ), a slit cut in the middle and then one end pulled through the slit to form a "knot". This is then deep-fried in oil. [5]   Laufabrauð  (lit. "leafbread"), a very thin  wafer , with patterns cut into it with a sharp knife and ridged cutting wheels and fried crisp in oil, is a traditional  Christmas  food, sometimes served with hangikjöt.
 
 Feasts [ edit ] 
 Christmas dishes [ edit ] 
   Decorating  laufabrauð  (leaf bread) is a Christmas tradition in many Icelandic homes. 
 In Iceland the  Christmas dinner  is traditionally served on  Christmas Eve . Traditional main courses are  hangikjöt  (smoked  lamb ), hamborgarhryggur (salted  pork   rib ) and various types of  game , especially  ptarmigan  stew,  puffin  (sometimes lightly smoked) and roast  greylag goose  where these are available. These are usually accompanied by a  béchamel  or  mushroom sauce , boiled potatoes and  peas , pickled  beetroot  or  red cabbage  and  jam . A traditional  dessert  is  rice pudding  with  raisins , topped with ground  cinnamon  and  sugar  called  jólagrautur  ("Yule pudding").
 On December 23 (mass of  Saint Thorlak ) there is a tradition (originally from the  Westfjords ) to serve fermented  skate  with melted  tallow  and boiled potatoes. Boiling the Christmas hangikjöt the day after serving the skate is said to dispel the strong smell which otherwise tends to linger around the house for days.
 In the weeks before Christmas many households bake a variety of  cookies  to keep in store for friends and family throughout the holidays. These include  piparkökur , a type of  ginger biscuits  often decorated with colored  glaze .  Laufabrauð  is also fried some days before Christmas and decorating it is for many an occasion for holding a family gathering.
 
 Þorramatur [ edit ] 
   A typical  Þorramatur  assortment. 
 Main article:  Þorramatur 
 The concept of  Þorramatur  was invented by a restaurant in Reykjavík in 1958 when they started advertising a platter with a selection of traditional country food linking it to the tradition of  Þorrablót  popular since the late 19th century. The idea became very popular and for older generations the taste of the food will have brought back fond memories of growing up or spending summers in the countryside before  World War II  and the urbanisation boom. In recent years, however,  þorramatur  has come to represent the supposed strangeness and peculiarity of traditional Icelandic food, overlooking the fact that many commonplace foods are also traditional though not generally thought of as part of the  þorramatur  category.
 
 Birthdays, weddings, baptisms and confirmations [ edit ] 
 These are the various occasions for inviting the  extended family  to a  lunch  or " afternoon tea " called  kaffi  in Icelandic, as filter  coffee  is usually served [6]  rather than  tea . Traditional dishes include the  kransakaka  of  Danish  origin and various types of  brauðterta , similar to the  Swedish   smörgåstårta  with filling of e.g.  shrimp ,  smoked salmon  or  hangikjöt  and liberal amounts of  mayonnaise  between layers of  white bread . Also popular for large family gatherings are various types of  sponge cake , topped with fresh or canned  fruit ,  whipped cream ,  marzipan  and  meringue . This tradition is satirised in an often-quoted passage from  Halldór Laxness 's novel,  Under the Glacier , where the character Hnallþóra insists on serving multiple sorts of sumptuous cake for the bishop's emissary at all meals. Her name has become a byword for this type of cake.
 
 See also [ edit ] 
 
 Iceland portal Food portal 
 List of restaurants in Iceland 
 Te & Kaffi 
 References [ edit ] 
 
 
 ^   Tillaga til þingsályktunar um aðgerðir til að bæta heilbrigði Íslendinga með hollara mataræði og aukinni hreyfingu.  [Whitepaper on "ways of improving the health of Icelanders through better nourishment and exercise"], Acts of the 131st Legislature of Iceland, 2004-05, case 806 ( [1] ) 
 
 ^   Hallgerður Gísladóttir (2000),  Eldamennska í íslensku torfbæjunum  [Cooking in the Icelandic turf houses], Byggðasafn Skagfirðinga, pp. 23. 
 
 ^   "Heyfengur og uppskera grænmetis, korns og garðávaxta 1977-2007",  Hagstofa Íslands , 2008 ( [2] ). 
 
 ^   Ólöf Margrét Snorradóttir (2002).  "Lagterta" . Stofnun Árna Magnússonar í íslenskum fræðum. Archived from  the original  on July 22, 2009 . Retrieved  3 July  2008 . 
 
 ^   Kleina is mentioned in one of the first cookbooks printed in Icelandic,  Einfaldt Matreidslu Vasa-Qver fyrir heldri manna Húss-freyjur  by  Marta María Stephensen  from 1800 
 
 ^   Adam Gopnik.  "The Coffee of Civilization in Iceland" .  The New Yorker . No. April 16, 2015 . Retrieved  April 16,  2015 .  By the mid-nineteenth century, coffee was central to Iceland's sense of itself. 
 
 
 External links [ edit ] 
 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons has media related to  Cuisine of Iceland . 
 
 Icelandic cooking, recipes and food culture .  (in English) 
 Matarsetur , an Icelandic association dedicated to the history of Reykjavík cuisine.  (in Icelandic) 
 The Shopper´s Guide to Icelandic food , an informative summary provided by the Farmers Association of Iceland.  (in English) 
 A Little Food History  by Nanna Rögnvaldardóttir.  (in English) 
 What did they eat?  An article on Icelandic food in the Middle Ages  (in English) 
 v t e Iceland   articles History By topic 
 Economic 
 Military 
 Nationality 
 Prohibition 
 Rulers 
 Timeline 
 Settlement 
 Commonwealth 
 Christianization 
 Aristocracy 
 Sturlung Era 
 Reformation 
 Danish trade monopoly 
 Independence Movement 
 Kingdom 
 World War II 
 Invasion 
 Cold War 
 Cod Wars 
 2008–2011 financial crisis 
 Geography Natural 
 Climate 
 Earthquakes 
 Extreme points 
 Fjords 
 Forests 
 Geology 
 Glaciers 
 Highlands 
 Islands 
 Lakes 
 National parks 
 Rivers 
 Valleys 
 Volcanoes 
 Waterfalls 
 Wildlife 
 Political 
 Constituencies 
 Counties 
 Farthings 
 Localities 
 Municipalities 
 Regions 
 Politics 
 Administrative divisions 
 Cabinet 
 Constitution 
 Elections 
 Foreign relations 
 Human rights 
 Law 
 Law enforcement 
 LGBT rights 
 Military 
 Parliament 
 Political parties 
 President 
 Prime Minister 
 Supreme Court 
 Economy 
 Agriculture 
 Banking 
 Communications 
 Króna  (currency) 
 Energy 
 Nasdaq Iceland 
 Outvasion 
 Taxation 
 Tourism 
 Transport 
 Society 
 Demographics 
 Education 
 Healthcare 
 Icelanders 
 Languages 
 Religion 
 Culture 
 Anthem 
 Architecture 
 Art 
 Chess 
 Cinema 
 Coat of arms 
 Cuisine 
 Flag 
 Literature 
 Mass media 
 Music 
 Names 
 National costume 
 Public holidays 
 Sport 
 Television 
 Outline Index 
 Category 
 Portal 
 v t e European cuisine Sovereign states European Union 
 Austria 
 Belgium 
 Bulgaria 
 Croatia 
 Cyprus 
 Czech Republic 
 Denmark 
 Estonia 
 Finland 
 France 
 Germany 
 Greece 
 Hungary 
 Republic of Ireland 
 Italy 
 Latvia 
 Lithuania 
 Luxembourg 
 Malta 
 Netherlands 
 Poland 
 Portugal 
 Romania 
 Slovakia 
 Slovenia 
 Spain 
 Sweden 
 Other 
 Albania 
 Andorra 
 Armenia 
 Azerbaijan 
 Belarus 
 Bosnia and Herzegovina 
 Georgia 
 Iceland 
 Kazakhstan 
 Liechtenstein 
 Moldova 
 Monaco 
 Montenegro 
 North Macedonia 
 Norway 
 Russia 
 San Marino 
 Serbia 
 Switzerland 
 Turkey 
 Ukraine 
 United Kingdom 
 Vatican City 
 States with limited recognition 
 Abkhazia 
 Kosovo 
 Nagorno-Karabakh 
 Northern Cyprus 
 South Ossetia 
 Transnistria 
 Dependencies  and other territories 
 Faroe Islands 
 Gibraltar 
 Guernsey 
 Isle of Man 
 Jersey 
 
 v t e Cuisines Continental 
 African 
 North 
 West 
 list 
 Americas 
 Caribbean 
 North 
 South 
 list 
 Asian 
 Caucasian 
 Central 
 Indian subcontinent 
 Levantine 
 list 
 European 
 Balkan 
 Central 
 Eastern 
 list 
 Oceanic 
 Intercontinental
 Global 
 Latin American 
 Mediterranean 
 Middle Eastern 
 National  and regional 
 Afghan 
 Albanian 
 Algerian 
 American 
 Californian 
 Floribbean 
 Hawaiian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Lowcountry (South Carolina) 
 New England 
 New Mexico 
 Pacific Northwest 
 Pennsylvania Dutch 
 Puerto Rican 
 Southern US 
 Southwest US 
 Texas 
 Angolan 
 Argentine 
 Armenian 
 Australian 
 Austrian 
 Azerbaijani 
 Bahraini 
 Bangladeshi 
 Barbadian 
 Belarusian 
 Belgian 
 Belizean 
 Beninese 
 Bhutanese 
 Bolivian 
 Bosnian-Herzegovinian 
 Botswana 
 Brazilian 
 British 
 Channel Islands 
 English 
 Gibraltarian 
 Northern Irish 
 Saint Helena 
 Scottish 
 Welsh 
 Bruneian 
 Bulgarian 
 Burkinabé 
 Burmese 
 Burundian 
 Cambodian 
 Cameroonian 
 Canadian 
 Acadian 
 Québécois 
 Central African Republic 
 Chadian 
 Chilean 
 Chinese 
 Cantonese 
 Hong Kong 
 Macanese 
 Tibetan 
 Xinjiang 
 Colombian 
 Congolese 
 Corsican 
 Croatian 
 Cuban 
 Cypriot 
 Czech 
 Danish 
 Faroese 
 Greenlandic 
 Djiboutian 
 Dominican 
 Dominican Republic 
 Dutch 
 East Timorese 
 Ecuadorian 
 Egyptian 
 Emirati 
 Equatorial Guinean 
 Eritrean 
 Estonian 
 Ethiopian 
 Fijian 
 Filipino 
 Finnish 
 French 
 Occitan 
 French Guianan 
 Gabonese 
 Gambian 
 Georgian 
 German 
 Ghanaian 
 Greek 
 Cretan 
 Epirotic 
 Greek Macedonian 
 Heptanesean 
 Guatemalan 
 Guinea-Bissauan 
 Guinean 
 Haitian 
 Honduran 
 Hungarian 
 Icelandic 
 Indian 
 Arunachalese 
 Assamese 
 Bengali 
 Bihari 
 Goan 
 Gujarati 
 Himachal Pradesh 
 Kashmiri 
 Jharkhandi 
 Karnataka 
 Kerala 
 Maharashtrian 
 Manipuri 
 Meghalayan 
 Mizo 
 Naga 
 Odia 
 Punjabi 
 Rajasthani 
 Sikkimese 
 Sindhi 
 Tamil 
 Telangana 
 Telugu 
 Indonesian 
 Acehnese 
 Balinese 
 Banjar 
 Batak 
 Betawi 
 Indo 
 Javanese 
 Madurese 
 Makassar 
 Minahasan 
 Minangkabau 
 Palembangese 
 Sundanese 
 Iranian 
 Iraqi 
 Irish 
 Israeli 
 Italian 
 Abruzzese 
 Ligurian 
 Lombard 
 Lucanian 
 Neapolitan 
 Roman 
 Sardinian 
 Sicilian 
 Venetian 
 Ivorian 
 Jamaican 
 Japanese 
 Okinawan 
 Jordanian 
 Kazakh 
 Kenyan 
 Korean 
 North Korean 
 South Korean 
 Kosovan 
 Kuwaiti 
 Kyrgyz 
 Lao 
 Latvian 
 Lebanese 
 Lesotho 
 Liberian 
 Libyan 
 Liechtensteiner 
 Lithuanian 
 Luxembourg 
 Macedonian 
 Malagasy 
 Malawian 
 Malaysian 
 Sabahan 
 Sarawakian 
 Maldivian 
 Malian 
 Maltese 
 Mauritanian 
 Mauritian 
 Mexican 
 Moldovan 
 Monégasque 
 Mongolian 
 Montenegrin 
 Moroccan 
 Mozambican 
 Namibian 
 Nauruan 
 Nepalese 
 New Zealand 
 Nicaraguan 
 Niger 
 Nigerian 
 Niuean 
 Norwegian 
 Omani 
 Pakistani 
 Palestinian 
 Panamanian 
 Peruvian 
 Polish 
 Portuguese 
 Qatari 
 Romanian  (incl.  Transylvanian Saxon ) 
 Russian 
 Bashkir 
 Chechen 
 Circassian 
 Komi 
 Mordovian 
 Sakha 
 Tatar 
 Udmurt 
 Yamal 
 Rwandan 
 Saint Lucian 
 Salvadoran 
 Sammarinese 
 São Tomé and Príncipe 
 Saudi Arabian 
 Senegalese 
 Serbian 
 Seychellois 
 Sierra Leonean 
 Singaporean 
 Slovak 
 Slovenian 
 Somali 
 South African 
 Spanish 
 Andalusian 
 Asturian 
 Balearic 
 Basque 
 Canarian 
 Cantabrian 
 Catalan 
 Extremaduran 
 Galician 
 Manchegan 
 Valencian 
 Sri Lankan 
 Sudanese 
 Swazi 
 Swedish 
 Swiss 
 Syrian 
 Taiwanese 
 Tajik 
 Tanzanian 
 Zanzibari 
 Thai 
 Togolese 
 Tunisian 
 Turkish 
 Turkmen 
 Trinidadian and Tobagonian 
 Ugandan 
 Ukrainian 
 Uruguayan 
 Uzbek 
 Venezuelan 
 Vietnamese 
 Western Saharan 
 Yemeni 
 Zambian 
 Zimbabwean 
 Ethnic 
 Ainu 
 Arab 
 Indonesian 
 Aromanian 
 Assyrian 
 Balochi 
 Berber 
 Cajun 
 Chinese 
 American 
 Canadian 
 Chifa 
 Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Crimean Tatar 
 Greek American 
 Hazaragi 
 Indian 
 Anglo-Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Indigenous American 
 Inuit 
 Italian American 
 Kurdish 
 Livonian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Malay 
 Ossetian 
 Parsi 
 Pashtun 
 Peranakan 
 Romani 
 Sámi 
 Soul food 
 Sylheti 
 Transylvanian Saxon 
 Yup'ik 
 Religious 
 Buddhist 
 Christian 
 Goan Catholic 
 Mangalorean Catholic 
 Mennonite 
 Hindu 
 Islamic 
 Chinese 
 Ital 
 Jain 
 Jewish 
 American 
 Ashkenazi 
 Bukharan 
 Ethiopian 
 Mizrahi 
 Sephardic 
 Syrian 
 Ritual slaughter 
 Sikh 
 Historical 
 Ancient Egyptian 
 Ancient Greek 
 Ancient Israelite 
 Ancient Roman 
 Antebellum America 
 Aztec 
 Byzantine 
 Early modern European 
 Historical Chinese 
 Historical Indian subcontinent 
 Historical North Indian and Pakistani 
 History of agriculture 
 History of alcoholic drinks 
 History of bread 
 History of seafood 
 History of vegetarianism 
 Historical Argentine 
 Historical Japanese 
 Inca 
 Mayan 
 Muisca 
 Mughal 
 Medieval 
 Ottoman 
 Peasant 
 Soviet 
 Thirteen Colonies 
 Styles 
 Classique 
 Fast food 
 Fusion 
 New American 
 Eurasian 
 Haute 
 Molecular gastronomy 
 Note by Note 
 Nouvelle 
 Lists 
 List of cuisines 
 List of historical cuisines 
 Lists of prepared foods 
 Related 
 Cookbook 
 Cooking 
 Culinary arts 
 Drink 
 Food 
 history 
 Diet 
 Meal preparation 
 
   Food portal 
   Drink portal 
   Category 
   Commons 
   Cookbook 
   WikiProject 
   Outline 
 
 Authority control : National libraries  
 Israel 
 United States 
 
  
NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw2269
Cached time: 20230311170641
Cache expiry: 1814400
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc, no‐toc‐conversion]
CPU time usage: 0.947 seconds
Real time usage: 1.226 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 18523/1000000
Post‐expand include size: 177993/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 18401/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 16/100
Expensive parser function count: 54/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 50045/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.470/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 23805762/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/400
 
 
Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  959.926      1 -total
 32.74%  314.252      5 Template:Navbox
 16.61%  159.463      1 Template:European_topic
 16.10%  154.538      1 Template:Culture_of_Iceland
 15.92%  152.827      1 Template:Culture_of_region
 15.58%  149.556      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 13.67%  131.257      1 Template:Iceland_topics
 13.46%  129.240      1 Template:Country_topics
 11.08%  106.341      5 Template:In_lang
 10.17%   97.595     55 Template:Iso2country
 
  Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:idhash:5642461-0!canonical and timestamp 20230311170640 and revision id 1141836538. Rendering was triggered because: page-view
  
 esi <esi:include src="/esitest-fa8a495983347898/content" />  
 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Icelandic_cuisine&oldid=1141836538 " 
 Categories :  Icelandic cuisine Arctic cuisine Hidden categories:  Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from May 2010 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2012 Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with Icelandic-language sources (is) Articles with J9U identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  This page was last edited on 27 February 2023, at 01:54  (UTC) . 
 Text is available under the  Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0 ;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the  Terms of Use  and  Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the  Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. 
 
 
 Privacy policy 
 About Wikipedia 
 Disclaimers 
 Contact Wikipedia 
 Mobile view 
 Developers 
 Statistics 
 Cookie statement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
