
 
 
 Jump to content 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle sidebar 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Create account Log in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Personal tools 
 
 
 
 
   Create account   Log in 
 
 
 
 
		Pages for logged out editors  learn more 
 
 
 Contributions Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Navigation 
 
 
 Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate 
 
 
 
 
 Contribute 
 
 
 Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file 
 
 
 
 
 Tools 
 
 
 What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item 
 
 
 
 
 Print/export 
 
 
 Download as PDF Printable version 
 
 
 
 
 Languages 
 
 On this Wikipedia the language links are at the top of the page across from the article title.  Go to top . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CentralNotice  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Contents 
 move to sidebar 
 hide 
 
 
 
 
 (Top) 
 
 
 
 
 
 1 Foods 
 
 
				Toggle Foods subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 1.1 Vegetables/Fruits 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.2 Meats 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 Food preparation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 See also 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4 Notes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5 References 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
						Toggle the table of contents
					 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle the table of contents 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Inca cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 8 languages 
 
 
 
 বাংলা Español Հայերեն ქართული Македонски Русский Українська Tiếng Việt 
 Edit links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Article Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 English 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 More 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
 
 
 Cuisine of the Inca civilization 
   Pachamanca , a traditional dish consisting of food prepared in a  huatia . 
 Inca Empire 
 Inca society 
 Education   ·   Religion   ·   Mythology 
 
 Architecture   ·   Engineering   ·   Roads 
 
 Army   ·   Agriculture   ·   Ayllu   ·   Cuisine 
 
 Inca history 
 Kingdom of Cusco   ·   Inca Empire   ·   History of Cusco 
 
( Chimor–Inca War   ·   Invasion of Chile   ·   Civil War   ·   Spanish conquest ) 
 
 Neo-Inca State 
 v t e 
 Inca cuisine  originated in pre-Columbian times within the  Inca civilization  from the 13th to the 16th century. The Inca civilization stretched across many regions, and so there was a great diversity of plants and animals used for food, many of which remain unknown outside  Peru . The most important staples were various tubers, roots, and grains.  Maize  was of high prestige, but could not be grown as extensively as it was further north. The most common sources of meat were  guinea pigs  and  llamas , and dried fish was common.
 
 
 Foods [ edit ] 
 There were also several types of edible  clay , like  pasa , which was used as sauce for potatoes and other tubers, and  chaco,  something used by the poor or religiously devout. As in the rest of Central and South America,  chili peppers  were an important and highly praised part of their diet. [1] 
 
 Vegetables/Fruits [ edit ] 
   The people of the Andes developed hundreds of varieties of potatoes, most still unknown in the rest of the world 
 The Inca realm stretched north-south, encompassing a great variety of climate zones. In Peru in particular, the mountain ranges provide highly varied types of growing zones at different altitudes. [2]  The staples of the Incas included various plants with edible tubers and roots like  potato  and  sweet potato , in hundreds of varieties. Slightly over 4,000 types are known to Peru and were domesticated in the region since the middle to early 3000 B.C. There was also oca ( oca ), which came in two varieties, sweet and bitter. The sweet variety could be eaten raw or preserved and was used as a sweetener before the arrival of  sugar  made from  sugar cane .
 Similar to oca in purpose,  paiko  ( Dysphania ambrosioides ), was a part of the Inca diet for flavoring and edible leaves. [3]  Species of the  Chenopodium  family in the Inca cuisine were  Chenopodium pallidicaule , also known as  cañihua , and  Chenopodium quinoa , or  quinoa , due to their ability to survive in the high altitudes of the Andes.  Quinoa  has grown popular in the modern world beyond the Andes due to its adaptability, nutritional value, and many uses. [4] 
 Another high-altitude plant in Inca cuisine is  Lupinus mutabilis , also known as  tarwi  or  chocho . High in protein, this plant was often eaten with  chilis  and  onions  after being carefully treated, since improper treatment can leave the crop poisonous. Like  chocho  in protein count,  Ahipa  ( Pachyrhizus ahipa ) was another crop in Inca cuisine. It grows rapidly and has a high yield rate of the tubers that were cherished for their sweet taste like  water chestnuts . [5] 
 Another tuber consumed in the Andes was  Tropaeolum tuberosum , also known as  mashua  and  añu  in  Quechua , due to its resistance to droughts and frost. It was specially prepared and cooked to bring out the flavor that was desired as it was very bitter before doing so. So much so that it was considered an  aphrodisiac  and given to the Inca soldiers during campaigns to make them forget about their spouses. [6] 
 Other roots that could be found in the Inca cuisine were the  maka  ( Lepidium meyenii ) and the  yacón  ( Polymnia sonchifolia ).  Maka  was capable of surviving in the coldest and highest areas of the Andes, thus giving it high value.  Yacón  was documented to be similar to a turnip in texture but was very sweet and kept well, making them popular on sea voyages. [7] 
 The insipid, starchy root  ullucu , and  arracacha , something like a cross between carrot and celery, were, like potatoes, used in stews and soup.  Achira , a species of  Canna , was a sweet, starchy root that was baked in earth ovens. Since it had to be transported up to the power center of  Cuzco , it is considered to have been food eaten as part of a tradition. Although the roots and tubers provided the staples of the Inca, they were still considered lower in rank than  maize  ( Zea mays ). [8] 
 It has been found that the Inca conquered lands were often transitioned from potato fields to maize fields, more than likely due to it being the main ingredient of  chicha .
 Several species of  seaweed , such as  Porphyra ,  Durvillaea antarctica , and  Ulva lactuca  were part of the Inca diet and could be eaten fresh or dried. Some freshwater algae and blue algae of the genus  Nostoc  were eaten raw or processed for storage. In post-colonial times it has been used to make a dessert by boiling it in sugar.  Pepino , a refreshing and thirst-quenching fruit, was eaten by common folk, but scorned by "pampered folk" and was considered difficult to digest. [9] 
 Another fruit that was available to the Incas was the  passion fruit  ( Passiflora spp. ) which was actually named so by the Spanish conquistadors and explorers due to the claim that the flowers of the plant contained the symbols of the passion of Christ. The fruit itself is like a  pomegranate  as they both have a mass of seeds covered by juicy flesh. 
 A fruit that was described as an interesting snack available in the Andes during the time of the Inca Empire was the paqay ( Inga feuilleei ), or the  guaba , which was known for its sweet, spongey substance that covers its seeds. [10]  A lesser valued fruit within Inca cuisine was the  lucuma  ( Lucuma bifera ) which was difficult to consume and had little flavor. Opposite to the lucuma in popularity, due to their tender texture and the sweet juice they produce, were the almonds within  Caryocar amygdaliferum  of the  Chachapoyas . They were luxury goods for many generations as many have been found within early tombs of the region. 
 The various fruits and vegetables of the Incas allowed for a diversity in flavor to be introduced to the world when the Spanish explored South America, creating so many new possibilities for those in the world of the culinary arts.
 
 Meats [ edit ] 
   Two modern  Peruvian  dishes of  cuy  meat 
 Peoples of the  Altiplano  had two large domesticated animals:  llamas  and  alpacas . They were kept for their wool and used as pack animals that were often used in large caravans. The llama in particular was highly valued, and a white llama adorned in red cloth with gold earrings would often go before the Inca ruler as a royal symbol. 
 Animals were believed to represent various gods depending on what color they had and were sacrificed in great number and the blood was used as a ritual anointment. Control over the sacred animals was very rigorous. Shepherds had to preserve every last part of any animal that died and present a full animal to the Inca or risk severe punishment. 
 Among the food products made from the Peruvian camelids was  sharqui , strips of freeze-dried meat, the origin of modern-day  jerky . Another meat for royalty was that of the lizards known as  Dicrodon holmbergi . It would be trapped as it attempted to consume the pods of  Prosopis juliflora . After being trapped, it would be paralyzed and cooked until it was easily skinned. Afterwards, it was cooked for another ten minutes in heated sand and ashes then gutted, thus making it to be consumed immediately or preserved for up to a year. [11] 
 The meat of the common folk was the  cuy ,  guinea pig . They were domesticated by 2000 BC and were easy to keep and multiplied rapidly. Guinea pigs were often cooked by stuffing them with hot stones. The entrails would often be used as an ingredient in soups along with potatoes, or made into a sauce. They could also be used for divination, which later brought them into disfavor by the Catholic Church. [12] 
 The Incas hunted game including the wild  camelids   vicuña  and  guanaco ,  whitetail deer ,  huemul  deer  and  viscacha , a kind of  chinchilla  which was hunted with  lassos . Hunting rights were controlled by the state and any meat would go into the state warehouses for storage. In massive royal hunts, hunting teams would force huge herds into enclosures, and there are reports of several thousand animals being caught in a single great hunt, including puma, bear, fox and deer. [13] 
 One mainstay of the Inca army and the general population was dried fish.  Limpets ,  skates ,  rays , small sharks of the genus  Mustelus , mullets and  bonito  were among the fish caught off the Peruvian coast. Other sea creatures like  seabirds ,  penguins ,  sea lions  and  dolphins  were eaten, as were various  crustaceans  and  chitons , mussels,  chanque  (an  abalone -like animal). 
 Like other American peoples, the Inca ate animals that were often considered vermin by many Europeans, such as frogs,  caterpillars ,  beetles , and  ants .  Mayfly  larvae were eaten raw or toasted and ground to make loaves that could then be stored. [14] 
 The power of the Inca Empire was mighty and one of the most impressive and the advocation for storage and preservation of foods is one of the many factors that allowed for such success.
 
 Food preparation [ edit ] 
 Cooking was often done by putting hot stones in cooking vessels [15]  and there was extensive use of the  huatia , a type of  earth oven  and the  paila , an earthenware bowl.
 The Inca often got through times of food shortage because they were able to preserve and store many of their crops. It is estimated that at any given time in Incan history, there were three to seven years worth of food in the state warehouses. In the high elevations of the Andes, the Inca people would begin the process of making  chuño  by setting out potatoes and similar tubers out in the dry days and cold nights would  freeze-dry  them in a matter of days. The farmers would help the process by covering the crops to protect them from dew, and by stomping on them to release the excess water quickly. This tradition has carried on through generations as the  Q’ero  people of Peru make  chuño  a staple of their diet to survive in the harsh environment of the highlands that they call home.
 In addition to fruits, vegetables and roots, the Inca also preserved meat by  drying  and  salting it , making for complete nutritional stores. The English word  jerky  comes from the Quechua term  ch'arki , used to primarily to refer to the sun-dried meat of the  llama . 
 For the preparation of the meats within Inca cuisine, a popular and efficient method was to dry various fish and meats. They would dry these meats for storage in the warehouse of the Inca Empire by various methods of food drying, including allowing the meats to dry by sunlight or, especially in the highlands, by  freeze-drying . [16] 
 These  food preservation  techniques, combined with their far-reaching road system, allowed the Inca Empire to withstand droughts and to have the means to feed a standing army. [17]  To reward such feats, the Inca empire practiced the ritual use of  chicha .  Chicha  can be made from a variety of ingredients depending on the region and/or nation and can come in a variety of colors such as red, yellow, or even gray. The type of  chicha  that was held with high esteem amongst the Incas was the  chicha  made with maize. An extremely potent form of this type of  chicha  is known as  sora , which is prepared in differing ways such as burying the maize in the ground until sprout or chewing the maize. Whichever it way it was done, the maize would then be cooked and strained through cloth with clean water making a brew of  chicha . [18] 
 After the brewing process and the  chicha  was ready for consumption, it would consumed in vessels that made of varying materials such silver and gold. However, perhaps the most interesting were the ones made of wood known as  keros , which often have elaborate designs and bold colors.
 Quinoa , a staple plant of the Incas, was used in various ways. The leaves were often used for stews and soups. Quinoa was also used as a substitute maize in the production of  chicha . The seeds were often toasted then pulverized to make various types of bread. [19] 
 
 See also [ edit ] 
 
 Civilizations portal Food portal 
 Peruvian cuisine 
 Bolivian cuisine 
 Chilean cuisine 
 Ecuadorian cuisine 
 Muisca cuisine 
 Notes [ edit ] 
 
 
 ^   Coe p. 179-180 
 
 ^   Coe p. 169-170 
 
 ^    Coe p. 181 
 
 ^   Jacobsen p. 168 
 
 ^   Foster p. 100 
 
 ^    Coe p. 184 
 
 ^    Coe p. 185 
 
 ^   Coe pp. 180-183 
 
 ^   Coe pp. 181-190 
 
 ^   Coe p. 188 
 
 ^   Coe pp. 213 
 
 ^   Coe p. 171-175 
 
 ^   Coe p. 176-7 
 
 ^   Coe p. 177-8 
 
 ^   Coe p. 175 
 
 ^   Coe p. 179 
 
 ^   Popenoe et al. 1989 
 
 ^   Coe p. 204 
 
 ^   Coe p. 182 
 
 
 References [ edit ] 
 Coe, Sophie D.  (1994),  America's First Cuisines ,  ISBN   0-292-71159-X 
 Foster, Nelson.  Chilies to Chocolate: Food the Americas Gave the World  The Univ. of Arizona Press. 
 Jacobsen, Sven-Erik. "The Worldwide Potential for Quinoa ( Chenopodium quinoa  Willd.)."  Food Reviews International  19.1-2 (2003): 167-177. 
 Popenoe, Hugh, Steven R. King, Jorge Leon, Luis Sumar Kalinowski, and Noel D. Vietmeyer (1989),  Lost Crops of the Incas ,  ISBN   0-309-04264-X 
 v t e Cuisines Continental 
 African 
 North 
 West 
 list 
 Americas 
 Caribbean 
 North 
 South 
 list 
 Asian 
 Caucasian 
 Central 
 Indian subcontinent 
 Levantine 
 list 
 European 
 Balkan 
 Central 
 Eastern 
 list 
 Oceanic 
 Intercontinental
 Global 
 Latin American 
 Mediterranean 
 Middle Eastern 
 National  and regional 
 Afghan 
 Albanian 
 Algerian 
 American 
 Californian 
 Floribbean 
 Hawaiian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Lowcountry (South Carolina) 
 New England 
 New Mexico 
 Pacific Northwest 
 Pennsylvania Dutch 
 Puerto Rican 
 Southern US 
 Southwest US 
 Texas 
 Angolan 
 Argentine 
 Armenian 
 Australian 
 Austrian 
 Azerbaijani 
 Bahraini 
 Bangladeshi 
 Barbadian 
 Belarusian 
 Belgian 
 Belizean 
 Beninese 
 Bhutanese 
 Bolivian 
 Bosnian-Herzegovinian 
 Botswana 
 Brazilian 
 British 
 Channel Islands 
 English 
 Gibraltarian 
 Northern Irish 
 Saint Helena 
 Scottish 
 Welsh 
 Bruneian 
 Bulgarian 
 Burkinabé 
 Burmese 
 Burundian 
 Cambodian 
 Cameroonian 
 Canadian 
 Acadian 
 Québécois 
 Central African Republic 
 Chadian 
 Chilean 
 Chinese 
 Cantonese 
 Hong Kong 
 Macanese 
 Tibetan 
 Xinjiang 
 Colombian 
 Congolese 
 Corsican 
 Croatian 
 Cuban 
 Cypriot 
 Czech 
 Danish 
 Faroese 
 Greenlandic 
 Djiboutian 
 Dominican 
 Dominican Republic 
 Dutch 
 East Timorese 
 Ecuadorian 
 Egyptian 
 Emirati 
 Equatorial Guinean 
 Eritrean 
 Estonian 
 Ethiopian 
 Fijian 
 Filipino 
 Finnish 
 French 
 Occitan 
 French Guianan 
 Gabonese 
 Gambian 
 Georgian 
 German 
 Ghanaian 
 Greek 
 Cretan 
 Epirotic 
 Greek Macedonian 
 Heptanesean 
 Guatemalan 
 Guinea-Bissauan 
 Guinean 
 Haitian 
 Honduran 
 Hungarian 
 Icelandic 
 Indian 
 Arunachalese 
 Assamese 
 Bengali 
 Bihari 
 Goan 
 Gujarati 
 Himachal Pradesh 
 Kashmiri 
 Jharkhandi 
 Karnataka 
 Kerala 
 Maharashtrian 
 Manipuri 
 Meghalayan 
 Mizo 
 Naga 
 Odia 
 Punjabi 
 Rajasthani 
 Sikkimese 
 Sindhi 
 Tamil 
 Telangana 
 Telugu 
 Indonesian 
 Acehnese 
 Balinese 
 Banjar 
 Batak 
 Betawi 
 Indo 
 Javanese 
 Madurese 
 Makassar 
 Minahasan 
 Minangkabau 
 Palembangese 
 Sundanese 
 Iranian 
 Iraqi 
 Irish 
 Israeli 
 Italian 
 Abruzzese 
 Ligurian 
 Lombard 
 Lucanian 
 Neapolitan 
 Roman 
 Sardinian 
 Sicilian 
 Venetian 
 Ivorian 
 Jamaican 
 Japanese 
 Okinawan 
 Jordanian 
 Kazakh 
 Kenyan 
 Korean 
 North Korean 
 South Korean 
 Kosovan 
 Kuwaiti 
 Kyrgyz 
 Lao 
 Latvian 
 Lebanese 
 Lesotho 
 Liberian 
 Libyan 
 Liechtensteiner 
 Lithuanian 
 Luxembourg 
 Macedonian 
 Malagasy 
 Malawian 
 Malaysian 
 Sabahan 
 Sarawakian 
 Maldivian 
 Malian 
 Maltese 
 Mauritanian 
 Mauritian 
 Mexican 
 Moldovan 
 Monégasque 
 Mongolian 
 Montenegrin 
 Moroccan 
 Mozambican 
 Namibian 
 Nauruan 
 Nepalese 
 New Zealand 
 Nicaraguan 
 Niger 
 Nigerian 
 Niuean 
 Norwegian 
 Omani 
 Pakistani 
 Palestinian 
 Panamanian 
 Peruvian 
 Polish 
 Portuguese 
 Qatari 
 Romanian  (incl.  Transylvanian Saxon ) 
 Russian 
 Bashkir 
 Chechen 
 Circassian 
 Komi 
 Mordovian 
 Sakha 
 Tatar 
 Udmurt 
 Yamal 
 Rwandan 
 Saint Lucian 
 Salvadoran 
 Sammarinese 
 São Tomé and Príncipe 
 Saudi Arabian 
 Senegalese 
 Serbian 
 Seychellois 
 Sierra Leonean 
 Singaporean 
 Slovak 
 Slovenian 
 Somali 
 South African 
 Spanish 
 Andalusian 
 Asturian 
 Balearic 
 Basque 
 Canarian 
 Cantabrian 
 Catalan 
 Extremaduran 
 Galician 
 Manchegan 
 Valencian 
 Sri Lankan 
 Sudanese 
 Swazi 
 Swedish 
 Swiss 
 Syrian 
 Taiwanese 
 Tajik 
 Tanzanian 
 Zanzibari 
 Thai 
 Togolese 
 Tunisian 
 Turkish 
 Turkmen 
 Trinidadian and Tobagonian 
 Ugandan 
 Ukrainian 
 Uruguayan 
 Uzbek 
 Venezuelan 
 Vietnamese 
 Western Saharan 
 Yemeni 
 Zambian 
 Zimbabwean 
 Ethnic 
 Ainu 
 Arab 
 Indonesian 
 Aromanian 
 Assyrian 
 Balochi 
 Berber 
 Cajun 
 Chinese 
 American 
 Canadian 
 Chifa 
 Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Crimean Tatar 
 Greek American 
 Hazaragi 
 Indian 
 Anglo-Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Indigenous American 
 Inuit 
 Italian American 
 Kurdish 
 Livonian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Malay 
 Ossetian 
 Parsi 
 Pashtun 
 Peranakan 
 Romani 
 Sámi 
 Soul food 
 Sylheti 
 Transylvanian Saxon 
 Yup'ik 
 Religious 
 Buddhist 
 Christian 
 Goan Catholic 
 Mangalorean Catholic 
 Mennonite 
 Hindu 
 Islamic 
 Chinese 
 Ital 
 Jain 
 Jewish 
 American 
 Ashkenazi 
 Bukharan 
 Ethiopian 
 Mizrahi 
 Sephardic 
 Syrian 
 Ritual slaughter 
 Sikh 
 Historical 
 Ancient Egyptian 
 Ancient Greek 
 Ancient Israelite 
 Ancient Roman 
 Antebellum America 
 Aztec 
 Byzantine 
 Early modern European 
 Historical Chinese 
 Historical Indian subcontinent 
 Historical North Indian and Pakistani 
 History of agriculture 
 History of alcoholic drinks 
 History of bread 
 History of seafood 
 History of vegetarianism 
 Historical Argentine 
 Historical Japanese 
 Inca 
 Mayan 
 Muisca 
 Mughal 
 Medieval 
 Ottoman 
 Peasant 
 Soviet 
 Thirteen Colonies 
 Styles 
 Classique 
 Fast food 
 Fusion 
 New American 
 Eurasian 
 Haute 
 Molecular gastronomy 
 Note by Note 
 Nouvelle 
 Lists 
 List of cuisines 
 List of historical cuisines 
 Lists of prepared foods 
 Related 
 Cookbook 
 Cooking 
 Culinary arts 
 Drink 
 Food 
 history 
 Diet 
 Meal preparation 
 
   Food portal 
   Drink portal 
   Category 
   Commons 
   Cookbook 
   WikiProject 
   Outline 
 
  
NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw2310
Cached time: 20230310201353
Cache expiry: 1814400
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [show‐toc, no‐toc‐conversion]
CPU time usage: 0.317 seconds
Real time usage: 0.421 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1167/1000000
Post‐expand include size: 66325/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 726/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 3/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 0/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 25435/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.145/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 2626783/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/400
 
 
Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  259.428      1 -total
 32.05%   83.147      1 Template:Inca_civilization
 31.31%   81.219      1 Template:Sidebar
 19.69%   51.088      1 Template:Cuisines
 18.95%   49.157      1 Template:Navbox
 18.60%   48.241      1 Template:Short_description
 14.52%   37.674      2 Template:ISBN
 11.25%   29.192      2 Template:Catalog_lookup_link
 10.49%   27.225      2 Template:Pagetype
  6.91%   17.939      1 Template:Portal
 
  Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:idhash:11571392-0!canonical and timestamp 20230310201352 and revision id 1141221991. Rendering was triggered because: page-view
  
 esi <esi:include src="/esitest-fa8a495983347898/content" />  
 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Inca_cuisine&oldid=1141221991 " 
 Categories :  Andean civilizations Indigenous culture of the Andes Indigenous cuisine of the Americas South American cuisine Inca Cuisine by culture Hidden categories:  Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  This page was last edited on 24 February 2023, at 00:05  (UTC) . 
 Text is available under the  Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0 ;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the  Terms of Use  and  Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the  Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. 
 
 
 Privacy policy 
 About Wikipedia 
 Disclaimers 
 Contact Wikipedia 
 Mobile view 
 Developers 
 Statistics 
 Cookie statement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
