
 
 
 Jump to content 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle sidebar 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Create account Log in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Personal tools 
 
 
 
 
   Create account   Log in 
 
 
 
 
		Pages for logged out editors  learn more 
 
 
 Contributions Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Navigation 
 
 
 Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate 
 
 
 
 
 Contribute 
 
 
 Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file 
 
 
 
 
 Tools 
 
 
 What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item 
 
 
 
 
 Print/export 
 
 
 Download as PDF Printable version 
 
 
 
 
 In other projects 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons 
 
 
 
 
 Languages 
 
 On this Wikipedia the language links are at the top of the page across from the article title.  Go to top . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CentralNotice  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Contents 
 move to sidebar 
 hide 
 
 
 
 
 (Top) 
 
 
 
 
 
 1 Origins 
 
 
				Toggle Origins subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 1.1 Chinese in India 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.2 Additional Origin Points 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.2.1 Silk Road Cultural Exchange 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.2.2 Influences on Southeast Asian Cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.2.3 Culinary Diffusion Across Borders 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 Features 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 Dishes 
 
 
				Toggle Dishes subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 3.1 Appetizers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.2 Main dishes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.3 Rice and noodles 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.4 Sweets and desserts 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4 Availability 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5 See also 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6 Notes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 7 References 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8 External links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
						Toggle the table of contents
					 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle the table of contents 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Indian Chinese cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 8 languages 
 
 
 
 العربية Español हिन्दी मैथिली Bahasa Melayu 日本語 Português Српски / srpski 
 Edit links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Article Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 English 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 More 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
 
 (Redirected from  Indo-Chinese cuisine ) 
 Fusion cuisine combining Indian and Chinese traditions 
 This article is part of the series on Indian cuisine 
 Regional cuisines 
 North India 
 Awadhi 
 Bhojpuri 
 Haryana 
 Kashmiri 
 Kumauni 
 Mughlai 
 Punjabi 
 Rajasthani 
 Uttar Pradeshi 
 South India 
 Chettinad 
 Hyderabadi 
 Karnataka 
 Kerala 
 KonguNadu 
 Mangalorean 
 Mangalorean Catholic 
 Saraswat 
 Tamil 
 Telangana 
 Telugu 
 Udupi 
 East India 
 Bengali 
 Bihari 
 Jharkhand 
 Odia 
 Maithil 
 West India 
 Goan 
 Gujarati 
 Malvani & Konkani 
 Marathi 
 Parsi 
 Sindhi 
 Northeast India 
 Arunachalese 
 Assamese 
 Meghalayan 
 Manipuri 
 Mizoram 
 Naga 
 Sikkimese 
 Tripuri 
 Other 
 Anglo-Indian 
 Fast food 
 Indian Chinese 
 Indian Indonesian 
 Indian Singaporean 
 Jain (Satvika) 
 Malaysian Indian 
 Nepali 
 
 Ingredients, types of food 
 Main dishes 
 Soups and stews 
 Desserts 
 Bread 
 Drinks 
 Snack foods 
 Spices 
 Condiments 
 
 Preparation, cooking 
 Handi 
 Karahi 
 Tava 
 Tandoor 
 Uruli 
 Other 
 
 See also 
 History 
 Etiquette 
 Indian chefs 
 Cookbook: Cuisine of India 
 
 Related cuisines 
 Nepalese cuisine 
 Sri Lankan cuisine 
 Bangladeshi cuisine 
 Pakistani cuisine 
 Bhutanese cuisine 
 Tibetan cuisine 
 Afghani cuisine 
 
   India portal 
   Food portal v t e 
 Part of a series on Chinese cuisine 
 Regional cuisines 
 Four Great Traditions 
 Chuan (Sichuan) 
 Lu (Shandong) 
 Yue (Guangdong) 
 Huaiyang (Jiangsu) 
 Eight Great Traditions (+all above) 
 Anhui 
 Fujian 
 Hunan 
 Zhejiang 
 Ten Great Traditions (+all above) 
 Beijing 
 Shanghai 
 Twelve Great Traditions (+all above) 
 Henan 
 Shaanxi 
 Fourteen Great Traditions (+all above) 
 Hubei 
 Liaoning 
 Sixteen Great Traditions (+all above) 
 Tianjin 
 Yunnan 
 New Eight Great Traditions 
 Gansu 
 Hangzhou 
 Jilin 
 Liaoning 
 Ningbo 
 Shaanxi 
 Shanghai 
 Shanxi 
 Beijing and the vicinity 
 Beijing 
 Imperial 
 Aristocrat 
 Tianjin 
 Other regional styles 
 Teochew 
 Guangxi 
 Guizhou 
 Hainan 
 Haipai 
 Hakka 
 Hong Kong 
 Jiangxi 
 Macanese 
 Manchu 
 Northeastern 
 Putian (Henghwa) 
 Qinghai 
 Taiwan 
 Tibetan 
 Xinjiang 
 
 Overseas cuisine 
 Australia 
 Britain 
 Burma 
 Canada 
 Caribbean 
 Philippines 
 India 
 Indonesia 
 Japan 
 Latin America 
 Perú 
 Puerto Rico 
 Korea 
 Malaysia 
 Pakistan 
 Singapore 
 United States 
 
 Religious cuisines 
 Buddhist 
 Islamic 
 Taoist 
 
 Ingredients and types of food 
 Main dishes 
 Desserts 
 Noodles 
 
 Preparation and cooking 
 Stir frying 
 Double steaming 
 Red cooking 
 
 See also 
 Customs and etiquette 
 List of Chinese desserts 
 List of Chinese dishes 
 List of Chinese restaurants 
 List of restaurants in China 
 
   Asia portal 
   China portal 
   Hong Kong portal 
   Taiwan portal v t e 
 
 
   Shanghai fried noodles with oily, saucy flavors 
 Indian Chinese cuisine ,  Chinese Indian cuisine ,  Sino-Indian cuisine ,  Chindian cuisine ,  Hakka Chinese [1]  or  Desi -Chinese cuisine  is a distinct fusion culinary style that combines aspects of both  Indian  and  Chinese  foods and flavours. Though Asian cuisines have mixed throughout history throughout Asia, the most popular origin story of the fusion food resides with the  Chinese of Calcutta , who immigrated to  British Raj India  looking for work. [2]  Opening restaurant businesses in the area, these early Chinese food sellers adapted their culinary styles to suit the tastes of the Indians in order for Chinese food sellers to keep earning money from the Indians. [2] 
 Chinese Indian food is generally characterised by its ingredients: Indian vegetables and  spices  are used, along with a heavy amount of pungent Chinese sauces, thickening agents, and oil. [3]   Stir-fried  in a wok, Sino-Indian food takes Chinese culinary styles and adds spices and flavours familiar to the Indian palate. [3]  This idea of flavourful, saucy Chinese food cooked with Indian spices and vegetables has become integral to the mainstream culinary scenes of India,  Pakistan ,  Bangladesh , and  Afghanistan , and its diffusion to nations like America, Britain, Canada, and the Caribbean has shaped and altered the global view of Chinese, Indian, and Asian cuisines. [4] 
 
 
 Origins [ edit ] 
   Chinese New Year celebration in Kolkata (2014). 
   Tiretti Bazaar in Kolkata, India's only Chinatown (2013). 
 Chinese in India [ edit ] 
 The most popularized theory for the origins of Chinese Indian food was during the  British Rule of India  deep within Calcutta. Calcutta was the capital of  British-ruled India  when it was governed by the  East India Trading Company  (from 1757 to 1858). [5]  The city's relation to the British crown made it a great place for material prospects and opportunity, which drew businessmen and immigrant workers from surrounding areas. [3]  Located in the Northeastern region of India, Calcutta was the most accessible metropolitan area of the country by land from China; thus, this city harbored the very first Chinese settler, a southern Chinese man named Tong Atchew (also referred to as Yang Dazhao or Yang Tai Chow). [3]  In 1778, Atchew settled 20 miles southwest of Kolkata (then Calcutta), founding a  sugar mill  along with five dozen or so Chinese laborers. [2]  Following Atchew's footsteps, waves of immigrants from the  Guangdong province  of China fled to India due to civil war, famine, poverty, and conflict, searching for safety and prosperity. [2]   Hakka  Chinese found their niche as  cobblers  and  tanners , while the  Cantonese  settled majorly as  carpenters  and the  Hubei  people as dentists. However, an occupation popular among all groups, especially of wives supporting their laboring husbands, was a  restaurateur . [2] 
 From these first early settlers, communities of Chinese influence sprung up throughout the area, neighborhoods of immigrants cooking and eating foods from their homeland. These  Canton cuisines , known in China to be light and fresh in flavor, began to adapt and evolve into the new area. One reason is due to the availability of ingredients and spices being different from those in Guangdong, therefore forcing the flavors to naturally Indianize; additionally, Chinese businesses began to cater their foods to the tastes of their Indian patrons to increase sales, utilizing more spices and heavier douses of sauce and oil than their  traditional techniques  required. [6]  Recognized as one of the first Indo-Chinese restaurants in the country, the still-standing corner eatery of Eau Chew gained its popularity by using the fashionable pull of exotic Chinese foods combined with non-threatening familiar flavors of chili,  curry , and corn starch, to attract and keep-on customers. [3] [6]  Kolkata today boasts the only  Chinatown  in the country, a neighborhood known as the  Tiretti Bazaar . [2]  This being said, nearly every city in India has these adapted "Chinese" foods, whether found in restaurants or hawked by  roadside vendors , as the greasy, spicy, stir-fried food has become wildly popular throughout the country. [6]  It is important also to note those Chinese returning from India to their homelands in China's south, for they often brought their new culinary practices and flavors with them, working to Indianize the taste of Cantonese-style foods in southern coastal cities such as  Hong Kong . [6] 
 
 Additional Origin Points [ edit ] 
 As Indian historian  Pushpesh Pant  once noted, Indian Chinese food is "the result of several isolated encounters." [6]  These encounters, in addition to the Kolkata story, include influences of the  Silk Road , historical ties, and geography. Each of these aspects has worked in some way to tie the culinary practices and flavors of the two countries together, marking other possible origin points for the Indian Chinese culinary tradition.
 
   Silk Road  routes connecting the (near and far) East with the West 
 Silk Road Cultural Exchange [ edit ] 
   Buddhist expansion in Asia , from Buddhist heartland in  northern India  (dark orange) starting 5th century BCE, to Buddhist majority realm (orange), and historical extent of Buddhism influences (yellow).  Mahāyāna  (red arrow),  Theravāda  (green arrow), and  Tantric - Vajrayāna  (blue arrow). The overland and maritime "Silk Roads" were interlinked and complementary, forming what scholars have called the "great circle of Buddhism". [7] 
 The  Silk Road  (or Silk Routes) was a network of  trading posts  and pathways on land and sea utilized from 130 BCE to 1453 CE spanning from China and the  Indonesian islands  through India and the  Middle East , all the way to  northeastern Africa  and Italy. [8]  The significance of this route to ancient history is undeniable, the exchange of goods,  diseases , and ideas from the East to West and vice versa has had a lasting impact upon the human story. Chinese and Indian  merchants  would carry their goods across the borders separating the two neighboring countries:  silks ,  rice , and  crockery  coming from China, with a plethora of influential spices sprouting from India. [8]  Another exchange between China and India was religion, with  Buddhism  coming to China from India via the Silk Road as well; moreover, as aspects of Indian culture, practices, and beliefs melded with Chinese traditions, the  Mahayana Buddhist  religion was formed. [9]  Just as the Chinese adapted Buddhist practices to their own beliefs, the two cultures adopted certain aspects of the other throughout their historical interactions and exchanges. Rice dishes cooked in  Indianized Chinese woks  can be found in the  nation's south , and there are spices of  ginger ,  cinnamon , and  black pepper  present in various Chinese culinary styles; in this way, it can be seen how the Silk Road was vital in bringing characteristics of the two cultures together. [10]  Indian and Chinese food aspects collided hundreds of years ago to form culinary traditions now inextricable with these nations; in this way, the Indo-Chinese fusion cuisine could be said to have appeared long before the first Chinese settlers in Kolkata.
 
   Thai red curry: the red chilies give it color and spice. 
 Influences on Southeast Asian Cuisine [ edit ] 
 Geographically, India and China are neighbors; historically, the two nations are  ancient empires . Two of the  most populous  countries in the world today, both India and China boast lengthy histories. Since the second century CE,  Hindu rulers  presided over  Southeast Asian countries  and Chinese regimes ruled the more eastern regions, such as  Vietnam . [11] [12]  Similarly, Asia's southeast was historically populated by immigrants from both China and India, namely the  Han  and  Tamil  ethnic groups who joined scattered aboriginal societies. [10]  The influences of China and India can be detected in the  cuisines of Southeast Asia , where the two culinary practices have been combined, adapted, and developed by generations of people. For example, the Chinese practice of  rice cultivation  was introduced to the regions of Southeast Asia and Nepal in the thirtieth century BC, where it has existed as an irreplaceable and undeniable staple ever since. [13]  Furthermore, now completely embedded within Southeast Asian culinary practices, Chinese cooking and  eating implements  such as spoons, chopsticks, and  woks  were other products which were introduced to the region. [14]  Evidence of Indian influence, in addition to  religious philosophies  and  ancient architecture , can be found in the spices and flavors of Southeast Asian cooking. [11]   Curries —meat, fish, or vegetables cooked in a spiced sauce accompanied by rice or bread—originated on the Indian subcontinent, but have since diffused throughout Asia. [15]  Spices such as  turmeric ,  coriander ,  pepper ,  brown mustard , and ginger are present in curries throughout Southeast Asia, though each country has adapted the practice to utilize their own regional ingredients as well; most notably,  Indonesian ,  Malaysian ,  Thai ,  Filipino , and  Cambodian  cuisines all have strong ties to Indian-style curry flavors. [15]  These aspects of both Chinese and Indian culinary practices and traditions have combined to create the origins of what is now a rich and diverse culinary scene making up Asia's southeastern region. Thus, with the joined influence of the two cultures, Southeast Asian cuisine itself is another example of Indian Chinese food origins.
 
   Nepal and Myanmar; bordered by India and Tibet, China. 
   Momo dumplings; found in Nepal, Tibet, and Northeastern India. 
 Culinary Diffusion Across Borders [ edit ] 
 In addition to Southeast Asia, China has been influenced by Indian spices as well, especially in the autonomous region of  Tibet , with  Nepal  also possessing culinary practices hailing from both its Chinese and Indian neighbors. [10]  Therefore, another origin point of Indian Chinese food can be traced to the cultures of  Nepalese  and  Tibetan  peoples, whose lands are mostly encompassed by the two nations (India and China). Although not aligned with the greasy and pungent flavors of the culinary traditions which evolved in  Kolkata , the simple  foods of Nepal  are often accompanied by rice, and consist of curries or spiced vegetables stir-fried or boiled in an Indian-style wok called a  karahi . [16]   Tibetan food , in addition to  high altitude and harsh climates , is geographically influenced by the flavors of the countries surrounding it: notably Nepal, India, and China. Tibet is a nation heavily influenced by  Indian Buddhist  values (first brought in the fifth century AD), and with beliefs and ideas travels culture and food as well. [11]   Noodles  and  teas  from China (vital in making the  tsampa  eaten with every meal),  brown mustard  from India, and even a " momo " dumpling dish shared with Nepal are all significant constituents to and dishes of Tibetan cuisine. [17]  With the diffusion of ingredients, culinary styles, and flavors across  borders , the regions of Nepal and Tibet (as well as  Bhutan ) which touch both India and China inadvertently developed cuisines mixing both Chinese and Indian styles and tastes, creating yet another Indo-Chinese food origin.
 
 Features [ edit ] 
 This section  needs additional citations for  verification .  Please help  improve this article  by  adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.   ( April 2009 )  ( Learn how and when to remove this template message ) 
 Foods tend to be flavoured with  spices  such as  cumin ,  coriander  seeds, and  turmeric , which with a few regional exceptions, such as  Xinjiang , are traditionally not associated with much of  Chinese cuisine . Hot  chilli ,  ginger ,  garlic , sesame seeds, dry red chilis, black pepper corns and  yogurt  are also frequently used in dishes. [18]  This makes Indian Chinese food similar in taste to many ethnic dishes in  Southeast Asian  countries such as  Singapore  and  Malaysia , which have strong Chinese and  Indian  cultural influences. [15] [14] 
 Non- staple  dishes are by default served with generous helpings of  gravy , although they can also be ordered "dry" or "without gravy". Culinary styles often seen in Indian Chinese fare include "Chili" (implying  batter -fried items cooked with pieces of  chili pepper ), "Manchurian" (implying a  sweet  and  salty   brown  sauce), and " Schezwan " (sic - see below) (implying a  spicy   red  sauce).
 
 Dishes [ edit ] 
 Appetizers [ edit ] 
 Chicken lollipop  - Chicken hors d'œuvre 
 Hot and sour soup 
 Manchow soup  - Vegetable/chicken soup 
 Main dishes [ edit ] 
 The main ingredient in all these dishes can often be substituted with other meats, vegetables or  paneer . Usually the  nomenclature  is such that the main ingredient is mentioned first, followed by the entree style, for example "Chicken Chilli". Many are available in both "dry" or "gravy" versions, varying the amount of sauce served in the dish.
 
 This section  needs additional citations for  verification .  Please help  improve this article  by  adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.   ( April 2019 )  ( Learn how and when to remove this template message ) 
   Veg  Chow mein  from  West Bengal 
   Chilli Paneer 
   Chicken Manchurian 
 Chilli chicken , dry or gravy 
 Garlic chicken 
 Chilli Paneer 
 Schezwan [note 1]  - A spicy and pungent sauce made with dry red chillies, garlic, shallots and spices. [19]   Dishes with this name in fact usually bear very little resemblance to ones from China's  Sichuan Province , although they sometimes contain  Sichuan peppercorns . 
 Ginger chicken 
 Manchurian , generally consisting of a variety of deep-fried meats,  cauliflower  ( gobi ) or  paneer  with vegetables in a spicy brown sauce. [20]  It is basically a creation of Chinese restaurants in India, and bears little resemblance to traditional  Manchu cuisine  or  Chinese cuisine . [21]  It is said to have been invented in 1975 by  Nelson Wang ; Wang described his invention process as starting from the basic ingredients of an Indian dish, namely chopped garlic, ginger, and green chilis, but next, instead of adding  garam masala , he put in  soy sauce , followed by  cornstarch  and the chicken itself. [22]  A popular vegetarian variant replaces chicken with cauliflower, [20]  and is commonly known as  gobi manchurian . Other vegetarian variants include mushroom, paneer, baby corn, veg Manchurian. [ citation needed ] 
 Chow mein  - A popular dish combining noodles, vegetables,  scrambled egg , ginger and garlic, soy sauce, green chili sauce, red chili sauce and vinegar 
 Hong Kong Chicken 
 Jalfrezi Chicken 
 Lemon chicken 
 Hunan chicken 
 Sweet and Sour Chicken  - Different from the American Version of Sweet and Sour, but similar to  General Tso's Chicken . 
 Chop suey  American style & Chinese Style - Crispy Noodles with a variety of vegetables, chicken or meat and sauces. 
 Rice and noodles [ edit ] 
 Staple base options for an Indian Chinese meal include chicken,  shrimp  or vegetable variants of "Hakka" or "Schezwan"  noodles  popularly referred to as  chow mein ; and regular or "Schezwan"  fried rice .  American   chop suey  and  sweet and sour  dishes can be found at many restaurants. Some  South Indian   restaurants  have also come up with  spring rolls  and "Schezwan"  dosas .
 
 Sweets and desserts [ edit ] 
 Indian Chinese  dessert  options include  ice cream  on  honey -fried noodles or  date   pancakes .
 
 Availability [ edit ] 
 This section  needs additional citations for  verification .  Please help  improve this article  by  adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.   ( April 2009 )  ( Learn how and when to remove this template message ) 
 Indian or  Calcutta  Chinese food is readily available in major metropolitan areas of India such as  Kolkata  along with other towns and cities in  West Bengal ,  Mumbai ,  Chennai ,  Guwahati ,  Hyderabad ,  Delhi  and  Bangalore . It is also available in a number of towns and at  dhabas  (roadside stalls), also popularly referred to as "Fast food", adjacent to major Indian  roads  and  highways . Many restaurants have a Chinese section in their  menus , and some are even dedicated to serving Indian Chinese food. It can also be found in mobile  kitchen   carts  (lari or rekdi) that ply the streets of cities, prepared in  woks  over a portable  gas  burner. Manchurian sauce,  Schezwan sauce ,  soy sauce  and Hakka noodles are available in many stores in cities across the country.
 As of 2007, Chinese cuisine ranked as India's most favourite cuisine (after local food), growing at 9% annually. It is the most favoured option when young people go out to eat and the second favorite (after  south Indian cuisine ) when families dine out. [23] 
 Many overseas Indian restaurants in  the West  and the  Middle East  also cater to the overseas Indians'  nostalgic  taste for Indian Chinese food. [24]  The cuisine is also branching out into the mainstream in major cities of North America, such as  New York City ,  San Francisco ,  Seattle ,  Philadelphia ,  Chicago ,  Toronto ,  Los Angeles ,  Atlanta ,  Montreal ,  Phoenix  and  Vancouver . Chinese food in  Nairobi ,  Kenya , also tends to be of this style. It is also available in  Australia , especially in  Sydney  and  Melbourne . In many of these places, the restaurants are labelled as Hakka Chinese, when in fact the cuisine itself has very little resemblance to authentic  Hakka cuisine . "Hakka" label in these restaurants are usually referring to the owner's origins, and many Chinese restaurant owners in India were of  Hakka  origin. [ citation needed ] 
 
 See also [ edit ] 
 Chindian people 
 Pakistani Chinese cuisine 
 Fusion cuisine 
 Notes [ edit ] 
 
 
 ^   The spelling of "Schezwan" is not a mis-print; this is indeed how the term tends to be spelled in the Indo-Chinese kitchen rather than "Sichuan", "Szechuan" or "Szechwan". 
 
 
 References [ edit ] 
 
 
 ^   "Lunch Lesson: Getting schooled on Hakka Indian cuisine at Yueh Tung" . September 25, 2017 . Retrieved  22 January  2022 . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   e   f   Ding, Emily (Spring 2019). "Sunday Market, Tiretti Bazaar".  Virginia Quarterly Review .  95 : 12–13. 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   e   Sanjiv Khamgaonkar.  "Chinese food in India -- a fiery fusion of flavors" .  CNN . Retrieved  2020-10-16 . 
 
 ^   Sankar, Amal (2017-12-01).  "Creation of Indian–Chinese cuisine: Chinese food in an Indian city" .  Journal of Ethnic Foods .  4  (4): 268–273.  doi : 10.1016/j.jef.2017.10.002 .  ISSN   2352-6181 . 
 
 ^   Johnson, Ben (2015).  "The East India Company and its Role in Ruling India" .  Historic UK . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   e   "Food for Thought in India-China Ties".  Filipino Post . 30 July 2020. 
 
 ^   Acri, Andrea (20 December 2018).  "Maritime Buddhism" .  Oxford Research Encyclopedia of Religion .  Oxford :  Oxford University Press .  doi : 10.1093/acrefore/9780199340378.013.638 .  ISBN   9780199340378 .  Archived  from the original on 19 February 2019 . Retrieved  30 May  2021 . 
 
 ^  a   b   "Silk Road" .  World History Encyclopedia . Retrieved  2020-10-16 . 
 
 ^   "Buddhism in China | World History: A Comprehensive Reference Set - Credo Reference" . Retrieved  2020-10-16 . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   "Asia".  Funk & Wagnalls New World Encyclopedia . January 2018. 
 
 ^  a   b   c   "Education - Indian influences on Asia" .  Encyclopedia Britannica . Retrieved  2020-10-16 . 
 
 ^   Kenneth, Kiple (2000).  V.B.2. Southeast Asia: Cambridge World History of Food . Cambridge Press. 
 
 ^   "History of rice cultivation" .  Ricepedia . Retrieved  2020-10-16 . 
 
 ^  a   b   says, All Graduates | Japanese Translation Service (2015-05-05).  "Chinese food culture: Influences from within and without" .  Asia Dialogue . Retrieved  2020-10-16 . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   "Curry | food" .  Encyclopedia Britannica . Retrieved  2020-10-27 . 
 
 ^   Buchet, Jennifer (September 2019). "Momo, Yack and Dal Bhat--mmmm, How about That?".  Faces .  36 : 18. 
 
 ^   Brooks, Iris (August 2008). "Food Fit for a Dalai Lama".  Global Rhythm .  17 : 18–19. 
 
 ^   Deshpande, Shubada (October 25, 1999).  "Fare for the Desi Dragon" .  Rediff.com . Retrieved  2009-02-22 . 
 
 ^   "Schezwan Sauce" . 9 June 2021. 
 
 ^  a   b   "Manchurian chicken" .  The Straits Times . 2007-06-03. p. 77 – via NewspaperSG, National Library Board. Thng, Lay Teen (2007-06-03).  "Manchurian chicken" .  The Straits Times . Archived from  the original  on 2011-02-07 . Retrieved  2010-04-21 . 
 
 ^   Mukherjee, Sipra; Gooptu, Sarvani (2009). "The Chinese community of Calcutta".  In Banerjee, Himadri (ed.).  Calcutta Mosaic: Essays and Interviews on the Minority Communities of Calcutta . Anthem Press. pp. 131–142.  ISBN   978-81-905835-5-8 . 
 
 ^   Bhagat, Rasheeda (2007-05-04).  "Taste and disdain … A tour of the country's interesting eating habits with a roving journalist" .  The Hindu Businessline . Retrieved  2010-04-21 . 
 
 ^   M, Raja (October 30, 2007).  "India gets a taste for Chinese" .  Asia Times Online . Archived from  the original  on August 21, 2008 . Retrieved  2009-02-22 . 
 
 ^   Chopra, Sonia (September 3, 2001).  "Chinese food, Indian-style" .  Rediff.com  (US Edition) . Retrieved  2009-02-22 . 
 
 
 External links [ edit ] 
 The Hindu Business Line: The Chinese factor 
 
 
 v t e   China–India relations   Diplomatic posts 
 Embassy of China, New Delhi 
 Ambassadors of China to India 
 Embassy of India, Beijing 
 Ambassadors of India to China 
 Diplomacy 
 Greater East Asia Conference 
 Sino-Indian Agreement 1954 
 Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence 
 2007 Delhi security summit 
 Conflicts 
 Sino-Indian War 
 Origins of the Sino-Indian War 
 1962 Indian parliamentary resolution on China 
 Defence of India act and Defence of India rules, 1962 
 Forward policy 
 Internment of Chinese-Indians 
 Nathu La and Cho La clashes 
 1987 skirmish 
 2013 Depsang standoff 
 2017 border standoff 
 2020–2021 skirmishes 
 Timeline 
 Chinese Order of battle 
 Indian Order of battle 
 Sino-Indian border dispute 
 Aksai Chin 
 Dakpa Sheri 
 Dehra Compass 
 Depsang Bulge 
 Doklam 
 Dolam 
 Sirijap 
 Trans-Karakoram Tract 
 Sino-Pakistan Agreement 
 Line of Actual Control 
 Differing perceptions of the LAC 
 Infrastructure 
 Roads 
 Report of the Officials on the Boundary Question 
 Border Peace and Tranquility Agreement, 1993 
 Agreement on the Political Parameters and Guiding Principles, 2005 
 Border Defence Cooperation Agreement, 2013 
 India-China Joint Working Group on the boundary question 
 Special Representative mechanism on the India-China boundary question 
 Working Mechanism for Consultation and Coordination on India–China Border Affairs 
 Border Personnel Meeting Point 
 Economic relations 
 BRICS 
 BASIC 
 BCIM Economic Corridor 
 Shanghai Cooperation Organisation 
 Related 
 India–Hong Kong relations 
 India–Taiwan relations 
 India–Tibet relations 
 Five Fingers of Tibet 
 Chindia 
 Chinas 
 Cheena Bhavana 
 China–India railway 
 China Study Group 
 Tan Yun-Shan 
 Zhengyou 
 Cholas-Chinese relations 
 Tamil-Chinese relations 
   Category:China–India relations 
 v t e   Indian dishes  by  region North Mughlai 
 Mughlai kabab 
 Mughlai paratha 
 Murgh musallam 
 Pasanda 
 Qeema matar 
 Rezala 
 Punjabi 
 Amritsari papar warian 
 Chicken tikka 
 Chole bhature 
 Dal makhani 
 Lassi 
 Makki di roti 
 Sarson ka saag 
 Kashmiri 
 Noon chai 
 Rogan josh 
 Shab deg 
 Other 
 Aloo gobi 
 Aloo mutter 
 Baati 
 Baingan bartha 
 Barfi  ( Kaju barfi/Kaju katli ) 
 Bhatura 
 Butter chicken 
 Chana masala 
 Chapati 
 Churma 
 Dal baati 
 Dum aloo 
 Dopiaza 
 Egg curry 
 Haleem 
 Jeera aloo 
 Kachori 
 Kadai chicken 
 Kadhi 
 Kahwah 
 Keema 
 Khichra 
 Khichdi 
 Kulcha 
 Korma 
 Kulfi 
 Laal maans 
 Mattar paneer 
 Mirchi bada 
 Mutton curry 
 Naan 
 Nihari 
 Palak paneer 
 Pakora 
 Paneer tikka 
 Raita 
 Rajma 
 Rumali roti 
 Sai bhaji 
 Shahi paneer 
 Shami kebab 
 Tandoori chicken 
 Paneer tikka masala 
 South Hyderabadi 
 Baghara baingan 
 Hyderabadi biryani 
 Hyderabadi haleem 
 Hyderabadi marag 
 Lukhmi 
 Mirchi ka salan 
 Osmania Biscuit 
 Other 
 Aavakaaya 
 Appam  ( pesaha appam ) 
 Ariselu 
 Parotta 
 Aviyal 
 Benne dose 
 Bhajji 
 Bisi bele bath 
 Bonda 
 Chicken 65 
 Chicken Chettinad 
 Chakna 
 Curd rice 
 Dahi chutney 
 Dopiaza 
 Dosa 
 Double ka meetha 
 Fish moolie 
 Idiappam 
 Idli 
 Injipuli 
 Kaalan 
 Kakinada Kaja 
 Kanji 
 Kerala porotta 
 Koottu 
 Kozhukkattai 
 Kuzhambu 
 Murukku 
 Mysore Pak 
 Pachadi 
 Palathalikalu 
 Paniyaram 
 Parotta 
 Pesarattu 
 Payasam 
 Pootharekulu 
 Pongal 
 Ponganalu 
 Poriyal 
 Pulihora 
 Puttu 
 Rasam 
 Rice and curry 
 Sakinalu 
 Sambar 
 Sheer korma 
 Sevai 
 Ulava charu 
 Upma 
 Uttapam 
 Thalassery biryani 
 Vada 
 West Gujarati 
 Dhokla 
 Khakhra 
 Maharashtrian 
 Misal 
 Vada pav 
 Thalipeeth 
 Other 
 Akuri 
 Basundi 
 Bhakri 
 Bhel puri 
 Bombil fry 
 Chinese bhel 
 Chivda 
 Chouriço 
 Dahi vada 
 Dhansak 
 Doodhpak 
 Handvo 
 Kadboli 
 Khatkhate 
 Khandvi 
 Khichdi 
 Kombdi vade 
 Kuswar 
 Misal pav 
 Pav bhaji 
 Patoleo 
 Patra ni machhi 
 Pohe 
 Sabudana Khichadi 
 Sanna 
 Sevpuri 
 Shrikhand 
 Solkadhi 
 Sorpotel 
 Veg Kolhapuri 
 Vindaloo 
 Xacuti 
 East Bengali 
 Cham cham 
 Charchari 
 Jalfrezi 
 Indian Chinese cuisine 
 Kati roll 
 Luchi 
 Machher Jhol 
 Mishti doi 
 Pantua 
 Prawn malai curry 
 Rasgulla 
 Ras malai 
 Sandesh 
 Sorshe Ilish 
 Daab Chingri 
 Ashke pithe 
 Malpua 
 Kosha mangsho 
 Odia 
 Arisa pitha 
 Chakuli pitha 
 Chandrakanti 
 Charchari 
 Chhena gaja 
 Chhena jalebi 
 Chhena Jhili 
 Chhena kheeri 
 Chhena poda 
 Chingudi Jhola 
 Dahi baigana 
 Dahi Machha 
 Dahibara Aludam 
 Enduri pitha 
 Ghuguni 
 Kakara pitha 
 Kanika 
 Khira sagara 
 Khiri 
 Maachha Bihana 
 Manda pitha 
 Ouu khatta 
 Pakhala 
 Pitha 
 Podo pitha 
 Rasabali 
 Rasagola 
 Santula 
 Mathapuli 
 Bihari 
 Litti 
 Ghugni 
 Sattu 
 Khaja 
 Motichoor ka Ladoo 
 Tilkut 
 Anarsa 
 Regional ( Bhojpuri ,  Maithil ,  Magahi ) 
 Miscellaneous 
 Biryani 
 Chaat 
 Chutney 
 Dal 
 Falooda 
 Flattened rice 
 Gulab Jamun 
 Halwa 
 Indian pickle 
 Jalebi 
 Kheer 
 Kofta 
 Laddu 
 Mango pudding 
 Panipuri 
 Papadum 
 Paratha 
 Puri 
 Qeema 
 Roti 
 Sindhi biryani 
 Samosa 
 Shankarpali 
 Soan papdi 
 Zarda 
 Puri Bhaji 
 Indian diaspora 
 Chicken tikka masala 
 Fish head curry 
 Phall 
 Nasi kandar 
 Pasembur 
 Roti canai 
 
   Category 
   Commons 
   Cookbook 
   Food portal 
   India portal 
 
  
NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw2313
Cached time: 20230311170000
Cache expiry: 1814400
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc, no‐toc‐conversion]
CPU time usage: 0.582 seconds
Real time usage: 0.745 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3314/1000000
Post‐expand include size: 168045/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2964/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 11/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 109213/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.305/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 9008787/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/400
 
 
Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  517.059      1 -total
 36.09%  186.625      2 Template:Reflist
 20.69%  106.984     13 Template:Cite_web
 20.62%  106.619      2 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 16.51%   85.373      1 Template:Indian_cuisine
 14.11%   72.966      6 Template:Navbox
 10.30%   53.240      1 Template:China–India_relations
  9.40%   48.578      3 Template:More_citations_needed_section
  9.01%   46.606      1 Template:Short_description
  8.66%   44.780      3 Template:More_citations_needed
 
  Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:idhash:4126680-0!canonical and timestamp 20230311165959 and revision id 1143370906. Rendering was triggered because: page-view
  
 esi <esi:include src="/esitest-fa8a495983347898/content" />  
 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Indian_Chinese_cuisine&oldid=1143370906 " 
 Category :  Indian Chinese cuisine Hidden categories:  Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use Indian English from March 2014 All Wikipedia articles written in Indian English Articles needing additional references from April 2009 All articles needing additional references Articles needing additional references from April 2019 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2010 Articles with unsourced statements from April 2009 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  This page was last edited on 7 March 2023, at 09:47  (UTC) . 
 Text is available under the  Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0 ;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the  Terms of Use  and  Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the  Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. 
 
 
 Privacy policy 
 About Wikipedia 
 Disclaimers 
 Contact Wikipedia 
 Mobile view 
 Developers 
 Statistics 
 Cookie statement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
