
 
 
 Jump to content 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle sidebar 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Create account Log in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Personal tools 
 
 
 
 
   Create account   Log in 
 
 
 
 
		Pages for logged out editors  learn more 
 
 
 Contributions Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Navigation 
 
 
 Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate 
 
 
 
 
 Contribute 
 
 
 Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file 
 
 
 
 
 Tools 
 
 
 What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item 
 
 
 
 
 Print/export 
 
 
 Download as PDF Printable version 
 
 
 
 
 Languages 
 
 On this Wikipedia the language links are at the top of the page across from the article title.  Go to top . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CentralNotice  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Contents 
 move to sidebar 
 hide 
 
 
 
 
 (Top) 
 
 
 
 
 
 1 Background: History, Tradition, and Harvest 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 Indigenous cuisine of North America 
 
 
				Toggle Indigenous cuisine of North America subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 2.1 Country food 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.2 Eastern Native American cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.3 Southeastern Native American cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.3.1 Selected dishes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.4 Great Plains Native American cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.5 Western Indigenous cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.6 Southwestern Indigenous cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.7 Alaska Native cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.8 Dishes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.9 Restaurants 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 Indigenous cuisine of the Circum-Caribbean 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4 Indigenous cuisine of Mesoamerica 
 
 
				Toggle Indigenous cuisine of Mesoamerica subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 4.1 Some known dishes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5 Indigenous cuisine of South America 
 
 
				Toggle Indigenous cuisine of South America subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 5.1 Andean cultures 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5.2 Other South American cultures 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6 Cooking utensils 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 7 Crops and ingredients 
 
 
				Toggle Crops and ingredients subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 7.1 Non-animal foods 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 7.2 Hunted or livestock 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8 Notable chefs and food writers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 9 See also 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 10 References 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 11 Bibliography 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 12 External links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
						Toggle the table of contents
					 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle the table of contents 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Indigenous cuisine of the Americas 
 
 
 
 
 8 languages 
 
 
 
 Français Հայերեն Italiano Nederlands Русский Simple English Svenska Українська 
 Edit links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Article Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 English 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 More 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
 
 
 Food and drink of peoples Indigenous to the Americas 
 
 
   Wild rice  is a native traditional food of Minnesota, Wisconsin, Michigan, and some areas of North Dakota. [1] 
 Part of a series on Native Americans  
in the United States 
 History 
 Paleo-Indians 
 Lithic stage 
 Archaic period in the Americas 
 Formative stage 
 Classic stage 
 Post-Classic stage 
 Woodland period 
 Age of Discovery 
 European colonization of the Americas 
 Population history of Indigenous peoples of the Americas 
 Slavery 
 Slavery in the United States 
 Partus sequitur ventrem 
 Indian Removal Act 
 Trail of Tears 
 Native American slave ownership 
 Indian Territory 
 American Civil War 
 Dawes Rolls 
 Cultural assimilation of Native Americans 
 Indian Appropriations Act 
 Racial Integrity Act 
 Indian Citizenship Act of 1924 
 Indian Reorganization Act of 1934 
 Jim Crow laws 
 Blood quantum laws 
 Native Americans and World War II 
 American Indian boarding schools 
 Civil rights movement  /  Native American Rights Fund 
 Red Power movement 
 Native American rights 
 Alcohol and Native Americans 
 Native American temperance activists 
 
 
 Culture 
 Mississippian culture 
 Adena culture 
  Hohokam culture 
 Iroquois culture 
 Art 
 Food 
 Music 
 Pow wow 
 Dance 
 Film 
 Indigenous Peoples' Day 
 Literature 
 Fashion 
 Neighborhoods 
 Health 
 Tribal sovereignty 
 
 
 Wars 
 Beaver Wars 
 Anglo-Powhatan Wars 
 Pequot War 
 Kieft's War 
 Peach Tree War 
 Esopus Wars 
 King Philip's War 
 Tuscarora War 
 Yamasee War 
 Dummer's War 
 Pontiac's War 
 Lord Dunmore's War 
 American Revolutionary War 
 Cherokee–American wars 
 Northwest Indian War 
 War of 1812 
 Creek War 
 Arikara War 
 Seminole Wars  /  Second Seminole War 
 Osage Indian War  
 American Civil War 
 Texas–Indian wars (1836–1877)  /  Comanche Wars (1836–1877)  /  (1858)|Antelope Hills expedition  /  Comanche Campaign (1867–1875)  /  Red River War (1874–1875)  /  Buffalo Hunters' War (1876–1877) 
 Cayuse War 
 Apache Wars (1849–1924)  /  Jicarilla War (1849–1855)  /  Chiricahua Wars (1860–1886)  /  Tonto War (1871–1875)  /  Victorio's War (1879–1880)  /  Geronimo's War (1881–1886)  /  Post 1887 Apache Wars period (1887–1924) 
 Yuma War 
 Ute Wars(1850–1923)  /  Battle at Fort Utah (1850)  /  Walker War (1853–1854)  /  Tintic War (1856)  /  Black Hawk War (1865–1872)  /  White River War (1879)  /  Ute War (1887)  /  Bluff War (1914–1915)  /  Bluff Skirmish (1921) 
 Posey War (1923) 
 Sioux Wars (1854–1891)  /  First Sioux War (1854-1856)  /  Dakota War (1862)  /  Colorado War (1863–1865)  /  Powder River War (1865)  /  Red Cloud's War (1866–1868)  /  Great Sioux War (1876–1877)  /  Northern Cheyenne Exodus (1878-1879)  /  Ghost Dance War (1890–1891) 
 Rogue River Wars (1855–1856) 
 Yakima War (1855–1858)  /  Puget Sound War (1855–1856)  /  Coeur d'Alene War (1858) 
  Mohave War(1858–1859) 
 Navajo Wars (1849–1866) 
 Paiute War(1860) 
 Yavapai Wars(1861–1875) 
 Snake War (1864–1869) 
 Hualapai War (1865–1870) 
 Modoc War (1872–1873) 
 Nez Perce War (1877) 
 Bannock War (1878) 
 Crow War (1887) 
 Bannock Uprising (1895) 
 Yaqui Uprising (1896) 
 Battle of Sugar Point (1898) 
 Crazy Snake Rebellion (1909) 
 Last Massacre (1911) 
 Battle of Kelley Creek (1911) 
 Battle of Bear Valley (1918) 
 
 
 Political movements 
 Civil rights movement 
 Self-determination 
 Nationalism 
 American Indian Movement (AIM) 
 Red Power Movement 
 Occupation of Alcatraz 
 Trail of Broken Treaties 
 Occupation of Wounded Knee 
 MMIW  ( Red handprint ) 
 
 
 Religion 
 American Indian Religious Freedom Act 
 Christianity 
 Eagle Feather law 
 Traditional religions 
 Native American church 
 Sun Dance 
 Longhouse Religion 
 
 
 Groups 
 National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP) 
 Native American Rights Fund (NARF) 
 National Congress of American Indians 
 National Indian Youth Council (NIYC) 
 Women of All Red Nations (WARN) 
 The International Indian Treaty Council (IITC) 
 
 
 Ethnic subdivisions 
 Black Indians 
 Indigenous peoples of the Americas 
 Louisiana Creole 
 
 
 Languages 
 English 
 American English 
 Native American languages 
 
 
 Demographics 
 Neighborhoods 
 Societal statistics 
 Reservations 
 Tribal disenrollment 
 Reservation poverty 
 
 
 Geography 
by region 
 
 Great Basin 
 Northeastern Woodlands 
 Northwest Plateau 
 Pacific Northwest 
 The Great Plains 
 Southeastern Woodlands 
 Southwest 
 
 
by state 
 
 Alaska 
 Arizona 
 California 
 Colorado 
 Florida 
 Hawaii 
 Iowa 
 Maryland 
 Michigan 
 Nebraska 
 North Carolina 
 Oklahoma 
 Oregon 
 Virginia 
 Wisconsin 
 
 
 
 Lists 
 Native Americans 
 artists 
 actors 
 war leaders 
 musicians 
 congressional politicians 
 Native American Medal of Honor recipients 
 List of federally recognized tribes 
 List of federally recognized tribes by state  
 List of Indian reservations in the United States 
 
 v t e 
 Indigenous cuisine of the Americas  includes all  cuisines  and  food  practices of the  Indigenous peoples of the Americas . Contemporary Native peoples retain a varied culture of traditional foods, along with the addition of some post-contact foods that have become customary and even iconic of present-day Indigenous American social gatherings (for example,  frybread ). Foods like  cornbread ,  turkey ,  cranberry ,  blueberry ,  hominy  and  mush  have been adopted into the cuisine of the broader United States population from Native American cultures.
 In other cases, documents from the early periods of Indigenous American contact with European, African, and Asian peoples have allowed the recovery and revitalization of Indigenous food practices that had formerly passed out of popularity.
 The most important Indigenous American crops have generally included  Indian corn  (or  maize , from the  Taíno  name for the plant), beans, squash, pumpkins, sunflowers, wild rice, sweet potatoes, tomatoes, peppers, peanuts, avocados, papayas, potatoes and chocolate. [1] 
 Indigenous cuisine of the Americas uses domesticated and wild native ingredients. [2]  As the Americas cover a large range of  biomes , and there are more than 574 currently  federally recognized  Native American tribes in the US alone, Indigenous cuisine can vary significantly by region and culture. [3] [ failed verification ] [4]  For example, North American Native cuisine differs from  Southwestern  and  Mexican cuisine  in its simplicity and directness of flavor.
 
 
 Background: History, Tradition, and Harvest [ edit ] 
 Native Americans located in the forests and woodlands had a wide variety of plant options. Native Americans who gathered much of the forest had access to many of the sustainable resources including, fleshy fruits, roots and tubers, and greens. Available greenery changed year to year, depending on weather conditions and the production cycle of perennial resources such as nut-bearing trees.
 A popular source of meat, that offered a great amount of nutrition that Native Americans hunted were Bison, which were most  traditional and important  for the  Plains Indians  in the area between the  Mississippi River  and the  Rocky Mountains .
 Each Native American territory encompasses considerable regional and temporal variation in topography, climate, and ecology. There have also been temporal and regional differences in Native American lifeways, including their subsistence practices and preparation.
 Recipes were initially passed down through oral tradition. Over a period of hundreds of years, some tribes migrated into different  climate zones , so by the time European settlers recorded these recipes the cuisine had probably adapted to use local ingredients. Some anthropologists propose that the southwestern  Eastern Pueblo ,  Hopi  and  Zuni  may have retained more of the original elements. [5] 
 
 Indigenous cuisine of North America [ edit ] 
 Further information:  Eastern Agricultural Complex 
 Country food [ edit ] 
 For the American sense of the term, see  Cuisine of the Southern United States . 
 See also:  Inuit cuisine 
 Indigenous peoples in Canada 
 First Nations 
 Inuit 
 Métis 
 
 History 
 Timeline 
 Paleo-Indians 
 Pre-colonization 
 Genetics 
 Residential schools 
 gravesites 
 Indian hospitals 
 Conflicts 
 First Nations 
 Inuit 
 Truth and Reconciliation Commission 
 
 Politics 
 Indigenous law 
 British Columbia Treaty Process 
 Crown and Indigenous peoples 
 Health Policy 
 Idle No More 
 Indian Act 
 Indigenous and Northern Affairs Canada 
 Land Back 
 Land claims 
 Land defender 
 Land title 
 Missing and murdered Indigenous women 
 Numbered Treaties 
 Royal Commission 
 Self-government 
 Specific claims 
 Treaty rights 
 Case law 
 Organizations 
 Politics 
 
 Culture 
 Art 
 Indigenous cultures 
 Indigenous personalities 
 Country food 
 Music 
 
 Demographics 
 Indian reserves 
 AB
 FN 
 Métis 
 Atlantic CA 
 BC 
 MB 
 ON 
 QC 
 SK 
 Territories 
 Pacific Coast 
 
 Linguistics 
 Indigenous languages 
 Inuit languages 
 Chinuk Wawa 
 Indigenous English Dialects 
 NAPA 
 Aboriginal syllabics 
 Chinuk pipa 
 Inuit grammar 
 
 Religions 
 Traditional beliefs 
 Inuit religion 
 
 Index 
 Index of articles 
 Indigenous 
 First Nations 
 Inuit 
 Métis 
 Stubs 
 
   Indigenous North Americas   Canada portal v t e 
 Country food, in Canada, refers to the   traditional diets  of the  Indigenous peoples in Canada  (known in Canada as  First Nations ,  Metis , and  Inuit ), especially in remote  northern regions  where  Western food  is an expensive import, and  traditional foods  are still relied upon. [6] [7] [8] 
 The Government of the  Northwest Territories  estimated in 2015 that nearly half of Northwest Territories residents in smaller communities relied on country food for 75% of their meat and fish intake; in larger communities the percentage was lower, with the lowest percentage relying on country foods (4%) being in  Yellowknife , the capital and only "large community".
 The most common country foods in the Northwest Territories' area include mammals and birds (caribou, moose, ducks, geese, seals, hare, grouse, ptarmigan), fish (lake trout, char,  inconnu , whitefish, pike, burbot) and berries (blueberries, cranberries, blackberries, cloudberries). [9] 
 In the eastern  Canadian Arctic , Inuit consume  a diet  of foods that are fished, hunted, and gathered locally. This may include  caribou ,  walrus ,  ringed seal ,  bearded seal ,  beluga whale ,  polar bear ,  berries , and  fireweed .
 The cultural value attached to certain game species, and certain parts, varies.  For example, in the  James Bay  region, a 1982 study found that beluga whale meat was principally used as dog food, whereas the blubber, or  muktuk  was a "valued delicacy". [10]   Value also varies by age, with Inuit preferring younger ring seals, and often using the older ones for dog food. [11] 
 Contaminants in country foods are a public health concern in Northern Canada; volunteers are tested to track the spread of industrial chemicals from emitters (usually in the South) into the northern food web via the air and water. [12] 
 In 2017, the Government of the Northwest Territories committed to using country foods in the soon-to-open Stanton Territorial Hospital, despite the challenges of obtaining, inspecting, and preparing sufficient quantities of wild game and plants. [13] 
 In  Southern Canada , wild foods (especially meats) are relatively rare in restaurants, due to  wildlife conservation  rules against selling hunted meat, as well as strict  meat inspection rules . There is a  cultural divide  between  rural and remote  communities that rely on wild foods, and urban Canadians (the majority), who have little or no experience with them. [14] 
 
   A 19th-century illustration, "Sugar-Making Among the Indians in the North". Aboriginal peoples living in the northeastern part of North America were the first people known to have produced  maple syrup  and  maple sugar 
 Eastern Native American cuisine [ edit ] 
 Further information:  Three Sisters (agriculture) 
   Corn was a vital source of food for Indigenous communities across the Northern Hemisphere. Sophisticated farming techniques were used to cultivate the crop throughout the American continent. 
 The essential staple foods of the  Indigenous peoples of the Eastern Woodlands  have traditionally been corn (also known as maize),  beans , and  squash , known as " The Three Sisters " because they were planted interdependently: the beans grew up the tall stalks of the corn, while the squash spread out at the base of the three plants and provided protection and support for the root systems.
 Maple syrup  is another essential food staple of the Eastern Woodlands peoples.  Tree sap is collected from sugar maple trees during the beginning of springtime when the nights are still cold. [15]  Birch bark containers are used in the process of making maple syrup, maple cakes, maple sugar, and maple taffy.  When the sap is boiled to a certain temperature, the different variations of maple food products are created. When the sap starts to thicken, it can be poured into the snow to make taffy. [16] 
 Since the first colonists of  New England  had to adapt their foods to the local crops and resources, the Native influences of  Southern New England Algonquian cuisine  form a significant part of  New England cuisine  with dishes such as  cornbread ,  succotash  and  Johnnycakes  and ingredients such as  corn ,  cranberries  and local species of  clam  still enjoyed in the region today. [17] 
 The  Wabanaki  tribal nations and other eastern woodlands peoples have made  nut milk  and  infant formula  made from nuts and cornmeal, [18] [19] [20]  while the Cherokee nation made  Kanuchi  soup from hickory nuts. [21] 
 
 Southeastern Native American cuisine [ edit ] 
 Southeastern Native American  culture has formed the cornerstone of  Southern cuisine  from its origins through the present day. From Southeastern Native American culture came one of the main staples of the Southern diet:  corn  (maize), either ground into meal or limed with an alkaline salt to make  hominy , using a Native American technique known as  nixtamalization . [22]  Corn is used to make all kinds of dishes from the familiar  cornbread  and grits.
 Though a less important staple,  potatoes  were also adopted from Native American cuisine and have been used in many ways similar to corn. Native Americans introduced the first non-Native American Southerners to many other vegetables still familiar on southern tables.  Squash ,  pumpkin , many types of  beans ,  tomatoes , many types of  peppers , and  sassafras  all came to the settlers via Indigenous peoples. The Virginia  Algonquian  word  pawcohiccora  means  hickory -nut meat or a  nut milk  drink made from it.
 Many  fruits  are available in this region.  Muscadines ,  blackberries ,  raspberries , and many other wild berries were part of Southern Native Americans' diet.
 
 To a far greater degree than anyone realizes, several of the most important food dishes of the Southeastern Indians live on today in the "soul food" eaten by both black and white Southerners. Hominy, for example, is still eaten ... Sofkee live on as grits ... cornbread [is] used by Southern cooks ... Indian fritters ... variously known as "hoe cake", ... or "Johnny cake." ... Indians boiled cornbread is present in Southern cuisine as "corn meal dumplings", ... and as "hush puppies", ... Southerns cook their beans and field peas by boiling them, as did the Indians ... like the Indians they cure their meat and smoke it over hickory coals. —  Charles Hudson,  The Southeastern Indians [23] 
 Southeastern Native Americans traditionally supplement their diets with meats derived from the hunting of native game.  Venison  has always been an important meat staple, due to the abundance of  white-tailed deer  in the area.  Rabbits ,  squirrels ,  opossums , and  raccoons  are also common.
 Livestock , adopted from Europeans, in the form of  hogs  and  cattle , are also kept. Aside from the more commonly consumed parts of the animal, it is traditional to also eat organ meats such as  liver ,  brains , and  intestines . This tradition remains today in hallmark dishes like  chitterlings , commonly called chitlins, which are the fried large  intestines  of  hogs ;  livermush , a common dish in the Carolinas made from hog liver; and pork brains and eggs. The fat of the animals, particularly of hogs, is traditionally rendered and used for cooking and frying. Many of the early settlers were taught Southeastern Native American cooking methods.
 
 Selected dishes [ edit ] 
 Chitterling  ( Chitlin ), usually made from the large intestines of a hog 
 Cornbread 
 Hominy , coarsely ground corn used to make grits 
 Hush puppy , small, savory, deep-fried round ball made from cornmeal-based batter 
 Indian fritter 
 Kanuchi , soup made from ground hickory nuts 
 Livermush , pig liver, parts of pig heads, cornmeal and spices 
 Sofkee, corn soup or drink, sour [24] 
 Great Plains Native American cuisine [ edit ] 
 Indigenous peoples of the Great Plains and Canadian Prairies or  Plains Indians  have historically relied heavily on  American bison  (American buffalo) as a staple food source. One traditional method of preparation is to cut the meat into thin slices then dry it, either over a slow fire or in the hot sun, until it is hard and brittle. In this form it can last for months, making it a main ingredient to be combined with other foods, or eaten on its own.
 One such use could be  pemmican , a concentrated mixture of fat and protein, and fruits such as  cranberries ,  Saskatoon berries ,  blueberries ,  cherries ,  chokecherries , and  currants  are sometimes added.  Many parts of the bison were utilized and prepared in numerous ways, including: "boiled meat, tripe soup perhaps thickened with brains, roasted intestines, jerked/smoked meat, and raw kidneys, liver, tongue sprinkled with gall or bile were eaten immediately after a kill." [25] 
 The animals that Great Plains Indians consumed, like bison, deer, and antelope, were grazing animals. Due to this, they were high in  omega-3  fatty acids, an essential acid that many diets lack. [26] 
 When asked to state traditional staple foods, a group of Plains elders identified prairie turnips ( Psoralea esculenta ), called timpsula or Tin'psila in the Lakota language group; fruits ( chokecherries ,  June berries ,  plums ,  blueberries ,  cranberries ,  strawberries ,  buffalo berries ,  gooseberries );  potatoes ;  squash ; dried meats ( venison ,  buffalo ,  jack rabbit ,  pheasant , and  prairie chicken ); and  wild rice  as being these staple foods. [27] 
 "We landed at a Watlala village 200 men of Flatheads of 25 houses 50 canoes built of Straw, we were treated verry kindly by them, they gave us round root near the size of a hens egg roasted which they call Wap-to (wapato) to eate . . . . which they roasted in the embers until they became Soft"
 —William Clark, Lewis and Clark Expedition
 Wapato ( Sagittaria latifolia ) has a number of varieties and is found growing in damp marsh area around ponds, lakes, rivers, and streams.  The edible rhizomes were gathered and could be roasted in the embers of a fire, or dried, ground and the meal pressed into a cake which "served well as bread" as noted by Meriwether Lewis of the Lewis and Clark Expedition.  They are known today as broadleaf arrowhead, arrowhead, duckroot, or duck-potato.
 
 Western Indigenous cuisine [ edit ] 
 In the  Pacific Northwest , traditional diets include salmon and other fish, seafood, mushrooms, berries, and meats such as deer, duck, and rabbit.
 In contrast to the Easterners, the Northwestern peoples are traditionally hunter-gatherers, primarily. The generally mild climate led to the development of an  economy based on year-round abundant food supplies, rather than having to rely upon seasonal agriculture.
 In what is now California,  acorns  can be ground into a flour that has at times served as the principal foodstuff for about 75 percent of the population, [28]  and dried meats can be prepared during the dry season. [29] 
 
 Southwestern Indigenous cuisine [ edit ] 
 Ancestral Puebloans  of the present-day Four Corners region of the United States, comprising  Arizona ,  Colorado ,  New Mexico , and  Utah , initially practiced subsistence agriculture by cultivating  maize ,  beans ,  squash ,  sunflower seeds , and  pine nuts  from the  pinyon pine , and game meat including  venison  and  cuniculture , and freshwater fish such as  Rio Grande cutthroat trout  and  rainbow trout  are also traditional foods in the region. [ citation needed ] 
 Ancestral Puebloans are also known for their basketry and pottery, indicating both an agricultural surplus that needed to be carried and stored, and clay pot cooking. Grinding stones have been used to grind maize into meal for cooking. Archaeological digs indicate a very early domestication of  turkeys  for food. [ citation needed ] 
 New Mexican cuisine  is heavily rooted in both  Pueblo  and  Hispano  food traditions, and is a prevalent cuisine in the American Southwest, especially in  New Mexico . [ citation needed ] 
 The 2002  Foods of the Southwest Indian Nations  won a  James Beard Award , the first Native American cookbook so honored. [30] [31]  Publishers had told the author,  Lois Ellen Frank , that there was no such thing as Native American cuisine. [32] 
 
 Alaska Native cuisine [ edit ] 
 Alaska Native  cuisine consists of nutrient-dense foods such as seal, fish (salmon), and moose.  Along with these, berries (huckleberries) and bird eggs are traditionally consumed by Alaska Natives. [33] 
 Seal, walruses, and polar bear are the large game that Alaska Natives hunt. Smaller game includes whitefish,  Arctic char ,  Arctic hare , and ptarmigan.
 Due to weather, edible plants like berries are only available to be consumed in the summer, so the people have a diet very high in fat and protein, but low in carbohydrates.
 The game that is hunted is also used for clothing. The intestines of large mammals are used to make waterproof clothing and caribou fur is used to make warm clothing. [34] 
 
 Dishes [ edit ] 
   Cornbread 
   Succotash 
   Drying  salmon  filets 
 Acorn  bread 
 Acorn mush , from the  Miwok  people [35] 
 Akutaq , also called "Eskimo ice cream", made from caribou or moose tallow and meat, berries, seal oil, and sometimes fish, whipped together with snow or water 
 Bannock , a bread of European origin, cooked over an open fire 
 Bean bread, made with corn meal and beans, popular among the  Cherokee [36] 
 Bird brain stew, from the  Cree  nation [37] 
 Black drink  or  asi , a Southeastern ceremonial drink made from the  yaupon holly 
 Buffalo stew, from the Lakota and Cherokee people, also called  tanka-me-a-lo [38] 
 Chinook olives , a type of cured acorn eaten by the aboriginal people of the Columbia River Valley 
 Cornbread  and  corn pone —the word  pone  derives from the word for 'bread' in some  Eastern Algonquian languages , such as  Powhatan   apon [39]  and  Lenape   ahpòn [40] 
 Dried meats  like  jerky  and smoked  salmon  strips 
 Filé  powder, made from sassafras leaves, used by the  Choctaw  for flavoring and thickening soups and stews as well as for herbal medicine 
 Frybread , a dish made from ingredients distributed to Native Americans living on  reservations 
 Green chili stew 
 Hopi tea , an  herbal tea  made from  Thelesperma megapotamicum 
 Mutton stew, from the Navajo people 
 Nokake ,  Algonquian   hoecakes , made of cornmeal 
 Nut milk , from the  Wabanaki [18] 
 Pemmican , a concentrated food consisting of dried pulverized meat, dried berries, and rendered fat. [41] [42] [43] 
   Pemmican Ball 
 Piki bread , from the  Hopi  people 
 Psindamoakan , a  Lenape  hunter's food made of parched cornmeal mixed with maple sugar 
 Pueblo bread [44] 
 Salted salmon , an Inuit dish of brined  salmon  in a heavy concentration of salt water, left for months to soak up salts 
 Sapan  ( pronounced  [ˈsaːpːʌn] ), [45]   cornmeal mush , a staple of Lenape cuisine 
 Stink fish, an Inuit dish of dried fish, kept underground until ripe, for later consumption; also done with fish heads 
 Succotash , a dish of beans and corn 
 Sumac lemonade, [46]  a Native American beverage made from  sumac  berries 
 Tiswin , a term used for several  fermented beverages  in the Southwest, including a corn or fruit beer of the  Apache  and a  saguaro  fruit beer of the  Tohono O'odham 
 Walrus flipper soup, an Inuit dish made from  walrus  flippers 
 Wojapi , a  Plains Indian  pudding of mashed, cooked berries 
 Restaurants [ edit ] 
 
 
 
 
 Indian Pueblo Kitchen (Albuquerque, NM)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tocabe (Denver, CO)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mitsitam Native Foods Café (Washington, D.C.)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Owamni (Minneapolis, MN)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Thirty Nine Restaurant (Oklahoma City, OK)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cafe Ohlone (Berkeley, CA)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Café Gozhóó (Whiteriver, Navajo County, AZ)
 
 
 
 
 Indigenous cuisine of the Circum-Caribbean [ edit ] 
   Jerk chicken  with  plaintains ,  rice  and  honey  biscuit 
 This region comprises the cultures of the  Arawaks , the  Caribs , and the  Ciboney . The  Taíno  of the  Greater Antilles  were the first  New World  people to encounter Columbus. Prior to European contact, these groups foraged, hunted, and fished. The Taíno cultivated  cassava ,  sweet potato ,  maize ,  beans ,  squash ,  pineapple ,  peanut , and  peppers . Today these cultural groups have mostly assimilated into the surrounding population, but their culinary legacy lives on.
 
 Ajiaco , same as pepperpot, a soup believed to have originated in Cuba before Columbus' arrival. The soup mixes a variety of meats, tubers, and peppers. 
 Barbacoa , the origin of the English word  barbecue , a method of slow-grilling meat over a fire pit. 
 Jerk , a style of cooking meat that originated with the Taíno of  Jamaica . Meat was applied with a dry rub of  allspice ,  Scotch bonnet pepper , and perhaps additional spices, before being smoked over fire or wood charcoal. 
 Casabe , a crispy, thin flatbread made from cassava root widespread in the Pre-Columbian Caribbean and Amazonia. 
 Bammy , a Jamaican bread made from cassava and water, today this bread is fried and made with coconut milk. 
 Guanime , a  Puerto Rican  food similar to the  tamale ; made with cornmeal or cornmeal and mashed cassave together. 
 Pasteles , a dish that may have also been called  hallaca  and originated from Puerto Rico.  Pasteles  were once made with cassava and  taro  mashed into a  masa  onto a taro leaf. They are then stuffed with meat and wrapped. 
 Funche  or  fungi , a cornmeal mush. 
 Cassareep , a sauce, condiment, or thickening agent made by boiling down the extracted juices of bitter cassava root. 
 Mama Juana , a tea made in  Hispaniola  (Dominican Republic and Haiti). 
 Pepperpot , a spicy stew of Taíno origin based on meat, vegetables, chili peppers, and boiled-down cassava juice, with a legacy stretching from  Cuba ,  Colombia  coast and to  Guyana . 
 Bush teas , popular as herbal remedies in the  Virgin Islands  and other parts of the Caribbean, often derived from indigenous sources, such as ginger thomas,  soursop , inflammation bush,  kenip ,  wormgrass, worry wine, and many other leaves, barks, and herbs. 
 Ouicou , a fermented, cassava-based beer brewed by the Caribs of the  Lesser Antilles . [ citation needed ] 
 Taumali  or taumalin, a Carib sauce made from the green liver meat of lobsters, chile pepper, and lime juice. 
 Indigenous cuisine of Mesoamerica [ edit ] 
   Tamales 
   Pupusas 
 Main articles:  Aztec cuisine  and  Maya cuisine 
 The pre- conquest  cuisine of the  Indigenous peoples  of  Mesoamerica  made a major contribution to shaping modern-day  Mexican cuisine ,  Salvadoran cuisine ,  Honduran cuisine ,  Guatemalan cuisine . The cultures involved included the  Aztec ,  Maya ,  Olmec ,  Pipil  and many more (see the  List of pre-Columbian civilizations ).
 
 Some known dishes [ edit ] 
 
 Alegría , a candy made from puffed amaranth and boiled-down  honey  or  maguey  sap, in ancient times formed into the shapes of  Aztec  gods 
 Balché , Mayan fermented honey drink 
 Champurrado , a chocolate drink [47] 
 Chili 
 Corn tortillas 
 Guacamole 
 Huarache 
 Mezcal 
 Mole 
 Pejelagarto , a fish with an alligator-like head seasoned with amashito chile and lime  [48] [ better source needed ] 
 Pozole 
 Pulque  or  octli , an alcoholic beverage of fermented  maguey  juice 
 Pupusas , thick cornmeal flatbread from the  Pipil  culture of  El Salvador 
 Salsa 
 Tacos 
 Tamales 
 Tepache , pineapple beer 
 Tlacoyos  ( gordita ) 
 Xocolātl 
 
 Indigenous cuisine of South America [ edit ] 
   Roast  guinea pig  ( cuy ) 
   Ceviche 
   Cheese-filled  arepa 
   Chipa , cheese bread 
 Andean cultures [ edit ] 
 Main articles:  Inca cuisine  and  Muisca cuisine 
 This currently includes recipes known from the  Quechua ,  Aymara  and  Nazca  of the  Andes .
 
 Grilled guinea pig , a native to most of the  Andes  region, this small rodent has been cultivated for at least 4000 years. 
 Fried green tomatoes , a nightshade relative native to  Peru . 
 Saraiaka , a corn liquor. 
 Chicha , a generic name for any number of Indigenous beers found in South America. Though  chichas  made from various types of corn are the most common in the Andes,  chicha  in the  Amazon Basin  frequently use  manioc . Variations found throughout the continent can be based on  amaranth ,  quinoa ,  peanut ,  potato ,  coca , and many other ingredients. 
 Chicha morada , a  Peruvian , sweet, unfermented drink made from purple corn, fruits, and spices. 
 Colada morada , a thickened, spiced fruit drink based on the  Andean blackberry , traditional to the  Day of the Dead  ceremonies held in  Ecuador , it is typically served with  guagua de pan , a bread shaped like a swaddled infant (formerly made from  cornmeal  in Pre-Columbian times), though other shapes can be found in various regions. 
 Quinoa   porridge . 
 Ch'arki , a type of dried meat. 
 Humitas , similar to modern-day  tamales , a thick mixture of corn, herbs and onion, cooked in a corn-leaf wrapping. The name is modern, meaning bow-tie, because of the shape in which it's wrapped. 
 Locro  (from the Quechua  ruqru ) is a hearty thick stew popular along the Andes mountain range. It one of the national dishes of Argentina and Bolivia. 
 Mazamorra morada , a thick, sweet pudding made from ground purple corn and fruit. Sold in mix form in Peru. [49] 
 Mate de coca , a Peruvian tea made from steeped  coca leaves . It is commonly sipped by Indigenous people living at high altitudes in the Andes to prevent elevation illnesses. 
 Pachamanca , stew cooked in a  hautía  oven. 
 Papa a la Huancaína , Peruvian potatoes covered in a spicy, peanut-based sauce called  Huancaína  (Wan-ka-EE-na) sauce. 
 Patasca , spicy stew made from boiled maize, potatoes, and dried meat. [50] 
 Ceviche , raw fish marinated in lime juice. One of  Peru 's national dishes. 
 Cancha  or  tostada , fried golden  hominy . 
 Llajwa ,  salsa  of  Bolivia . 
 Llapingachos , mashed-potato cakes from  Ecuador . 
 Tocosh  ( togosh ), a traditional Quechua food prepared from fermented potato pulp. 
 Other South American cultures [ edit ] 
 Angu , an Indigenous Brazilian type of corn mush. 
 Arepa , a maize-based bread originating from the Indigenous peoples of  Colombia  and  Venezuela . 
 Vori vori , a Paraguayan soup with cornmeal dumplings. 
 Cauim , a fermented beverage based on maize or  manioc  broken down by the enzymes of human saliva, traditional to the  Tupinambá  and other  indigenous peoples of Brazil . 
 Chipa , a wide variety of corn flour or  manioc -based breads traditional to  Paraguay . 
 Curanto , a  Chilean  stew cooked in an earthen oven originally from the  Chono  people of  Chiloé Island . 
 Kaguyjy , a Guarani-derived  locro  corn mush that become part of the national Paraguayan cuisine. 
 Kiveve , a sweet or savory dish from Paraguay consisting of puréed pumpkin and other ingredients cooked over a fire. 
 Lampreado  or  payaguá mascada , a starchy, manioc-based fried cake from Paraguay and the northeast of  Argentina . 
 Lapacho  or  taheebo , a medicinal tree-bark infusion. 
 Maniçoba , dish of boiled manioc leaves and smoked meat indigenous to the Brazilian  Amazon . 
 Mate  (beverage) . 
 Mbeju , a pan-cooked cake utilizing manioc starch. 
 Merken , an  ají  powder from the  Mapuche  of  Patagonia . 
 Mocotó , a  Brazilian  stew with cow's feet, beans, and vegetables. 
 Moqueca , a Brazilian seafood stew. 
 Paçoca , from the Tupi "to crumble," describes two different dishes of pulverized ingredients: one with peanuts and sugar, and the other with dried meat, ground manioc, and onion. 
 Pamonha , a Brazilian  tamale . 
 Pira caldo ,  Paraguayan  fish soup. 
 Sopa paraguaya , a corn-flour casserole esteemed as the national dish of Paraguay, related to  chipa guasu . 
 Soyo , shortened from the Guarani name  so’o josopy , a Paraguayan soup based on meat crushed in a mortar. 
 Tacacá , a Brazilian stew of  tucupi ,  jambu  leaves, and shrimp, typically served in a dried gourd. 
 Tereré  or  ka'ay , a cold-brewed version of  yerba mate . 
 Tucupi ,  manioc -based broth used in Brazilian dishes such as  pato no tucupi  and  tacacá . 
 Yerba mate , a tea made from the holly of the same name, derived from  Guaraní . 
 Cooking utensils [ edit ] 
   Metate  and  mano 
 The earliest utensils, including bowls, knives, spoons, grinders, and griddles, were made from all kinds of materials, such as rock and animal bone. Gourds were also initially cultivated, hollowed, and dried to be used as bowls, spoons, ladles, and storage containers.
 Many Indigenous cultures also developed elaborate ceramics for making bowls and cooking pots, and basketry for making containers. Nobility in the Andean and Mesoamerican civilizations were even known to have utensils and vessels smelted from gold, silver, copper, or other minerals.
 
 Batan , an Andean grinding slab used in conjunction with a small stone  uña 
 Burén , a clay griddle used by the  Taíno . 
 Comal , a griddle used since  Pre-Columbian  times in Mexico and Central America for a variety of purposes, especially to cook tortillas. 
 Cuia , a gourd used for drinking mate in South America. 
 Metate , a stone grinding slab used with a stone  mano  or  metlapil  to process meal in Mesoamerica and one of the most notable Pre-Columbian artifacts in  Costa Rica . 
 Molinillo , a device used by Mesoamerican royalty for frothing cacao drinks. 
 Molcajete , a  basalt  stone bowl, used with a  tejolote  to grind ingredients as a Mesoamerican form of  mortar and pestle . 
 Paila , an Andean earthenware bowl. 
 Cooking baskets were woven from a variety of local fibers and sometimes coated with clay to improve durability. The notable thing about basket cooking and some native clay pot cooking is that the heat source, i.e. hot stones or charcoal, is used inside the utensil rather than outside. (Also see  Cookware and bakeware .) 
 Crops and ingredients [ edit ] 
   A russet  potato  with sprouts 
   The bean pods of the  mesquite  (above) can be dried and ground into flour, adding a sweet, nutty taste to breads 
   A  maple syrup  tap 
   Several large  pumpkins 
   Acorns  of  sessile oak . The acorn, or oak nut, is the nut of the oaks and their close relatives (genera  Quercus  and  Lithocarpus , in the family Fagaceae). 
 Non-animal foods [ edit ] 
 
 Acorn —used to make flour and fertilizers for plants 
 Achira —edible tubercule 
 Achiote — annatto  seed, a seasoning 
 Acuyo —a seasoning 
 Agarita —berries 
 Agave nectar —a sweetener 
 Allspice —a seasoning 
 Amaranth 
 American chestnut 
 Arazá 
 American lotus —seeds & root, leaves for baking coverings 
 Amole  - can include  Chlorogalum  and  Agave schottii 
 Aspen —inner bark and sap (both used as sweetener) 
 Avocado 
 Barbados cherry  or acerola 
 Beans —throughout the Americas 
 Bear grass 
 Beautyberry 
 Beech nuts 
 Birch  bark 
 Birch syrup —sweetener 
 Bitterroot 
 Blackberries 
 Blow wife seeds 
 Blueberries 
 Bodark  seeds—also called Osage orange, hedge apple, monkeybrain 
 Bog rosemary —poisonous, but leaves can be brewed into tea regardless 
 Box elder —inner bark (used as sweetener) 
 Buckeye —(same rules apply as acorn) 
 Butia —palm fruits from South America 
 Buffalo gourd —(wild ancestor of all squash/ pumpkin) 
 Bur cucumber 
 Cacao 
 Cactus  (various species)—fruits and young pads (see  nopales ) 
 California poppy  seeds—(There are eastern American poppies also, but they are believed to have always been so rare, inclusion in the human diet is highly unlikely) 
 Camas  root 
 Canella winterana —white cinnamon (used as a seasoning before cinnamon) 
 Cashew  nuts 
 Cassava —primarily South America 
 Cattails —rootstocks 
 Century plant  ( mescal  or  agave )—crowns ( tuberous  base portion) and  shoots 
 Chia seed 
 Chicle —chewing gum 
 Chili peppers  (including  bell peppers )—seasoning 
 Cherimoya 
 Chokecherries 
 Cholla  fruits 
 Coca —South and Central America 
 Cow parsnip  root 
 Cranberries 
 Crowberry 
 Culantro —used as a seasoning before  cilantro 
 Currants 
 Custard-apple 
 Dandelion 
 Datil —fruit and flowers 
 Devil's claw 
 Dewberry 
 Dropseed grasses (various varieties)—seeds 
 Dwarf plantain 
 Eastern redbud —flowers as spice, fruit 
 Eastern red columbine —nectar only 
 Elderberries 
 Emory oak —acorns 
 Epazote —a seasoning 
 Feijoa —fruit from South America 
 Ferns (various edible species, such as  fiddleheads ) 
 Gaylussacias  or black  huckleberry —grows near wild blueberries, tastes similar, but unrelated 
 Goji  or wolf berry 
 Goldenberry 
 Gooseberries 
 Groundcherry —multiple species from North and South America 
 Guarana 
 Guava 
 Guaviyú 
 Hackberries 
 Hawthorn —fruit 
 Hazelnut  or filbert 
 Hierba Luisa 
 Hueinacaztli , or ear-flower 
 Hickory  nuts 
 Hogpeanut 
 Holly 
 Hops 
 Horsemint 
 Huazontle 
 Huckleberries 
 Indian cucumber 
 Indian potato  or  hopniss ,  openowag , cinnamon vine, groundnut (cultivated in Japan as  hodoimo , edible root bulbs and beans, dried flowers as spice) 
 Indigo bush —sources disagree whether edible, but presumably fruit? 
 Jack in the pulpit  root 
 Jambú 
 Jerusalem artichoke 
 Jicama 
 Juniper berries 
 Kaniwa 
 Kentucky coffeetree 
 Kiwicha 
 Lamb's-quarters —leaves and seeds 
 Lapacho 
 Lechehuana  honey 
 Lemon-verbena —lemon-flavoring herb 
 Lichen  (certain species) 
 Lilypad  root 
 Locust —blossoms and pods 
 Lúcuma 
 Maca 
 Maize —throughout the Americas, probably domesticated in or near Mexico, including the  blue corn  variety 
 Mamey 
 Manzanita 
 Maple syrup  and sugar, used as the primary sweetener and seasoning in Northern America 
 Mesquite —bean pods, flour/meal 
 Mexican oregano 
 Milkweed 
 Mint, various species— American mint  is best known in eastern woodlands region 
 Mooseberry —called highbush cranberry in Eastern US—actually a type of  Viburnum 
 Mulberries 
 Nopales —cactus 
 Okra 
 Onions 
 Oregon grape —(not a real grape) 
 Palmetto 
 Surinam cherry 
 Papaya 
 Passionfruit 
 Pawpaw 
 Peanuts  (thought to be native to West Africa) 
 Pecans 
 Pennyroyal —American false variety 
 Persimmon 
 Pigweed  —seeds 
 Pine  (including  western white pine  and  Pinus ponderosa )—inner bark (used as sweetener), sap as chewing gum ingredient, tips for jelly, cuttings for tea, and  pinenuts 
 Pineapples —South America 
 Pinyon —nuts 
 Piñonero —nuts 
 Pipsissewa 
 Plum 
 Popcorn flower —herb 
 Potatoes —North and South America 
 Prickly pears 
 Prairie turnips 
 Pumpkins 
 Purslane —leaves 
 Quinoa —South America, Central America, and Eastern North America 
 Ramps —wild onion 
 Raspberries 
 Rice —imported by the Spanish 
 rock cress 
 Rose pepper 
 Sage 
 Saguaro  cactus—fruits and seeds 
 Salt 
 Sangre de drago 
 Sapote 
 Sassafras 
 Screwbean —fruit 
 Sedge —tubers 
 Sea grape  or  uva de playa 
 Serviceberry —also juneberry, saskatoon 
 Shepherd's purse —leaves 
 Solomon's seal 
 Sotol —crowns 
 Soursop  or  guanábana 
 Spanish bayonet —fruit 
 Spanish lime  or  mamoncillo 
 Common spicebush —a seasoning 
 Spikenard —berries and roots for tea, some tribes ate roots (this is a select species, of which there are many in the America's and not all species are edible, though Natives had wide medicinal and practical uses) 
 Squash —throughout the Americas 
 Stevia —sweetener 
 Strawberries 
 Sumac —berries 
 Sunflower seeds 
 Sweet anise 
 Sweet potato —South America (misleading name: not a potato) 
 Sweetsop  or sugar-apple 
 Tamarillo 
 Teaberry  or wintergreen 
 Tobacco 
 Tomatillo 
 Tomato 
 Texas persimmons  or sugar plum 
 Tuckahoe 
 Tulip poplar —syrup made from bark 
 Tule — rhizomes 
 Tumbleweed —seeds 
 Tumbo  or  taxo 
 Vanilla —a seasoning 
 Vetch —pods 
 Wapato  root 
 White  evening primrose —fruit 
 White walnuts  or butternuts 
 Wild  carrot —also harbinger of spring, salt and pepper 
 Wild celery 
 Wild  cherries 
 Wild grapes —fruit 
 Wild honey 
 Wild onion 
 Wild  pea —pods 
 Wild roses 
 Wild sweet potato —(misleading name: not a potato) 
 Wood sorrel —leaves 
 Yacón —nectar 
 Yaupon holly —leaves 
 Yerba buena 
 Yerba mate 
 Yucca —blossoms, fruit, and stalks 
 Zamia —nuts 
 
 Hunted or livestock [ edit ] 
   Bison  cow and calf 
   Moose 
 
 Antelope 
 Armadillo 
 Badger 
 Bear 
 Beaver 
 Bighorn sheep 
 Bison —originally found throughout most of the North American plains 
 Burro —European import 
 Camel —extinct in the Americas 
 Capybara 
 Cattle —European import 
 Chipmunk 
 Deer 
 Dove 
 Duck 
 Elk 
 Ants 
 Geese 
 Ground hog 
 Grouse 
 Guanaco —hunted in South America by hunter-gatherer societies, for ex. in  Patagonia  until the 19th century 
 Guinea pig —domesticated in the Andes 
 Hog —important European import 
 Honey wasp — Brachygastra mellifica ,  Brachygastra lecheguana , and  Polybia occidentalis , a source of honey found from the Southwestern United States to Argentina 
 Horse —although imported by Europeans, the horse was still very important to Indigenous cultures throughout the Americas (famously on the North American Plains) in the historic era 
 Hutia 
 Iguana 
 Livestock 
 Llama —domesticated in the Andes 
 Locust  (cicada) 
 Manatee 
 Mastodon —extinct 
 Moose 
 Mourning dove 
 Mule —European import 
 Muscovy duck —domesticated in Mesoamerica 
 Opossum 
 Otter 
 Passenger pigeon —extinct 
 Peccaries 
 Pheasant 
 Porcupine 
 Prairie dog 
 Pronghorn  (antelope) 
 Quail 
 Rabbit 
 Raccoon 
 Sheep —important European import 
 Skunk 
 Sloth 
 Stingless bee — Melipona beecheii  and  M. yucatanica , Mayan source of honey 
 Squirrel 
 Turkey 
 Turtle 
 Yacare caiman 
 Wood rat 
 Woolly mammoth —extinct 
 
 Notable chefs and food writers [ edit ] 
 Lois Ellen Frank 
 Sean Sherman 
 See also [ edit ] 
 
 Food portal Drink portal Indigenous peoples of the Americas portal 
 
 Plants used in Native American cuisine 
 House dish 
 Hunter gatherer 
 Locavores 
 Tlingit cuisine 
 Wild onion festival 
 Inuit diet 
 List of First Nations peoples 
 Aboriginal food security in Canada 
 Peasant food 
 Staple food 
 Soul food 
 Bush meat  (Africa) 
 Bushfood  (Australia) 
 Game (food) 
 
 
 References [ edit ] 
 
 
 ^  a   b   "Native American Food: Agriculture, Hunting and Gathering, Fishing, and other American Indian food sources" . 
 
 ^   "Welcome to NativeTech: Indigenous Food and Traditional Recipes" . NativeTech: Native American Technology & Art. 
 
 ^   "The Native American Culinary Association Forum Index" . The Native American Culinary Association. Archived from  the original  on April 22, 2007. 
 
 ^   Severson, Kim (November 23, 2005).  "Native Foods Nourish Again" .  The New York Times . Retrieved  January 21,  2015 . 
 
 ^   Berzok, Linda Murray (2005).  American Indian Food . Greenwood.  ISBN   9780313329890 . Retrieved  August 16,  2019 . 
 
 ^   Usher, Peter J (1976).  "Evaluating Country Food in the Northern Native Economy"   (PDF) .  Arctic . Arctic Institute of North America.  29  (2): 105–120.  doi : 10.14430/arctic2795 .  JSTOR   40509261 . Retrieved  November 25,  2022 . 
 
 ^   Wein, Eleanor E.;  et al. (1990). "Food Consumption Patterns and Use of Country Foods by Native Canadians near Wood Buffalo National Park, Canada".  Arctic .  44  (3): 196–206.  doi : 10.14430/arctic1539 . 
 
 ^   http://www.enr.gov.nt.ca/sites/enr/files/weights_of_wildlife.pdf  "in deriving estimates of the economic value of wildlife used as food (known in northern Canada as country food or traditional food)..." page 2 
 
 ^   "18.4 Trends in country food use in NWT regions" . NWT State of the Environment Report (Report). Government of Northwest Territories. 2022 . Retrieved  November 25,  2022 . 
 
 ^   http://www.enr.gov.nt.ca/sites/enr/files/weights_of_wildlife.pdf  page 16 
 
 ^   Ashley, pg 22 
 
 ^   Williams, Ollie (January 25, 2016).  "Country food contaminants: NWT residents undergo tests" .  100.1 True North FM . Retrieved  November 25,  2022 . 
 
 ^   Brockman, Alex (September 21, 2017).  "Traditional Indigenous food in a hospital? That's the plan for new N.W.T. Facility" .  CBC News . Retrieved  November 25,  2022 . 
 
 ^   "Kill What You Eat" . April 10, 2017. 
 
 ^   "Maple Sugarbush Questions and Answers"   (PDF) .  University of Minnesota Duluth . Retrieved  December 15,  2018 . 
 
 ^   Nerburn, Kent (Project Director) (1991).  We Choose To Remember: More Memories of the Red Lake Ojibwe People . Bemidji, Minnesota: Arrow Printing. p. 8. 
 
 ^   Freedman, P. (2019).  American Cuisine: And How It Got This Way.  (pp. 1-40). New York, NY: Liveright Publishing.   ISBN   978-1631494628 
 
 ^  a   b   Kamila, Avery Yale (November 8, 2020).  "Wabanaki Enjoying Nut Milk and Butter for Centuries" . Portland Press Herald . Retrieved  November 26,  2022  – via Atowi. 
 
 ^   Kamila, Avery Yale (November 8, 2020).  "Vegan Kitchen: Americans have been enjoying nut milk and nut butter for at least 4 centuries" .  Portland Press Herald . Retrieved  November 26,  2022 . 
 
 ^   Diemer-Eaton, Jessica (October 2014).  "Food Nuts of the Eastern Woodlands Native Peoples" .  www.woodlandindianedu.com . Archived from  the original  on January 8, 2021. 
 
 ^   Freedman, Robert Louis (1976). "Native North American Food Preparation Techniques".  Boletín Bibliográfico de Antropología Americana (1973-1979) . Pan American Institute of Geography and History.  38  (47): 142.  JSTOR   43996285 . , s.v. Hickory Nut Soup (Cherokee) 
 
 ^   
 Dragonwagon, Crescent (2007).  The Cornbread Gospels . Workman Publishing.  ISBN   978-0-7611-1916-6 . 
 
 ^   
 Hudson, Charles (1976). "A Conquered People".  The Southeastern Indians . University of Tennessee Press. pp. 498–499.  ISBN   0-87049-248-9 . 
 
 ^   "Sofkey | The Encyclopedia of Oklahoma History and Culture" .  www.okhistory.org . Retrieved  March 18,  2021 . 
 
 ^   "American Indian Health - Foods of Plains Tribes" . 
 
 ^   The Dakota Diet: Health Secrets from the Great Plains . 
 
 ^   Colby, Sarah E;  et al. (2012).  "Traditional Native American Foods" .  Journal of Ecological Anthropology .  15 : 65–73.  doi : 10.5038/2162-4593.15.1.5 . 
 
 ^   Redhawk (2004).  "Cooking With Acorns" .  North American Indian Recipes . "the People's Paths home page!". 
 
 ^   "The History of Jerky: The incomplete but interesting history of jerky" . The JerkyFAQ. April 10, 2012. 
 
 ^   Swanson, Stevenson (2003).  "Star grazing" .  chicagotribune.com . Retrieved  November 14,  2019 . 
 
 ^   Biggers, Ashley M. (September 5, 2018).  "The first truly American cuisine is having a revival" .  CNN . Retrieved  November 14,  2019 . 
 
 ^   Frederich, Lori (November 20, 2013).  "Chef Lois Ellen Frank demystifies .ew Native American cuisine" .  OnMilwaukee.com . Retrieved  November 14,  2019 . 
 
 ^   "Traditional Foods in Native America: A compendium of traditional foods stories from American Indian and Alaska Native communities"   (PDF) . 
 
 ^   "Inuit" . 
 
 ^   "Acorn Mush" . NativeTech: Native American Technology & Art. 
 
 ^   "Cherokee Bean Bread Recipe" .  www.pbs.org . Retrieved  March 19,  2021 . 
 
 ^   "Bird brain stew" . NativeTech: Native American Technology & Art. 
 
 ^   "Buffalo Stew (Tanka-me-a-lo)" . NativeTech: Native American Technology & Art. 
 
 ^   Rudes, Blair A.  (December 15, 2011).  "Coastal Algonquian Language Sampler" .  Coastal Carolina Indian Center . Retrieved  November 20,  2014 . 
 
 ^   "ahpòn" .  Lenape Talking Dictionary . Delaware Tribe of Indians. Archived from  the original  on September 24, 2015 . Retrieved  November 20,  2014 . 
 
 ^   "How Long Does Pemmican Last" . May 27, 2017. 
 
 ^   "How To Make Pemmican: A Survival Superfood That Can Last 50 Years - Off The Grid News" .  Off The Grid News . June 2, 2015 . Retrieved  November 29,  2018 . 
 
 ^   "pemmican | Definition, History, & Facts" .  Encyclopedia Britannica . Retrieved  November 29,  2018 . 
 
 ^   "In New Mexico, Bakers Keep the Tradition of Pueblo Bread Alive" .  Atlas Obscura . Retrieved  March 19,  2021 . 
 
 ^   "sapàn" .  Lenape Talking Dictionary . Archived from  the original  on October 4, 2011 . Retrieved  June 26,  2011 . 
 
 ^   "Sumac Lemonade Recipe" .  PBS Food . Retrieved  March 19,  2021 . 
 
 ^   Aguilar, Valerie (2014).  "Chocolate - Ancient Drink of the Gods" .  Hispanic Culture Site . BellaOnline. 
 
 ^   Brandon; Courtney; Jonelle; Amanda.  "Mayan Cuisine" . Putnam County High School. Archived from  the original  on April 17, 2009. 
 
 ^   "How to Make Delicious Peruvian Purple Corn Pudding" .  The Spruce Eats . Retrieved  March 20,  2021 . 
 
 ^   "Patasca - Pork, Sheep or Beef Head Stew. Bolivian Food and Recipes" .  BoliviaBella . Retrieved  March 20,  2021 . 
 
 
 Bibliography [ edit ] 
 Coe, Sophie D.  (1994).  America's First Cuisines . Austin, Texas: University of Texas Press.  ISBN   978-0-292-71159-4 . 
 Hetzler, Richard (2010).  The Mitsitam Cafe cookbook : recipes from the Smithsonian National Museum of the American Indian . Washington, D.C.:  Smithsonian National Museum of the American Indian .  ISBN   978-1-55591-747-0 . 
 Niethammer, Carolyn (1974).  American Indian Food and Lore . New York: A Simon & Schuster Macmillan Company.  ISBN   0-02-010000-0 . 
 External links [ edit ] 
 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons has media related to  Foods and ingredients of the indigenous people . 
 
 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons has media related to  Cuisine of indigenous peoples in North America . 
 
 Traditional Chiricahua recipes   Archived  August 16, 2011, at the  Wayback Machine 
 American Indian Health and Diet Project 
 v t e Cuisine of the United States Historical 
 Cuisine of the Thirteen Colonies 
 Thanksgiving dinner 
 Regional General 
 List of regional dishes of the United States 
 List of regional beverages of the United States 
 Northeast 
 Mid-Atlantic 
 New Jersey 
 New York
 New York City 
 Pennsylvania
 Allentown 
 Philadelphia 
 New England 
 South 
 Appalachia 
 Floribbean 
 Kentucky 
 Louisiana
 Creole 
 New Orleans 
 Lowcountry 
 Texas 
 Barbecue in Texas 
 Tex-Mex 
 Midwest 
 Chicago 
 Cincinnati 
 Kansas City-style barbecue 
 Omaha 
 St. Louis 
 Wisconsin 
 West 
 California 
 Southwestern 
 New Mexican 
 Pacific Northwestern 
 Hawaii 
 Territories 
 Puerto Rico 
 Ethnic 
 Cajun 
 American Cambodian 
 American Chinese 
 Greek American 
 Soul food 
 Mexican 
 Native American 
 New Mexican (Neomexicano and Pueblo) 
 Pennsylvania Dutch 
 Italian American 
 Tejano 
 Tlingit 
 Filipino-American 
 American Jewish 
 List articles 
 American foods 
 American breads 
 American cheeses 
 American desserts 
 American regional and fusion cuisines 
 American sandwiches 
 American breakfast foods 
 Foods of the Southern United States 
 Soul foods and dishes 
 Miscellaneous 
 Barbecue 
 Christmas food 
 Fast food 
 Drinks 
 Sweet tea 
 Root beer 
 Coca-Cola 
 Egg cream 
 Milkshake 
 Shirley Temple 
 Italian soda 
 Pepsi 
 American tea culture 
   Category: American cuisine 
 v t e Cuisines Continental 
 African 
 North 
 West 
 list 
 Americas 
 Caribbean 
 North 
 South 
 list 
 Asian 
 Caucasian 
 Central 
 Indian subcontinent 
 Levantine 
 list 
 European 
 Balkan 
 Central 
 Eastern 
 list 
 Oceanic 
 Intercontinental
 Global 
 Latin American 
 Mediterranean 
 Middle Eastern 
 National  and regional 
 Afghan 
 Albanian 
 Algerian 
 American 
 Californian 
 Floribbean 
 Hawaiian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Lowcountry (South Carolina) 
 New England 
 New Mexico 
 Pacific Northwest 
 Pennsylvania Dutch 
 Puerto Rican 
 Southern US 
 Southwest US 
 Texas 
 Angolan 
 Argentine 
 Armenian 
 Australian 
 Austrian 
 Azerbaijani 
 Bahraini 
 Bangladeshi 
 Barbadian 
 Belarusian 
 Belgian 
 Belizean 
 Beninese 
 Bhutanese 
 Bolivian 
 Bosnian-Herzegovinian 
 Botswana 
 Brazilian 
 British 
 Channel Islands 
 English 
 Gibraltarian 
 Northern Irish 
 Saint Helena 
 Scottish 
 Welsh 
 Bruneian 
 Bulgarian 
 Burkinabé 
 Burmese 
 Burundian 
 Cambodian 
 Cameroonian 
 Canadian 
 Acadian 
 Québécois 
 Central African Republic 
 Chadian 
 Chilean 
 Chinese 
 Cantonese 
 Hong Kong 
 Macanese 
 Tibetan 
 Xinjiang 
 Colombian 
 Congolese 
 Corsican 
 Croatian 
 Cuban 
 Cypriot 
 Czech 
 Danish 
 Faroese 
 Greenlandic 
 Djiboutian 
 Dominican 
 Dominican Republic 
 Dutch 
 East Timorese 
 Ecuadorian 
 Egyptian 
 Emirati 
 Equatorial Guinean 
 Eritrean 
 Estonian 
 Ethiopian 
 Fijian 
 Filipino 
 Finnish 
 French 
 Occitan 
 French Guianan 
 Gabonese 
 Gambian 
 Georgian 
 German 
 Ghanaian 
 Greek 
 Cretan 
 Epirotic 
 Greek Macedonian 
 Heptanesean 
 Guatemalan 
 Guinea-Bissauan 
 Guinean 
 Haitian 
 Honduran 
 Hungarian 
 Icelandic 
 Indian 
 Arunachalese 
 Assamese 
 Bengali 
 Bihari 
 Goan 
 Gujarati 
 Himachal Pradesh 
 Kashmiri 
 Jharkhandi 
 Karnataka 
 Kerala 
 Maharashtrian 
 Manipuri 
 Meghalayan 
 Mizo 
 Naga 
 Odia 
 Punjabi 
 Rajasthani 
 Sikkimese 
 Sindhi 
 Tamil 
 Telangana 
 Telugu 
 Indonesian 
 Acehnese 
 Balinese 
 Banjar 
 Batak 
 Betawi 
 Indo 
 Javanese 
 Madurese 
 Makassar 
 Minahasan 
 Minangkabau 
 Palembangese 
 Sundanese 
 Iranian 
 Iraqi 
 Irish 
 Israeli 
 Italian 
 Abruzzese 
 Ligurian 
 Lombard 
 Lucanian 
 Neapolitan 
 Roman 
 Sardinian 
 Sicilian 
 Venetian 
 Ivorian 
 Jamaican 
 Japanese 
 Okinawan 
 Jordanian 
 Kazakh 
 Kenyan 
 Korean 
 North Korean 
 South Korean 
 Kosovan 
 Kuwaiti 
 Kyrgyz 
 Lao 
 Latvian 
 Lebanese 
 Lesotho 
 Liberian 
 Libyan 
 Liechtensteiner 
 Lithuanian 
 Luxembourg 
 Macedonian 
 Malagasy 
 Malawian 
 Malaysian 
 Sabahan 
 Sarawakian 
 Maldivian 
 Malian 
 Maltese 
 Mauritanian 
 Mauritian 
 Mexican 
 Moldovan 
 Monégasque 
 Mongolian 
 Montenegrin 
 Moroccan 
 Mozambican 
 Namibian 
 Nauruan 
 Nepalese 
 New Zealand 
 Nicaraguan 
 Niger 
 Nigerian 
 Niuean 
 Norwegian 
 Omani 
 Pakistani 
 Palestinian 
 Panamanian 
 Peruvian 
 Polish 
 Portuguese 
 Qatari 
 Romanian  (incl.  Transylvanian Saxon ) 
 Russian 
 Bashkir 
 Chechen 
 Circassian 
 Komi 
 Mordovian 
 Sakha 
 Tatar 
 Udmurt 
 Yamal 
 Rwandan 
 Saint Lucian 
 Salvadoran 
 Sammarinese 
 São Tomé and Príncipe 
 Saudi Arabian 
 Senegalese 
 Serbian 
 Seychellois 
 Sierra Leonean 
 Singaporean 
 Slovak 
 Slovenian 
 Somali 
 South African 
 Spanish 
 Andalusian 
 Asturian 
 Balearic 
 Basque 
 Canarian 
 Cantabrian 
 Catalan 
 Extremaduran 
 Galician 
 Manchegan 
 Valencian 
 Sri Lankan 
 Sudanese 
 Swazi 
 Swedish 
 Swiss 
 Syrian 
 Taiwanese 
 Tajik 
 Tanzanian 
 Zanzibari 
 Thai 
 Togolese 
 Tunisian 
 Turkish 
 Turkmen 
 Trinidadian and Tobagonian 
 Ugandan 
 Ukrainian 
 Uruguayan 
 Uzbek 
 Venezuelan 
 Vietnamese 
 Western Saharan 
 Yemeni 
 Zambian 
 Zimbabwean 
 Ethnic 
 Ainu 
 Arab 
 Indonesian 
 Aromanian 
 Assyrian 
 Balochi 
 Berber 
 Cajun 
 Chinese 
 American 
 Canadian 
 Chifa 
 Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Crimean Tatar 
 Greek American 
 Hazaragi 
 Indian 
 Anglo-Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Indigenous American 
 Inuit 
 Italian American 
 Kurdish 
 Livonian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Malay 
 Ossetian 
 Parsi 
 Pashtun 
 Peranakan 
 Romani 
 Sámi 
 Soul food 
 Sylheti 
 Transylvanian Saxon 
 Yup'ik 
 Religious 
 Buddhist 
 Christian 
 Goan Catholic 
 Mangalorean Catholic 
 Mennonite 
 Hindu 
 Islamic 
 Chinese 
 Ital 
 Jain 
 Jewish 
 American 
 Ashkenazi 
 Bukharan 
 Ethiopian 
 Mizrahi 
 Sephardic 
 Syrian 
 Ritual slaughter 
 Sikh 
 Historical 
 Ancient Egyptian 
 Ancient Greek 
 Ancient Israelite 
 Ancient Roman 
 Antebellum America 
 Aztec 
 Byzantine 
 Early modern European 
 Historical Chinese 
 Historical Indian subcontinent 
 Historical North Indian and Pakistani 
 History of agriculture 
 History of alcoholic drinks 
 History of bread 
 History of seafood 
 History of vegetarianism 
 Historical Argentine 
 Historical Japanese 
 Inca 
 Mayan 
 Muisca 
 Mughal 
 Medieval 
 Ottoman 
 Peasant 
 Soviet 
 Thirteen Colonies 
 Styles 
 Classique 
 Fast food 
 Fusion 
 New American 
 Eurasian 
 Haute 
 Molecular gastronomy 
 Note by Note 
 Nouvelle 
 Lists 
 List of cuisines 
 List of historical cuisines 
 Lists of prepared foods 
 Related 
 Cookbook 
 Cooking 
 Culinary arts 
 Drink 
 Food 
 history 
 Diet 
 Meal preparation 
 
   Food portal 
   Drink portal 
   Category 
   Commons 
   Cookbook 
   WikiProject 
   Outline 
 
 Authority control   National libraries 
 Israel 
 United States 
 Other 
 FAST 
 
  
NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw2384
Cached time: 20230311165505
Cache expiry: 1814400
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc, no‐toc‐conversion]
CPU time usage: 0.968 seconds
Real time usage: 1.241 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 5755/1000000
Post‐expand include size: 276115/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 22270/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 16/100
Expensive parser function count: 21/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 256577/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.484/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 9577768/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/400
 
 
Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  857.064      1 -total
 33.62%  288.121      1 Template:Reflist
 20.20%  173.106     32 Template:Cite_web
 16.35%  140.108      2 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 13.96%  119.656      1 Template:Native_American_topics_sidebar
  8.79%   75.348      2 Template:Sidebar
  6.69%   57.349      2 Template:Sister_project
  6.47%   55.444      2 Template:Side_box
  6.42%   54.992      6 Template:Fix
  5.87%   50.268      1 Template:Short_description
 
  Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:idhash:2793067-0!canonical and timestamp 20230311165504 and revision id 1143910485. Rendering was triggered because: page-view
  
 esi <esi:include src="/esitest-fa8a495983347898/content" />  
 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Indigenous_cuisine_of_the_Americas&oldid=1143910485 " 
 Categories :  Indigenous cuisine of the Americas Indigenous culture of the Americas Native American culture Native American cuisine Latin American cuisine North American cuisine First Nations culture Hidden categories:  Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use American English from April 2019 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from April 2019 All articles with failed verification Articles with failed verification from January 2015 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2022 Articles with unsourced statements from March 2019 All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from January 2015 Commons link is locally defined Commons category link is locally defined Webarchive template wayback links Articles with J9U identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers Articles with FAST identifiers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  This page was last edited on 10 March 2023, at 17:03  (UTC) . 
 Text is available under the  Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0 ;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the  Terms of Use  and  Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the  Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. 
 
 
 Privacy policy 
 About Wikipedia 
 Disclaimers 
 Contact Wikipedia 
 Mobile view 
 Developers 
 Statistics 
 Cookie statement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
