
 
 
 Jump to content 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle sidebar 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Create account Log in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Personal tools 
 
 
 
 
   Create account   Log in 
 
 
 
 
		Pages for logged out editors  learn more 
 
 
 Contributions Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Navigation 
 
 
 Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate 
 
 
 
 
 Contribute 
 
 
 Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file 
 
 
 
 
 Tools 
 
 
 What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item 
 
 
 
 
 Print/export 
 
 
 Download as PDF Printable version 
 
 
 
 
 In other projects 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons Wikibooks Wikiquote 
 
 
 
 
 Languages 
 
 On this Wikipedia the language links are at the top of the page across from the article title.  Go to top . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CentralNotice  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Contents 
 move to sidebar 
 hide 
 
 
 
 
 (Top) 
 
 
 
 
 
 1 History 
 
 
				Toggle History subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 1.1 Prehistory and Indus Valley civilization 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.2 Vedic age 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.3 Antiquity 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.4 Foods mentioned in ancient Indian scripture 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.5 Middle Ages to the 16th Century 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.6 Colonial Period 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 Ingredients 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 Regional cuisines 
 
 
				Toggle Regional cuisines subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 3.1 Andaman and Nicobar Islands 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.2 Andhra Pradesh 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.3 Arunachal Pradesh 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.4 Assam 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.5 Bengal 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.6 Bihar 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.7 Chandigarh 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.8 Chhattisgarh 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.9 Dadra and Nagar Haveli 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.10 Daman and Diu 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.11 Delhi 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.12 Goa 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.13 Gujarat 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.14 Haryana 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.15 Himachal Pradesh 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.16 Jammu and Kashmir 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.17 Jharkhand 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.18 Karnataka 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.19 Kerala 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.20 Ladakh 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.21 Lakshadweep 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.22 Madhya Pradesh 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.23 Maharashtra 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.23.1 Malwani 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.24 Manipur 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.25 Meghalaya 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.26 Mizoram 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.27 Nagaland 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.28 Odisha 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.29 Puducherry 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.30 Punjab 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.31 Rajasthan 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.32 Sikkim 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.33 Sindh 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.34 Tamil Nadu 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.35 Telangana 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.36 Tripura 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.37 Uttar Pradesh 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.38 Uttarakhand 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4 Gallery 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5 Hindu fasting cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6 Diaspora and fusion cuisines 
 
 
				Toggle Diaspora and fusion cuisines subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 6.1 Indian Chinese cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6.2 Indian Thai cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6.3 Malaysian Indian cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6.4 Indian Singaporean cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6.5 Indian Indonesian cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6.6 Indian Filipino cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6.7 Anglo-Indian cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 7 Desserts 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8 Beverages 
 
 
				Toggle Beverages subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 8.1 Non-alcoholic beverages 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8.2 Alcoholic beverages 
 
 
 
 
 
 8.2.1 Beer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8.2.2 Others 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 9 Eating habits 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 10 Dietary practices 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 11 Etiquette 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 12 Outside India 
 
 
				Toggle Outside India subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 12.1 Australia 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 12.2 Canada 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 12.3 China 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 12.4 Fiji 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 12.5 Middle East 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 12.6 Nepal 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 12.7 Southeast Asia 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 12.8 United Kingdom 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 12.9 Ireland 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 12.10 United States 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 13 See also 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 14 References 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 15 Bibliography 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 16 External links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
						Toggle the table of contents
					 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle the table of contents 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Indian cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 58 languages 
 
 
 
 العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Беларуская भोजपुरी Български Brezhoneg Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی Français Gaeilge ગુજરાતી 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Jawa ქართული Kurdî Lietuvių मैथिली Македонски മലയാളം მარგალური Bahasa Melayu Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk ଓଡ଼ିଆ پنجابی Polski Português Русский Simple English Slovenščina Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska தமிழ் తెలుగు ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 吴语 中文 
 Edit links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Article Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 English 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Read View source View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 More 
 
 
 
 Read View source View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
 
 
 Culinary traditions of India 
 For the cuisine of indigenous people of the Americas, see  Native American cuisine . 
 
 
 This article is part of the series on Indian cuisine 
 Regional cuisines 
 North India 
 Awadhi 
 Bhojpuri 
 Haryana 
 Kashmiri 
 Kumauni 
 Mughlai 
 Punjabi 
 Rajasthani 
 Uttar Pradeshi 
 South India 
 Chettinad 
 Hyderabadi 
 Karnataka 
 Kerala 
 KonguNadu 
 Mangalorean 
 Mangalorean Catholic 
 Saraswat 
 Tamil 
 Telangana 
 Telugu 
 Udupi 
 East India 
 Bengali 
 Bihari 
 Jharkhand 
 Odia 
 Maithil 
 West India 
 Goan 
 Gujarati 
 Malvani & Konkani 
 Marathi 
 Parsi 
 Sindhi 
 Northeast India 
 Arunachalese 
 Assamese 
 Meghalayan 
 Manipuri 
 Mizoram 
 Naga 
 Sikkimese 
 Tripuri 
 Other 
 Anglo-Indian 
 Fast food 
 Indian Chinese 
 Indian Indonesian 
 Indian Singaporean 
 Jain (Satvika) 
 Malaysian Indian 
 Nepali 
 
 Ingredients, types of food 
 Main dishes 
 Soups and stews 
 Desserts 
 Bread 
 Drinks 
 Snack foods 
 Spices 
 Condiments 
 
 Preparation, cooking 
 Handi 
 Karahi 
 Tava 
 Tandoor 
 Uruli 
 Other 
 
 See also 
 History 
 Etiquette 
 Indian chefs 
 Cookbook: Cuisine of India 
 
 Related cuisines 
 Nepalese cuisine 
 Sri Lankan cuisine 
 Bangladeshi cuisine 
 Pakistani cuisine 
 Bhutanese cuisine 
 Tibetan cuisine 
 Afghani cuisine 
 
   India portal 
   Food portal v t e 
 Part of  a series  on the Culture of India 
 Society 
 Indians 
 Folklore 
 History 
 Languages 
 Holidays 
 Religion 
 
 Arts and literature 
 Art 
 Architecture 
 Cinema 
 Dance 
 Festivals 
 Literature 
 Poetry 
 Music 
 Painting 
 Sculpture 
 Theatre 
 
 Others 
 Cuisine 
 Media 
 Newspapers 
 Radio 
 Television 
 Sports 
 Traditional 
 Video games 
 Fashion 
 Mythology 
 Hindu 
 Vedic 
 Meitei 
 Buddhist 
 Folklore 
 
 Symbols 
 Flag 
 State Emblem 
 Anthem 
 Miss India 
 World Heritage Sites 
 Monuments 
 
 Organizations 
 Ministry of Culture 
 Ministry of Tourism 
 Tourism 
 Museums 
 Incredible India 
 
   India portal v t e 
 Indian cuisine  consists of a variety of regional and traditional cuisines native to  India . Given the diversity in soil, climate, culture, ethnic groups, and occupations, these cuisines vary substantially and use locally available  spices ,  herbs ,  vegetables , and  fruits .
 Indian food is also heavily influenced by  religion , in particular  Hinduism  and  Islam , cultural choices and traditions. [1] [2] 
 Historical events such as invasions, trade relations, and  colonialism  have played a role in introducing certain foods to this country. The  Columbian discovery  of the  New World  brought a number of new vegetables and fruit to India. A number of these such as  potatoes ,  tomatoes ,  chillies ,  peanuts , and  guava  have become staples in many regions of India. [3] 
 Indian cuisine has shaped the history of  international relations ; the  spice trade  between India and  Europe  was the primary catalyst for Europe's  Age of Discovery . [4]  Spices were bought from India and traded around Europe and Asia. Indian cuisine has influenced other cuisines across the world, especially those from  Europe  (especially  Britain ), the  Middle East ,  Southern African ,  East Africa ,  Southeast Asia ,  North America ,  Mauritius ,  Fiji ,  Oceania , and the  Caribbean . [5] [6] 
 
 
 History 
 Main article:  History of Indian cuisine 
 Indian cuisine reflects an  8,000-year history  of various groups and cultures interacting with the  Indian subcontinent , leading to diversity of flavours and regional cuisines found in modern-day India. Later, trade with  British  and  Portuguese  influence added to the already diverse Indian cuisine. [7] [8] 
 
 Prehistory and Indus Valley civilization 
 This section  does not  cite  any  sources .  Please help  improve this section  by  adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and  removed .   ( May 2022 )  ( Learn how and when to remove this template message ) 
 See also:  Meluhha ,  Indus–Mesopotamia relations , and  Indian maritime history 
 After 9000 BCE, a first period of indirect contacts between  Fertile Crescent  and  Indus Valley  civilizations seems to have occurred as a consequence of the  Neolithic Revolution  and the diffusion of agriculture. Around 7000 BCE, agriculture spread from the Fertile Crescent to the Indus Valley, and wheat and barley began to be grown.  Sesame , and  humped cattle  were domesticated in the local farming communities. Mehrgarh is one of the earliest sites with evidence of farming and herding in  South Asia . From circa 4500 to 1900 BC the rulers of  Lower Mesopotamia  were  Sumerians  who spoke a non- Indo-European  and non- Semitic  language, may have initially come from India and may have been related to the original  Dravidian  population of India.
 By 3000 BCE,  turmeric ,  cardamom ,  black pepper  and  mustard  were harvested in India.
 From Around 2350 BCE the evidence for imports from the Indus to  Ur  in  Mesopotamia  have been found, as well as  Clove  heads which are thought to originate from the  Moluccas  in  Maritime Southeast Asia  were found in a 2nd millennium BC site in  Terqa .  Akkadian Empire  records mention timber, carnelian and ivory as being imported from  Meluhha  by Meluhhan ships, Meluhha being generally considered as the Mesopotamian name for the Indus Valley Civilization.
 
 Vedic age 
 This section  does not  cite  any  sources .  Please help  improve this section  by  adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and  removed .   ( May 2022 )  ( Learn how and when to remove this template message ) 
 The ancient  Hindu  text  Mahabharata  mentions rice and vegetable cooked together, and the word "pulao" or "pallao" is used to refer to the dish in ancient  Sanskrit  works, such as  Yājñavalkya Smṛti .  Ayurveda , ancient Indian system of wellness, deals with holistic approach to the wellness, and it includes food,  dhyana  (meditation) and  yoga .
 
 Antiquity 
 Early diet in India mainly consisted of  legumes ,  vegetables ,  fruits ,  grains ,  dairy products , and  honey . [ citation needed ]  Staple foods eaten today include a variety of lentils ( dal ),  whole-wheat flour  ( aṭṭa ), rice, and  pearl millet  ( bājra ), which has been cultivated in the Indian subcontinent since 6200 BCE. [8] 
 Over time, segments of the population embraced  vegetarianism  during the  Śramaṇa  movement [9] [10]  while an equitable climate permitted a variety of fruits, vegetables, and grains to be grown throughout the year.
 A food classification system that categorised any item as  saatvic ,  raajsic , or  taamsic  developed in  Yoga  tradition. [11] [12]  The  Bhagavad Gita  proscribes certain dietary practices (chapter 17, verses 8–10). [13] 
 Consumption of  beef  is  taboo , due to cows being considered sacred in Hinduism. [14]  Beef is generally not eaten by Hindus in India except for  Kerala , parts of southern  Tamil Nadu  and the north-east. [15] 
 
 Foods mentioned in ancient Indian scripture 
   Pomegranate 
 While many ancient Indian recipes have been lost in history, one can look at ancient texts to see what was eaten in ancient and pre-historic India.
 
 Barley [16] —(known as  Yava  in both  Vedic  and  Classical Sanskrit ) is mentioned many times in  Rigveda  and other Indian scriptures as one of the principal grains in ancient India 
 Betel leaf [17] —primary use is as a wrapper for the chewing of  areca nut  or  tobacco , where it is mainly used to add flavour; may also be used in cooking, usually raw, for its peppery taste 
 Breadfruit — fritters  called  jeev kadge phodi  in  Konkani [18]  or  kadachakka varuthath [19]  in  Malayalam  are a local delicacy in coastal  Karnataka  and  Kerala 
 Chickpeas [20] —popular dishes are made with chickpea flour, such as  mirchi bajji  and  mirapakaya bajji 
 Curd —a traditional yogurt or fermented milk product, originating from the Indian subcontinent, usually prepared from cow's milk, and sometimes buffalo milk, or goat milk 
 Figs [16] —cultivated from  Afghanistan  to  Portugal , also grown in  Pithoragarh  in the  Kumaon  hills of  India ; from the 15th century onwards, also grown in areas including Northern  Europe  and the  New World 
 Ghee —a class of clarified butter that originated in ancient India, commonly used in the Indian subcontinent, Middle-Eastern cuisine, traditional medicine, and religious rituals 
 Grape wine [21] —first-known mention of  grape -based wines in India is from the late 4th-century BC writings of  Chanakya 
 Honey [22] —the spiritual and supposed therapeutic use of honey in  ancient India  was documented in both the  Vedas  and the  Ayurveda  texts 
 Mango —the  Jain  goddess  Ambika  is traditionally represented as sitting under a mango tree 
 Mustard [16] — brown mustard  is a spice that was cultivated in the  Indus Valley civilization  and is one of the important spices used in the Indian subcontinent today 
 Pomegranate —in some Hindu traditions, the pomegranate ( Hindi :  anār ) symbolizes prosperity and fertility, and is associated with both  Bhoomidevi  (the earth goddess) and Lord  Ganesha  (the one fond of the many-seeded fruit) 
 Rice —cultivated in the Indian subcontinent from as early as 5,000 BC 
 Rice cake —quite a variety are available [23] 
 Rose apple —mainly eaten as a fruit and also used to make pickles ( chambakka achar ) 
 Saffron [24] —almost all saffron grows in a belt from Spain in the west to  Kashmir  in the east 
 Salt [24] —considered to be a very auspicious substance in  Hinduism  and is used in particular religious ceremonies like house-warmings and weddings; in  Jainism , devotees lay an offering of raw rice with a pinch of salt before a deity to signify their devotion, and salt is sprinkled on a person's cremated remains before the ashes are buried 
 Sesame oil [24] —popular in Asia, especially in  Korea ,  China , and the South Indian states of  Karnataka ,  Andhra Pradesh , and  Tamil Nadu , where its widespread use is similar to that of  olive oil  in the Mediterranean 
 Sorghum [20] —commonly called  jwaarie ,  jowar ,  jola , or  jondhalaa , sorghum is one of the staple sources of nutrition 
 Sugar —produced in the Indian subcontinent since ancient times, its cultivation spread from there into modern-day Afghanistan through the Khyber Pass 
 Sugarcane [20] —the earliest known production of crystalline sugar began in northern India; the earliest evidence of sugar production comes from ancient Sanskrit and Pali texts 
 Turmeric [21] —used widely as a spice in South Asian and Middle Eastern cooking 
 Middle Ages to the 16th Century 
 During the  Middle Ages , several Indian dynasties were predominant, including the  Gupta dynasty . Travel to India during this time introduced new cooking methods and products to the region, including  tea .
 India was later invaded by tribes from  Central Asian  cultures, which led to the emergence of  Mughlai cuisine , a mix of Indian and  Central Asian cuisine . Hallmarks include seasonings such as  saffron . [25] 
 
 Colonial Period 
 The  Portuguese  and  British  during their rule introduced cooking techniques such as baking, and foods from the  New World  and Europe. The  new-world vegetables  popular in cuisine from the Indian subcontinent include  tomato ,  potato ,  sweet potatoes ,  peanuts ,  squash , and  chilli . Most New World vegetables such as sweet potatoes, potatoes,  Amaranth , peanuts and  cassava  based  Sago  are allowed on Hindu fasting days. Cauliflower was introduced by the British in 1822. In the late 18th/early 19th century, an autobiography of a Scottish  Robert Lindsay  mentions a  Sylheti  man called Saeed Ullah cooking a curry for Lindsay's family. This is possibly the oldest record of Indian cuisine in the  United Kingdom . [26] [27] 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bhang  eaters in India c. 1790.  Bhang  is an  edible preparation  of  cannabis  native to the Indian subcontinent. It was used by Hindus in food and drink as early as 1000 BCE. [28] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 A page from the  Nimatnama-i-Nasiruddin-Shahi , book of delicacies and recipes. It documents the fine art of making  kheer .
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Medieval Indian  Manuscript Nimatnama-i-Nasiruddin-Shahi (circa 16th century) showing  samosas  being served.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Prawn  with a  Rohu  fish, Kalighat Painting. Freshwater fishes and crustaceans are staple diet in eastern regions, prominently in Bengal.
 
 
 
 
 Ingredients 
   Spices  at a grocery shop in India 
 Staple foods  of Indian cuisine include  pearl millet  ( bājra ),  rice ,  whole-wheat flour  ( aṭṭa ), and a variety of  lentils , such as  masoor  (most often red  lentils ),  tuer  ( pigeon peas ),  urad  (black gram), and  moong  ( mung beans ). Lentils may be used whole, dehusked—for example,  dhuli moong  or  dhuli urad —or split. Split lentils, or  dal , are used extensively. [29]  Some  pulses , such as  channa  or  cholae  ( chickpeas ),  rajma  ( kidney beans ), and  lobiya  ( black-eyed peas ) are very common, especially in the northern regions.  Channa  and  moong  are also processed into flour ( besan ).
 Many Indian dishes are cooked in  vegetable oil , but  peanut oil  is popular in northern and western India,  mustard oil  in eastern India, [25]  and  coconut oil  along the western coast, especially in Kerala and parts of southern Tamil Nadu. [30] [ self-published source? ]   Gingelly  (sesame) oil  is common in the south since it imparts a fragrant, nutty aroma. [31] 
 In recent decades,  sunflower ,  safflower ,  cottonseed , and  soybean  oils have become popular across India. [32]   Hydrogenated  vegetable oil, known as  Vanaspati  ghee , is another popular cooking medium. [33]  Butter-based ghee, or  deshi ghee , is used commonly.
 Many types of meat are used for Indian cooking, but chicken and mutton tend to be the most commonly consumed meats. Fish and beef consumption are prevalent in some parts of India, but they are not widely consumed except for coastal areas, as well as the north east. [ citation needed ] 
 
   Lentils  are a staple ingredient in Indian cuisine. 
 The most important and frequently used spices and flavourings in Indian cuisine are whole or powdered  chilli pepper  ( mirch ,  introduced by the Portuguese  from  Mexico  in the 16th century),  black mustard  seed ( sarso ),  cardamom  ( elaichi ),  cumin  ( jeera ),  turmeric  ( haldi ),  asafoetida  ( hing ),  ginger  ( adrak ),  coriander  ( dhania ), and  garlic  ( lasoon ). [34] 
 One popular  spice mix  is  garam masala , a powder that typically includes seven dried spices in a particular ratio, including  black cardamom ,  cinnamon  ( dalchini ),  clove  ( laung),  cumin (jeera), black peppercorns, coriander seeds and  anise star . [35] [ self-published source? ] 
 Each culinary region has a distinctive  garam masala  blend—individual  chefs  may also have their own.  Goda masala  is a comparable, though sweet, spice mix popular in  Maharashtra . Some leaves commonly used for flavouring include  bay leaves  ( tejpat ),  coriander  leaves,  fenugreek  ( methi ) leaves, and  mint  leaves. The use of  curry  leaves and roots for flavouring is typical of  Gujarati [36]  and  South Indian cuisine . [37]  Sweet dishes are often seasoned with cardamom,  saffron ,  nutmeg , and  rose  petal essences.
 
 
 Regional cuisines 
 See also:  List of Indian dishes 
   Indian food at restaurant in Paris. 
 Cuisine differs across  India's diverse regions  as a result of variation in local culture, geographical location (proximity to sea, desert, or mountains), and economics. It also varies seasonally, depending on which fruits and vegetables are ripe.
 
 Andaman and Nicobar Islands 
 Seafood  plays a major role in the cuisine of the  Andaman and Nicobar Islands . [38]  Staples of the diet of the Indigenous  Andamanese  traditionally include roots, honey, fruits, meat, and fish, obtained by hunting and gathering. Some insects were also eaten as delicacies. [39]  Immigration from mainland of India, however, has resulted in variations in the cuisine.
 
 Andhra Pradesh 
 Main article:  Telugu cuisine 
 This section  needs additional citations for  verification .  Please help  improve this article  by  adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.   ( April 2020 )  ( Learn how and when to remove this template message ) 
   A vegetarian  Andhra  meal served on important occasions 
 The cuisine of  Andhra Pradesh  belongs to the two Telugu-speaking regions of  Rayalaseema  and Coastal Andhra and is part of  Telugu cuisine . The food of Andhra Pradesh is known for its heavy use of spices, and the use of  tamarind .
 Seafood is common in the coastal region of the state. Rice is the staple food (as is with all South Indian states) eaten with lentil preparations such as  pappu  (lentils) and  pulusu  (stew) and spicy vegetables or curries.
 In Andhra, leafy greens or vegetables such as bottle-gourd and eggplant are usually added to  dal . Pickles are an essential part of the local cuisine; popular among those are mango-based pickles such as  avakaya  and  maagaya ,  gongura  (a pickle made from  sorrel  leaves), [40]   usirikaya  (gooseberry or  amla ),  nimmakaya  (lime), and tomato pickle.
 Perugu  (yogurt) is a common addition to meals, as a way of tempering spiciness. Breakfast items include  dosa , pesarattu  (mung bean  dosa ),  vada , and  idli .
 
 Arunachal Pradesh 
 Main article:  Cuisine of Arunachal Pradesh 
   Pitang Oying 
 The staple food of  Arunachal Pradesh  is rice, along with fish, meat, and  leaf vegetables . [41]  Native tribes of Arunachal are meat eaters and use fish, eggs, beef, chicken, pork, and mutton to make their dishes.
 Many varieties of rice are used. Boiled rice cakes wrapped in leaves are a popular snack.  Thukpa  is a kind of noodle soup common among the  Monpa  tribe of the region. [42] 
 Lettuce  is the most common vegetable, usually prepared by  boiling  with ginger, coriander, and green chillies. [43] 
 Apong  or  rice beer  made from fermented rice or millet is a popular beverage in Arunachal Pradesh and is consumed as a refreshing drink. [44] 
 
 Assam 
 Main article:  Assamese cuisine 
   A lunch platter of Assamese cuisine 
 Assamese  cuisine is a mixture of different indigenous styles, with considerable regional variation and some external influences. Although it is known for its limited use of spices, [45]  Assamese cuisine has strong flavours from its use of endemic herbs, fruits, and vegetables served fresh, dried, or  fermented .
 Rice is the staple food item and a huge variety of endemic rice varieties, including several varieties of sticky rice are a part of the cuisine in Assam. Fish, generally freshwater varieties, are widely eaten. Other non-vegetarian items include chicken, duck, squab, snails, silkworms, insects, goat, pork, venison, turtle, monitor lizard, etc.
 The region's cuisine involves simple cooking processes, mostly barbecuing, steaming, or boiling.  Bhuna , the gentle frying of spices before the addition of the main ingredients, generally common in Indian cooking, is absent in the cuisine of Assam.
 A traditional meal in Assam begins with a  khar , a class of dishes named after the main ingredient and ends with a  tenga , a sour dish. Homebrewed rice beer or  rice wine  is served before a meal. The food is usually served in  bell metal  utensils. [46]   Paan , the practice of chewing  betel nut , generally concludes a meal. [47] 
 
 Bengal 
 Main article:  Bengali cuisine 
   Pithe Puli 
 Mughal cuisine is a universal influencer in the Bengali palate, and has introduced Persian and Islamic foods to the region, as well as a number of more elaborate methods of preparing food, like marination using ghee. Fish, meat, rice, milk, and sugar all play crucial parts in Bengali cuisine. [48] 
 Bengali cuisine can be subdivided into four different types of dishes,  charbya  (চারব্য), or food that is chewed, such as rice or fish;  choṣya , or food that is sucked, such as  ambal  and  tak ;  lehya  (লেহ্য), or foods that are meant to be licked, like  chuttney ; and  peya  (পেয়ে), which includes drinks, mainly milk. [49] 
 
   Shorshe Pabda ( Pabo catfish  in Mustard paste) 
 During the 19th century, many  Odia-speaking  cooks were employed in  Bengal , [50]  which led to the transfer of several food items between the two regions. Bengali cuisine is the only traditionally developed multi-course tradition from the Indian subcontinent that is analogous in structure to the modern  service à la russe  style of French cuisine, with food served course-wise rather than all at once. [51] 
 Bengali cuisine differs according to regional tastes, such as the emphasis on the use of  chilli pepper  in the  Chittagong  district of Bangladesh [52]  However, across all its varieties, there is predominant use of mustard oil along with large amounts of spices.
 The cuisine is known for subtle flavours with an emphasis on  fish , meat, vegetables, lentils, and rice. [53]  Bread is also a common dish in Bengali cuisine, particularly a deep-fried version called  luchi  is popular. Fresh aquatic fish is one of its most distinctive features; Bengalis prepare fish in many ways, such as  steaming ,  braising , or  stewing  in vegetables and sauces based on  coconut milk  or  mustard .
 East Bengali food, which has a high presence in  West Bengal  and Bangladesh, is much spicier than the West Bengali cuisine, and tends to use high amounts of chilli, and is one of the spiciest cuisines in India and the World.
 Shondesh  and  Rashogolla  are popular dishes made of sweetened, finely ground fresh cheese. For the latter, West Bengal and neighboring  Odisha  both claim to be the origin of dessert. Each state also has a  geographical indication  for their regional variety of  rasgulla . [54] [55] 
 The cuisine is also found in the state of  Tripura  and the  Barak Valley  of Assam.
 
 Bihar 
 Main article:  Bihari cuisine 
 See also:  Bhojpuri cuisine ,  Maithil cuisine , and  Magahi cuisine 
   Litti Chokha 
 Bihari cuisine may include  litti chokha , [56]  a baked salted wheat-flour cake filled with  sattu  (baked chickpea flour) and some special spices, which is served with  baigan bharta , [57]  made of roasted eggplant ( brinjal ) and tomatoes. [58] [59] 
 Among meat dishes, meat  saalan [60]  is a popular dish made of mutton or goat curry with cubed potatoes in  garam masala .
 Dalpuri  is another popular dish in Bihar. It is salted wheat-flour bread, filled with boiled, crushed, and fried gram pulses. [61] 
 Malpua  is a popular sweet dish of Bihar, prepared by a mixture of  maida , milk, bananas, cashew nuts, peanuts, raisins, sugar, water, and green cardamom. Another notable sweet dish of Bihar is  balushahi , which is prepared by a specially treated combination of  maida  and sugar along with  ghee , and the other worldwide famous sweet,  khaja  is made from flour, vegetable fat, and sugar, which is mainly used in weddings and other occasions.  Silao  near  Nalanda  is famous for its production.
 During the festival of  Chhath ,  thekua , a sweet dish made of  ghee ,  jaggery , and whole-meal flour, flavoured with  aniseed , is made. [58] 
 Other food items that are quite prominent in Bihar are, Pittha, Aaloo Bhujiya, Reshmi  Kebab , Palwal ki mithai, and Puri Sabzi. [62] 
 
 Chandigarh 
   Punjabi   aloo paratha  served with butter 
 Chandigarh , the capital of  Punjab  and  Haryana  is a city of 20th-century origin with a cosmopolitan food culture mainly involving North Indian cuisine. People enjoy home-made recipes such as  paratha , especially at breakfast, and other  Punjabi  foods like  roti  which is made from  wheat ,  sweetcorn , or other  glutenous   flour  with cooked vegetables or beans.  Sarson da saag  and  dal makhani  are well-known dishes among others. [63]  Popular snacks include  gol gappa  (known as  panipuri  in other places). It consists of a round, hollow  puri , fried crisp and filled with a mixture of flavoured water, boiled and cubed potatoes,  bengal gram  beans, etc.
 
 Chhattisgarh 
 Main article:  Cuisine of Chhattisgarh 
   Chhattisgarhi Sweets Khurmi 
 Chhattisgarh  cuisine is unique in nature and not found in the rest of India, although the staple food is rice, like in much of the country. Many Chhattisgarhi people drink  liquor  brewed from the  mahuwa flower  palm wine ( tadi  in rural areas). [64]  Chhattisgarhi cuisines varies as per special occasions and festivals like Thethari and Khurmi, fara, gulgule bhajiya, chausela, chila, aaersa are prepared in regional festivals. [65]  The tribal people of the  Bastar  region of Chhattisgarh eat ancestral dishes such as  mushrooms , bamboo pickle, bamboo vegetables, etc. [66] [67] 
 
 Dadra and Nagar Haveli 
 The local cuisine resembles the cuisine of Gujarat.  Ubadiyu [68]  is a local delicacy made of vegetables and beans with herbs. The common foods include rice,  roti , vegetables, river fish, and crab. People also enjoy buttermilk and  chutney  made of different fruits and herbs. [69] 
 
 Daman and Diu 
 Daman and Diu  is a union territory of India which, like  Goa , was a former colonial possession of Portugal. Consequently, both native  Gujarati food  and traditional  Portuguese food  are common. Being a coastal region, the communities are mainly dependent on seafood. Normally,  rotli  and tea are taken for breakfast,  rotla  and  saak  for lunch, and  chokha  along with  saak  and curry are taken for dinner. Some of the dishes prepared on festive occasions include  puri ,  lapsee ,  potaya ,  dudh-plag , and  dhakanu . [70]  While  alcohol  is prohibited in the neighbouring state of  Gujarat , drinking is common in Daman and Diu. Better known as the "pub" of Gujarat. All popular brands of alcohol are readily available.
 
 Delhi 
 Main article:  Mughlai cuisine 
   Rajma - chawal , curried red kidney beans with steamed rice [ why? ] 
 Delhi  was once the capital of the Mughal empire, and it became the birthplace of  Mughlai cuisine . Delhi is noted for its street food. The  Paranthewali Gali  in  Chandani Chowk  is just one of the culinary landmarks for stuffed  flatbread  ( parathas ).
 Delhi has people from different parts of India, thus the city has different types of food traditions; its cuisine is influenced by the various cultures. Punjabi cuisine is common, due to the dominance of Punjabi communities. [71] 
 Delhi cuisine is actually an amalgam of different Indian cuisines modified in unique ways. This is apparent in the different types of street food available.  Kababs ,  kachauri ,  chaat , Indian sweets, Indian ice cream (commonly called  kulfi ), and even Western food items like sandwiches and patties, are prepared in a style unique to Delhi and are quite popular. [72] 
 
 Goa 
 Main articles:  Goan cuisine  and  Goan Catholic cuisine 
 See also:  Saraswat cuisine  and  Malvani cuisine 
   Pork  vindaloo  (pictured) is a popular curry dish in Goa and around the world. 
 The area has a tropical climate, which means the spices and flavours are intense. Use of  kokum  is a distinct feature of the region's cuisine.
 Goan cuisine is mostly seafood and meat-based; the staple foods are rice and fish.  Kingfish ( vison  or  visvan )  is the most common delicacy, and others include  pomfret ,  shark ,  tuna , and  mackerel ; these are often served with  coconut milk . [73]   Shellfish , including  crabs ,  prawns ,  tiger prawns ,  lobster ,  squid , and  mussels , are commonly eaten.
 The cuisine of Goa is influenced by its Hindu origins, 400 years of  Portuguese colonialism , and modern techniques. [73] [74] 
 Bread , introduced by the Portuguese, is very popular, and is an important part of the Goan breakfast, most frequently in the form of toast.
 Tourism in the area adds an international aspect, hence vegetarianism has become quite favored. [75] 
 
 Gujarat 
 Main article:  Gujarati cuisine 
   Khaman  is a popular Gujarati snack 
 Gujarati cuisine is primarily vegetarian. The typical Gujarati  thali  consists of  roti  ( rotlii  in  Gujarati ),  daal  or  kadhi , rice,  sabzi / shaak ,  papad  and  chaas  (buttermilk).
 
 Sabzi  is a dish of different combinations of vegetables and spices which may be  stir fried , spicy or sweet. [76]  Gujarati cuisine can vary widely in flavour and heat based on personal and regional tastes.  North Gujarat ,  Kathiawad ,  Kachchh , and  South Gujarat  are the four major regions of Gujarati cuisine. [77] 
 Many Gujarati dishes are simultaneously sweet, salty (like  handvo ), and spicy. In  mango  season,  keri no ras  (fresh mango pulp) is often an integral part of the meal. Spices also vary seasonally. For example,  garam masala  is used much less in summer.
 Gujarati snacks include  sev khamani , [78]   khakhra ,  dal vada , [79]   methi na bhajiya , [80]   khaman ,  bhakharwadi  and more.
 Regular  fasting , with diets limited to milk,  dried fruit , and  nuts , is a common practice, [81] 
 
 Haryana 
 Main article:  Cuisine of Haryana 
   Kadhi  is a  Haryana  dish. 
 Cattle being common in  Haryana , dairy products are a common component of its cuisine. [82] [83] 
 Specific regional dishes include  kadhi ,  pakora ,  besan   masala  roti , [84]   bajra aloo roti , [85]   churma ,  kheer ,  bathua raita , [86]   methi  gajar , [87]   singri ki  sabzi , [88]  and  tomato chutney .
 In the past, its staple diet included  bajra khichdi , [89]   rabdi , onion chutney, [90]  and  bajra ki roti . [91]  In non-vegetarian cuisine it includes  kukad kadhai [92]  and  chicken  tikka masala .
 Lassi ,  sharbat ,  nimbu pani  and  labsi  (a mixture of  bajra  flour and  lassi ) are three popular non-alcoholic beverages in Haryana. However, liquor stores are common there, which cater to a large number of truck drivers. [93] 
 
 Himachal Pradesh 
 Main article:  Culture of Himachal Pradesh § Cuisine 
 The daily diet of  Himachal  people is similar to that of the rest of North India, including lentils, broth, rice, vegetables, and bread, although non-vegetarian cuisine is preferred. Some of the specialities of Himachal include  sidu , [94]   patande , [95]   chukh ,  rajmah , and  til  chutney. [96] 
 
 Jammu and Kashmir 
 Main article:  Cuisine of Kashmir 
   Wazwan 
 The cuisine of Jammu and Kashmir is from two regions of the state: Jammu division and Kashmir Valley.  Kashmiri  cuisine has evolved over hundreds of years. Its first major influence was the food of the  Kashmiri Hindus  and Buddhists.
 
The cuisine was later influenced by the cultures which arrived with the invasion of Kashmir by  Timur  from the area of modern  Uzbekistan . Subsequent influences have included the cuisines of  Central Asia  and the North Indian plains.
 
The most notable ingredient in Kashmiri cuisine is  mutton , of which over 30 varieties are known. [97]   Wazwan  is a multicourse meal in the Kashmiri tradition, the preparation of which is considered an art. [98]     Shufta  Kashmiri pandit food is elaborate, and an important part of the Pandits' ethnic identity. Kashmiri pandit cuisine usually uses  dahi  (yogurt), oil, and spices such as turmeric, red chilli, cumin, ginger, and  fennel , though they do not use onion and garlic. [99]   Birayanis  are quite popular, and are the speciality of Kashmir.
 The Jammu region is famous for its  sund panjeeri ,  patisa ,  rajma  with rice and  Kalari cheese .
 Dogri  food includes  ambal  (sour pumpkin dish), [100]   khatta  meat, [101]   kulthein di dal , [102]   dal chawal , [103]   maa da madra  (black gram lentils in yogurt) [104]  and Uriya.
 Many types of pickles are made including  mango ,  kasrod , and  girgle . Street food is also famous which include various types of  chaats , specially  gol gappas ,  gulgule ,  chole bhature ,  rajma kulcha [105]  and  dahi bhalla .
 
 Jharkhand 
 Main article:  Cuisine of Jharkhand 
 Staple foods in  Jharkhand  are rice,  dal  and vegetables. Famous dishes include  chirka roti , [106]   pittha ,  malpua ,  dhuska ,  arsa roti [107]  and  litti chokha . [108] 
 Local alcoholic drinks include  handia , a rice beer, and  mahua  daru , made from flowers of the  mahua  tree ( Madhuca longifolia ) . [109] [110] 
 
 Karnataka 
 Main article:  Cuisine of Karnataka 
 See also:  Mangalorean cuisine  and  Udupi cuisine 
   Staple vegetarian meal of Karnataka is  jolada rotti , palya , and  anna-saaru . 
 A number of dishes, such as  idli ,  rava idli , Mysore  masala dosa , etc., were invented here and have become popular beyond the state of  Karnataka [ citation needed ] . Equally, varieties in the cuisine of Karnataka have similarities with its three neighbouring South Indian states, as well as the states of  Maharashtra  and Goa to its north. It is very common for the food to be served on a banana leaf, especially during festivals and functions.
 Karnataka cuisine can be very broadly divided into  Mysore / Bangalore  cuisine, North Karnataka cuisine,  Udupi cuisine ,  Kodagu /Coorg cuisine,  Karavali /coastal cuisine, and  Saraswat cuisine .
 This cuisine covers a wide spectrum of food from pure vegetarian and vegan to meats like pork, and from savouries to sweets.
 Typical dishes include  bisi bele bath ,  jolada rotti ,  badanekai yennegai , [111]   holige ,  kadubu ,  chapati ,  idli vada ,  ragi rotti ,  akki rotti ,  saaru ,  huli ,  kootu ,  vangibath ,  khara bath ,  kesari bhath ,  sajjige ,  neer dosa ,   mysoore [ clarification needed ] ,  haal bai , [112]   chiroti ,  benne dose ,  ragi mudde ,  and  uppittu . 
 The  Kodagu district  is known for spicy pork curries, [113]  while coastal Karnataka specialises in seafood. Although the ingredients differ regionally, a typical  Kannadiga oota  (Kannadiga meal) is served on a  banana leaf . The coastal districts of  Dakshina Kannada  and  Udupi  have slightly varying cuisines, which make extensive use of coconut in curries and frequently include seafood. [114] [115] 
 
 Kerala 
 Main article:  Cuisine of Kerala 
   A traditional Kerala Sadhya 
 Contemporary Kerala food includes vegetarian and non-vegetarian dishes. Fish and seafood play a major role in Kerala cuisine, as Kerala is a coastal state. An everyday Kerala meal in most households consists of rice with fish curry made of sardines, mackerel,  seer  fish, king fish, pomfret, prawns, shrimp, sole, anchovy, or parrotfish, (mussels, oysters, crabs, squid, scallops are not rare), and vegetable curry and stir-fried vegetables with or without coconut traditionally known as  thoran  or  mizhukkupiratti . As Kerala has large number of inland water bodies, freshwater fish are also abundant, and part of regular meals. It is common in Kerala to have a breakfast with non-vegetarian dishes in restaurants, in contrast to other states in India. Chicken or mutton stews, lamb, chicken, beef, pork, egg curry, and fish curry with tapioca for breakfast are also widely enjoyed.
 Kerala cuisine reflects its rich trading heritage. Over time, various cuisines have blended with indigenous dishes, while foreign ones have been adapted to local tastes. [116]  Significant Arab, Syrian, Portuguese, Dutch, Jewish, and Middle Eastern influences exist in this region's cuisine.
 
   Kerala style prawns roast–Kerala being a coastal state has different varieties of sea food preparations 
 Coconuts  grow in abundance in Kerala, so grated coconut and coconut milk are commonly used for thickening and flavouring. [117]  Kerala's long coastline and numerous rivers have led to a strong fishing industry in the state, making seafood a common part of the meal. Starchy food like Rice and  tapioca  forms the major part of Kerala's staple food. [118]  Having been a major region of  spice  cultivation and trade for thousands of years, the spices like black pepper, cardamom, clove, ginger, cumin and cinnamon finds extensive use in Kerala cuisine. Kerala  sadhya , an elaborate vegetarian banquet prepared for festivals and ceremonies. A full-course  sadhya , which consists of rice with about 20 different accompaniments and desserts is the ceremonial meal, eaten usually on celebrations such as marriages,  Onam ,  Vishu , etc. and is served on a  plantain  leaf.
 Most of Kerala's Hindus, except its  Brahmin  community, eats fish, chicken, beef, pork, eggs, and mutton. [119]  The Brahmin are famed for their vegan cuisine, especially varieties of  sambar  and  rasam . A thick vegetable stew popular in South and Central India called  avial  is believed to have originated in southern Kerala. The avial, eaten widely in the state, is an important vegetarian dish in  Kerala sadya . In most Kerala households, a typical meal consists of rice served along with vegetables and fish or meat dishes. Kerala also has a variety of breakfast dishes like  idli ,  dosa ,  appam ,  idiyappam ,  puttu ,  parotta  and  pathiri  served with sambar, coconut chutney, mutta curry (egg curry), kadala (chickpea) curry, green peas, chicken curry, beef curry and mutton curry. [120] 
 The  Muslim  community of Kerala blend Arabian, North Indian, and indigenous  Malabari  cuisines, using chicken, eggs, beef, and mutton. [121]   Thalassery biryani  is the only  biryani  variant, which is of Kerala origin having originated in  Talassery , in  Malabar region . The dish is significantly different from other  biryani  variants. [122]  Snacks like  Pazham nirachathu ,  Unnakkai ,  Bread pola — made of bread, eggs, milk and a simple masala, Iftar preparations like  Thari kanji ,  Kozhi pichuporichathu  (shredded chicken),  Pidi — a preparation of rice dumplings dunked in gravy, Irachi pathiri, Chatti pathiri, Meen pathiri, Neriya pathiri and Kannu vecha pathiri  — roti varieties usually made of powdered rice, dishes like Kaai curry etc., are also contributions of Muslim community to the broad Kerala cuisine. [123] 
The  Pathanamthitta  region is known for  raalan  and fish curries.  Appam  along with  wine  and curries of duck, pork and cured beef are popular among  Syrian Christians  in Central Kerala.
 Popular desserts are  payasam  (pudding) and  halwa . Payasam, especially  Ambalappuzha Paalpayasam  also known as Gopala Kashayam (Krishnan's potion) prepared at the 17th century  Ambalappuzha Sri Krishna swami temple , is a delicacy known for its unique and flavourful taste. Interestingly, on each day the paalpayasam is prepared only after (ritualistically) seeking due permission from the presiding deity —  Shri Krishna . [124]  Kerala has a number of paayasam varieties including but not limited to  Paalpayasam, Vermicelli Payasam, Pradhaman, Ada Pradhaman, Chakka (Jackfruit) Pradhaman, Parippu Paayasam  and more. Paayasam like Vermicelli Payasam (Semiya payasam) also finds a place in  Iftar  feast of Muslim communities in Kerala.
 Halva  is one of the most commonly found or easily recognized sweets in bakeries throughout Kerala, and originated from the Gujarathi community in Calicut. [125]  Europeans used to call the dish "sweetmeat" due to its texture, and a street in Kozhikode where became named  Sweet Meat Street  during  colonial rule . This is mostly made from  maida  (highly refined wheat), and comes in various flavours, such as banana,  ghee  or coconut. However,  karutha haluva  (black  haluva ) made from rice is also very popular.
 
 Ladakh 
   Thukpa  is popular in  Ladakh ,  Himachal Pradesh  &  North-East India . 
 Ladakhi cuisine is from the two districts of  Leh  and  Kargil  in the union territory of  Ladakh . Ladakhi food has much in common with  Tibetan food , the most prominent foods being  thukpa  (noodle soup) and  tsampa , known in Ladakhi as  ngampe  (roasted barley flour). Edible without cooking,  tsampa  makes useful trekking food.
 Strictly Ladakhi dishes include  skyu  and  chutagi , both heavy and rich soup pasta dishes,  skyu  being made with root vegetables and meat, and  chutagi  with leafy greens and vegetables. [126]  As Ladakh moves toward a cash-based economy, foods from the plains of India are becoming more common. [127] 
 As in other parts of Central Asia, tea in Ladakh is traditionally made with strong green tea, butter, and salt. It is mixed in a large churn and known as  gurgur cha , after the sound it makes when mixed. Sweet tea ( cha ngarmo ) is common now, made in the Indian style with milk and sugar. Most of the surplus barley that is produced is fermented into  chang , an alcoholic beverage drunk especially on festive occasions. [128] 
 
 Lakshadweep 
 The cuisine of  Lakshadweep  prominently features seafood and coconut. Local food consists of spicy non-vegetarian and vegetarian dishes.
 The culinary influence of Kerala is quite evident in the cuisines of Lakshadweep, since the island lies in close proximity to Kerala. Coconut and sea fish serve as the foundation of most meals.
 The people of Lakshadweep drink large amounts of  coconut water , which is the most abundant aerated drink on the island. Coconut milk is the base for most of the curries. All the sweet or savory dishes have a touch of famous  Malabar  spices. Local people also prefer to have  dosa ,  idlis,  and various rice dishes. [129] 
 
 Madhya Pradesh 
   Daal bafla , a popular dish in  Madhya Pradesh ,  Rajasthan , and  Gujarat 
 The cuisine in  Madhya Pradesh  varies regionally. Wheat and meat are common in the north and west of the state, while the wetter south and east are dominated by rice and fish. Milk is a common ingredient in  Gwalior  and  Indore .
 The  street food  of Indore is well known, with shops that have been active for generations. [130]   Bhopal  is known for meat and fish dishes such as  rogan josh ,  korma ,  qeema ,  biryani ,  pilaf , and  kebabs . On a street named Chatori Gali in old Bhopal, one can find traditional Muslim nonvegetarian fare such as  paya  soup,  bun kabab , and  nalli-nihari  as some of the specialties. [131] 
 Dal bafla  is a common meal in the region and can be easily found in Indore and other nearby regions, consisting of a steamed and grilled wheat cake dunked in rich  ghee , which is eaten with  daal  and  ladoos .
 The culinary specialty of the  Malwa  and Indore regions of central Madhya Pradesh is  poha  (flattened rice); usually eaten at breakfast with  jalebi . [132] 
 Beverages in the region include  lassi ,  beer ,  rum  and  sugarcane juice . A local liquor is distilled from the flowers of the  mahua tree .  Date palm   toddy  is also popular. In tribal regions, a popular drink is the sap of the  sulfi  tree, which may be alcoholic if it has  fermented .
 
 Maharashtra 
 Main article:  Maharashtrian cuisine 
   Vada pav 
 Maharashtrian  cuisine is an extensive balance of many different tastes. It includes a range of dishes from mild to very spicy tastes.  Bajri , wheat, rice,  jowar , vegetables, lentils, and fruit form important components of the Maharashtrian diet.
 Popular dishes include  puran poli ,  ukdiche  modak ,  batata wada ,  sabudana khichdi ,  masala bhat , [133]   pav bhaji , and  wada pav . [134]   Poha  or  flattened rice  is also usually eaten at breakfast.  Kanda poha [135]  and  aloo poha [136]  are some of the dishes cooked for breakfast and snacking in evenings.
 
Popular spicy meat dishes include those that originated in the Kolhapur region. These are the Kolhapuri  Sukka  mutton, [137]   pandhra rassa , [138]  and  tabmda rassa . [139]   Shrikhand , a sweet dish made from  strained yogurt , is a main dessert of Maharashtrian cuisine. [140]     Puran poli The cuisine of Maharashtra can be divided into two major sections, the coastal and the interior. The  Konkan , on the coast of the  Arabian Sea , has its own type of cuisine, a homogeneous combination of  Malvani ,  Goud Saraswat Brahmin , and  Goan cuisine .  In the interior of Maharashtra, the  Paschim Maharashtra ,  Khandesh ,  Vidarbha  and  Marathwada  areas have their own distinct cuisines.
 The cuisine of Vidarbha uses  groundnuts , poppy seeds,  jaggery , wheat,  jowar , and  bajra  extensively. A typical meal consists of rice,  roti ,  poli , or  bhakar , along with  varan  and  aamtee [141] —lentils and spiced vegetables. Cooking is common with different types of oil.
 Savji  food from Vidarbha is well known all over Maharashtra.  Savji dishes are very spicy and oily. Savji mutton curries are very famous.
 Like other coastal states, an enormous variety of vegetables, fish, and coconuts exists, where they are common ingredients. Peanuts and  cashews  are often served with vegetables. Grated coconuts are used to flavour many types of dishes, but coconut oil is not widely used; peanut oil is preferred. [142] 
 Kokum , most commonly served chilled, in an appetiser-digestive called  sol kadhi , is prevalent. During summer, Maharashtrians consume  panha , a drink made from raw mango. [143] [144] 
 
 Malwani 
 This section  needs additional citations for  verification .  Please help  improve this article  by  adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.   ( May 2021 )  ( Learn how and when to remove this template message ) 
   Pathrado (Steamed Taro leaves) 
 Malwani cuisine is a specialty of the tropical area which spans from the shore of  Deogad Malwan  to the southern Maharashtrian border with  Goa . The unique taste and flavor of Malwani cuisine comes from Malwani  masala  and use of coconut and  kokam .
 The staple foods are rice and fish. Various kinds of red and green fish, prawns, crab, and shellfish curries (also called  mashacha sar  in the Malwani language) are well known, along with  kombadi  (chicken)  wade  and mutton prepared Malwani style.  Mohari  mutton is also one of the distinct delicacies of Malwani cuisine.
 A large variety of fish is available in the region, which include  surmai ,  karali ,  bangada ,  bombil  ( Bombay duck ),  paplet  ( pomfret ),  halwa ,  tarali ,  suandale ,  kolambi  (prawns),  tisari  ( shellfish ),  kalwa  ( stone fish ) and  kurli  (crab).
 All these fish are available in dried form, including prawns, which are known as  sode . Local curries and  chatanis  are also prepared with dried fish.
 Different types of rice breads and pancakes add to the variety of Malwani cuisine and include  tandlachi bhakari , [145]   ghawane ,  amboli , [146]   patole ,  appe ,  tandalachi  and  shavai  (rice noodles). These rice breads can be eaten specially flavored with coconut milk, fish curries, and chicken or mutton curries.
 Sole kadi  made from  kokam  and coconut milk is a signature appetizer drink .
For vegetarians, Malwani delicacies include  alloochi bhaji ,  alloochi gathaya ,  kalaya watanyacha , and  sambara  (black gram stew).
 The sweets and desserts include  ukadiche modak , [147]   Malawani khaje ,  khadakahde kundiche ladu ,  shegdanyache ladu ,  tandalchi kheer , and  tandalachi shavai ani ras  (specially flavored with coconut milk).
 
 Manipur 
 Main article:  Manipuri cuisine 
   Eromba , here vegetarian, is a popular Manipuri dish. 
 Manipuri  cuisine is represented by the cuisine of the  Meitei people  who form the majority population in the central plain. Meitei food are simple, tasty, organic and healthy. Rice with local seasonal vegetables and fish form the main diet.
 Most of the dishes are cooked like vegetable stew, flavored with either  fermented fish  called  ngari , or dried and smoked fish.
 The most popular Manipuri dish is  eromba , a preparation of boiled and mashed vegetables, often including carrots,  potatoes  or  beans , mixed with  chilli  and roasted fermented  fish .
 Another popular dish is the savory cake called  paknam , made of a lentil flour stuffed with various ingredients such as banana inflorescence,  mushrooms , fish, vegetables etc., and baked covered in  turmeric  leaves.
 Along with spicy dishes, a mild side dish of steamed or boiled sweet vegetables are often served in the daily meals. The Manipuri salad dish called  singju , made of finely julienned  cabbage , green  papaya , and other vegetables, and garnished with local herbs, toasted  sesame  powder and lentil flour is extremely popular locally, and often found sold in small street side vendors.
 Singju  is often served with  bora , which are fritters of various kinds, and also  kanghou , or oil-fried spicy veggies. [148]  Cooked and fermented  soybean  is a popular condiment in all Manipuri kitchens.
 The staple diet of Manipur consists of rice, fish, large varieties of leafy vegetables (of both aquatic and terrestrial).  Manipuris  typically raise vegetables in a  kitchen  garden and rear fishes in small ponds around their house. Since the vegetables are either grown at home or obtained from local market, the cuisines are very seasonal, each season having its own special vegetables and preparations.
 The taste is very different from mainland Indian cuisines because of the use of various aromatic  herbs  and  roots  that are peculiar to the region. They are however very similar to the cuisines of  Southeast ,  East , and  Central Asia ,  Siberia ,  Micronesia  and  Polynesia .
 
 Meghalaya 
 Main article:  Meghalayan cuisine 
   Jadoh  with mutton is characteristic of  Meghalayan  cuisine. 
 Meghalayan  cuisine is unique and different from other Northeastern Indian states. [149]  Spiced meat is common, from goats, pigs, fowl, ducks, chickens, and cows. In the  Khasi  and  Jaintia Hills districts , common foods include  jadoh ,  ki kpu ,  tung-rymbai , [150]  and pickled  bamboo shoots .
 Other common foods in Meghalaya include  minil songa  (steamed  sticky rice ),  sakkin gata , and  momo  dumplings.
 Like other tribes in the northeast, the Garos ferment  rice beer , which they consume in religious rites and secular celebrations. [151] 
 
 Mizoram 
 Main article:  Mizo cuisine 
 The cuisine of  Mizoram  differs from that of most of India, though it shares characteristics to other regions of  Northeast India  and North India.
 Rice is the staple food of Mizoram, while Mizos love to add non-vegetarian ingredients in every dish. Fish, chicken, pork and beef are popular meats among Mizos. Dishes are served on fresh  banana leaves . Most of the dishes are cooked in  mustard oil .
 Meals tend to be less spicy than in most of India. Mizos love eating boiled vegetables along with rice. A popular dish is  bai , made from boiling vegetables (spinach, eggplant, beans, and other leafy vegetables) with  bekang  (fermented soya beans) or  sa-um , fermented pork fat served with rice.  Sawhchiar  is another common dish, made of rice and cooked with pork or chicken. [152] [153] 
 
 Nagaland 
 Main article:  Naga cuisine 
   Naga style smoked Pork ribs with bamboo shoots and rice 
 The cuisine of  Nagaland  reflects that of the  Naga people . It is known for exotic pork meats cooked with simple and flavourful ingredients, [154]  like the extremely hot  bhut jolokia  (ghost chili) pepper, fermented bamboo shoots, and  akhuni  ( fermented  soya beans ). Another unique and strong ingredient used by the Naga people, is the fermented fish known as  ngari .
 Fresh herbs and other local greens also feature prominently in the Naga cuisine. The Naga use oil sparingly, preferring to ferment, dry, and smoke their meats and fish.
 Traditional homes in Nagaland have external kitchens that serve as  smokehouses . [155] 
 A typical meal consists of rice, meat, a chutney, a couple of stewed or steamed vegetable dishes, flavored with  ngari  or  akhuni . Desserts usually consist of fresh fruits.
 
 Odisha 
 Main article:  Cuisine of Odisha 
   Hot  pakhaḷa ,  jira  (cumin)  pakhaḷa ,  basi  (stale) rice,  dhai  (curd)  pakhaḷa  are popular in rural areas of Odisha. 
 The cuisine of  Odisha  relies heavily on local ingredients. Flavours are usually subtle and delicately spiced. Fish and other seafood, such as crab and shrimp, are very popular, and chicken and mutton are also consumed.
 Panch phutana , a mix of cumin, mustard, fennel, fenugreek and  kalonji  ( nigella ), is widely used for flavouring vegetables and  dals , [156]  while  garam masala  and turmeric are commonly used for meat-based curries.
 Pakhala , a dish made of rice, water, and  dahi  (yogurt), that is fermented overnight, is very popular in summer in rural areas. [157]  Oriyas are very fond of sweets, so  dessert  follows most meals.
 Popular Oriya dishes include  anna ,  kanika ,  dalma ,  khata  ( tamato  and  oou ),  dali  (different types of lentils, i.e.  harada  [ red gram ],  muga  [ green gram ],  kolatha  [ horsegram ], etc.), spinach and other green leaves, and  alu-bharta  (mashed potato) [158]  along with  pakhala .
 Odisha and neighboring  West Bengal  both claim to be the origin of  rasgulla , each state having a  geographical indication  for their regional variety of the dessert. [54] [55]  Odisha is also known for its  chhena -based sweets, including  chhena poda ,  chhena gaja ,  chhena jhili , and  rasabali .
 
 Puducherry 
 The union territory of  Puducherry  was a  French colony  for around 200 years, making  French cuisine  a strong influence on the area.  Tamil cuisine  is eaten by the territory's  Tamil  majority. The influence of the neighbouring areas, such as  Andhra Pradesh  and Kerala, is also visible on the territory's cuisine.
 Some favourite dishes include coconut curry,  tandoori  potato,  soya dosa ,  podanlangkai  ( snake gourd   chutney ), [159]  curried vegetables,  stuffed cabbage , and  baked beans . [160] 
 
 Punjab 
 Main article:  Punjabi cuisine 
   Tandoori  chicken  is a popular grilled dish in Punjab. 
 The cuisine of  Punjab  is known for its diverse range of dishes. It is closely related to the cuisine of the neighbouring Punjab province of Pakistan.
 The state, being an agriculture center, is abundant with whole grains, vegetables, and fruits. Home-cooked and restaurant Punjabi cuisine can vary significantly.
 Restaurant-style Punjabi cooking puts emphasis on creamy textured foods by using   ghee , butter and cream, while home-cooked meals center around whole wheat, rice, and other ingredients flavored with various kinds of  masalas . [161] 
 Common dishes cooked at home are  roti  with  daal  and  dahi  (yogurt) with a side  chutney  and  salad  that includes raw onion, tomato, cucumber, etc.
 The meals are also abundant of local and seasonal vegetables usually sautéed with spices such as cumin, dried coriander, red chili powder, turmeric, black cloves, etc.  Masala chai  is a favorite drink and is consumed in everyday life and at special occasions.
 Many regional differences exist in the Punjabi cuisine based on traditional variations in cooking similar dishes, food combinations, preference of spice combination, etc. It is clear that "the food is simple, robust, and closely linked to the land." [162] 
 Certain dishes exclusive to Punjab, such as  makki di roti  and  sarson da saag , [163]   dal makhani , and others are a favorite of many.
 The  masala  in a Punjabi dish traditionally consists of onion, garlic, ginger, cumin,  garam masala , salt, turmeric, tomatoes sauteed in mustard oil.  Tandoori  food is a Punjabi specialty. Dishes like  Bhatti da murgh  also known as  tandoori chicken ,  Chicken hariyali kabab ,  Achari paneer tikka ,  fish ajwaini tikka  and  Amritsari kulcha  are some popular tandoori foods from Punjab.
 
   Punjabi platter. 
 Common meat dishes in this region are Bhakra curry (goat) and fish dishes. [164]  Dairy products are regularly enjoyed and usually accompany main meals in the form of  dahi , milk, and milk-derived products such as  lassi ,  paneer , and more.
 Punjab has a large number of people following the  Sikh  religion who traditionally follow a vegetarian diet (which includes plant-derived foods, milk, and milk by-products. See  diet in Sikhism ) in accordance to their beliefs.
 No description of Punjabi cuisine is complete without the myriad of famous desserts, such as  kheer ,  gajar ka halwa ,  sooji  (cream of wheat)  halwa ,  rasmalai ,  gulab jamun  and  jalebi . Most desserts are  ghee  or dairy-based, use nuts such as almonds, walnuts, pistachios, cashews, and, raisins.
 Many of the most popular elements of  Anglo-Indian cuisine , such as  tandoori  foods,  naan ,  pakoras  and vegetable dishes with  paneer , are derived from Punjabi styles. [165] 
 Punjabi food is well liked in the world for its flavors, spices, and, versatile use of produce, and so it is one of the most popular cuisines from the sub-continent. Last but not least are the  chhole bhature  and  chhole kulche [166]  which are famous all over the North India.
 
 Rajasthan 
 Main article:  Rajasthani cuisine 
   Rajasthani  thali 
 Cooking in  Rajasthan , an arid region, has been strongly shaped by the availability of ingredients. Food is generally cooked in milk or  ghee , making it quite rich.  Gram flour  is a mainstay of  Marwari  food mainly due to the scarcity of vegetables in the area. [167] 
 Historically, food that could last for several days and be eaten without heating was preferred. Major dishes of a Rajasthani meal may include  daal-baati ,  tarfini ,  raabdi ,  ghevar ,  bail-gatte ,  panchkoota ,  chaavadi ,  laapsi ,  kadhi  and  boondi . Typical  snacks  include  bikaneri bhujia ,  mirchi bada ,  pyaaj kachori , and  dal kachori .
 Daal-baati  is the most popular dish prepared in the state. It is usually supplemented with  choorma , a mixture of finely ground baked  rotis , sugar and  ghee . [168] 
 Rajasthan  is also influenced by the  Rajput  community who have liking for meat dishes. Their diet consisted of  game meat  and gave birth to dishes like  laal maans ,  safed maas , [169]   khad khargosh [170]  and  jungli maas . [171] 
 
 Sikkim 
 Main article:  Sikkimese cuisine 
   Nepalese-style  dal bhat  is popular in Sikkim. 
 In  Sikkim , various ethnic groups such as the  Nepalese ,  Bhutias , and  Lepchas  have their own distinct cuisines.  Nepalese cuisine  is very popular in this area.
 Rice is the staple food of the area, and meat and dairy products are also widely consumed. For centuries, traditional fermented foods and beverages have constituted about 20 percent of the local diet.
 Depending on altitudinal variation, finger millet, wheat, buckwheat, barley, vegetables, potatoes, and soybeans are grown.  Dhindo ,  daal bhat ,  gundruk ,  momo ,  gya thuk ,  ningro ,  phagshapa , and  sel roti  are some of the local dishes.
 Alcoholic drinks are consumed by both men and women. Beef is eaten by  Bhutias . [172] 
 
 Sindh 
 Main article:  Sindhi cuisine 
 See also:  Sindhis in India 
   Sai bhaji  is a Sindhi dish. 
 Sindhi cuisine refers to the native cuisine of the  Sindhi people  from the  Sindh  region, now in  Pakistan . While Sindh is not geographically a part of modern India, its culinary traditions persist, [173]  due to the sizeable number of Hindu Sindhis who migrated to India following the  independence  of  Pakistan  in 1947, especially in Sindhi enclaves such as  Ulhasnagar  and  Gandhidam .
 A typical meal in many Sindhi households includes wheat-based flatbread ( phulka ) and rice accompanied by two dishes, one with gravy and one dry.  Lotus stem  (known as  kamal kakri ) is also used in Sindhi dishes. Cooking vegetables by deep frying is common.
 Some regular Sindhi dishes are  sindhi kadhi , [174]   sai bhaji ,  koki [175]  and  besan bhaji . Ingredients frequently used are mango powder, tamarind,  kokum  flowers , and dried pomegranate seeds. [176] 
 
 Tamil Nadu 
 Main article:  Cuisine of Tamil Nadu 
   Vegetarian meals in Tamil Nadu are traditionally served on a plantain leaf. 
   Murukku 
 Tamil Nadu  is noted for its deep belief that serving food to others is a service to humanity, as is common in many regions of India. The region has a rich cuisine involving both traditional non-vegetarian and vegetarian dishes.
 Tamil  food is characterised by its use of rice, legumes, and lentils, along with distinct aromas and flavours achieved by the blending of spices such as  mustard ,  curry leaves ,  tamarind ,  coriander ,  ginger ,  garlic ,  chili pepper ,  cinnamon ,  clove ,  cardamom ,  cumin ,  nutmeg ,  coconut  and  rose water .
 The traditional way of eating involves being seated on the floor, having the food served on a plantain leaf, and using the right hand to eat. After the meal the plantain leaf is discarded but becomes food for free-ranging cattle and goats.
 A meal (called  saapadu ) consists of rice with other typical Tamil dishes on a plantain leaf. A typical Tamilian would eat on a plantain leaf as it is believed to give a different flavour and taste to food. Also growing in popularity are stainless-steel trays, plates with a selection of different dishes in small bowls.
 Tamil food is characterized by  tiffin , which is a light food taken for breakfast or dinner, and meals which are usually taken during lunch. The word "curry" is derived from the  Tamil   kari , meaning something similar to "sauce". [177] [178] 
 Southern regions such as  Tirunelveli ,  Madurai ,  Paramakudi ,  Karaikudi ,  Chettinad  and  Kongu Nadu  are noted for their spicy non-vegetarian dishes. [179] [180]   Dosa ,  idli ,  pongal  and  biryani  are some of the popular dishes that are eaten with  chutney  and  sambar . Fish and other seafoods are also very popular, because the state is located on the coast. Chicken and goat meat are the predominantly consumed meats in Tamil Nadu.
 A typical Tamil vegetarian meal is heavily dependent on rice, vegetables and lentil preparations such as  rasam  and  sambar , but there are variations. They have influenced Kerala as well in their  kootu ,  arachi vitta sambhar [181]  and  molagootals  ( mulligatawny  soup).
 As mentioned above, the Chettinad variety of food uses many strong spices, such as pepper, garlic, fennel seeds and onions. Tamil food tends to be spicy compared to other parts of India so there is a tradition of finishing the meal with  dahi  (yogurt) is considered a soothing end to the meal.
 Notably,  Tamil Brahmin  cuisine, the food of the  Iyers  and  Iyengar  community, is characterized by slightly different meal times and meal structures compared to other communities within the state.
 Historically vegetarian, the cuisine is known for its milder flavor and avoidance of onion and garlic (although this practice appears to be disappearing with time).
 After a light morning meal of  filter coffee  and different varieties of porridges (oatmeal and  janata kanji  are immensely popular), the main meal of the day, lunch/brunch is usually at 11 am and typically follows a two-three course meal structure. Steamed rice is the main dish, and is always accompanied by a seasonally steamed/sauteed vegetable ( poriyal ), and two or three types of tamarind stews, the most popular being  sambhar  and  rasam . The meal typically ends with  thair sadham  (rice with yogurt), usually served with pickled mangoes or lemons.
 Tiffin  is the second meal of the day and features several breakfast favorites such as  idli ,  rava idli ,  upma ,  dosa  varieties, and  vada , and is usually accompanied by  chai .
 Dinner is the simplest meal of the day, typically involving leftovers from either lunch or  tiffin . Fresh seasonal fruit consumed in the state include bananas, papaya, honeydew and canteloupe melons, jackfruit, mangos, apples,  kasturi  oranges , pomegranates, and  nongu  ( hearts of palm ).
 
 Telangana 
 Main article:  Telangana cuisine 
 Further information:  Telugu cuisine  and  Hyderabadi cuisine 
   Hyderabadi biryani  from Hyderabad 
 The cuisine of  Telangana  consists of the  Telugu cuisine , of Telangana's  Telugu people  as well as  Hyderabadi cuisine  (also known as  Nizami  cuisine), of Telangana's  Hyderabadi Muslim community . [182] [183] 
 Hyderabadi food  is based heavily on non-vegetarian ingredients, while  Telugu food  is a mix of both vegetarian and non-vegetarian ingredients. Telugu food is rich in spices and chillies are abundantly used. The food also generally tends to be more on the tangy side with tamarind and lime juice both used liberally as souring agents.
 Rice is the staple food of Telugu people. Starch is consumed with a variety of curries and lentil  soups  or  broths . [184] [185]  Vegetarian and non-vegetarian foods are both popular.
 Hyderabadi cuisine includes popular delicacies such as  biryani ,  haleem ,  Baghara baingan  and  kheema,  while Hyderabadi day-to-day dishes see some similarities to Telanganite Telugu food, with its use of tamarind, rice, and lentils, along with meat. [184]   Dahi  (yogurt) is a common addition to meals, as a way of tempering  spiciness . [186] 
 
 Tripura 
 Main article:  Tripuri cuisine 
   A Tripuri  thali 
 The  Tripuri people  are the original inhabitants of the state of  Tripura  in northeast India. Today, they comprise the communities of  Tipra ,  Reang ,  Jamatia ,  Noatia , and  Uchoi , among others. The Tripuri are non-vegetarian, [187]  although they have a minority of  Vaishnavite  vegetarians. [188] 
 The major ingredients of Tripuri cuisine include vegetables, herbs, pork, chicken, mutton, fishes, turtle, shrimps, crabs, freshwater mussels, periwinkles, edible freshwater snails and frogs.
 
 Uttar Pradesh 
 Main article:  Cuisine of Uttar Pradesh 
 Further information:  Awadhi cuisine  and  Bhojpuri cuisine 
   Uttar Pradeshi  thali  (platter) with  naan ,  rice ,  daal ,  raita ,  shahi paneer , and  salad 
 Traditionally,  Uttar Pradeshi  cuisine consists of  Awadhi ,  Bhojpuri , and  Mughlai cuisine , [189]  though a vast majority [ citation needed ]  of the state is vegetarian, preferring  dal ,  roti ,  sabzi , and rice.  Pooris  and  kachoris  are eaten on special occasions.
 Chaat ,  samosa , and  pakora , among the most popular snacks in India, originate from Uttar Pradesh. [190] [191] 
 Well-known dishes include  kebabs ,  dum biryani , and various  mutton  recipes.  Sheer qorma ,  ghevar ,  gulab jamun ,  kheer , and  ras malai  are some of the popular desserts in this region.
 Awadhi cuisine  ( Hindi :  अवधी खाना ) is from the city of  Lucknow , which is the capital of the state of  Uttar Pradesh  in  Central-South Asia  and  Northern India , and the cooking patterns of the city are similar to those of Central Asia, the Middle East, and other parts of  Northern India . The cuisine consists of both vegetarian and non-vegetarian dishes.
 Awadh  has been greatly influenced by  Mughal cooking techniques , and the cuisine of Lucknow bears similarities to those of  Central Asia ,  Kashmir ,  Punjab  and  Hyderabad . The city is also known for its  Nawabi  foods. [192]  The  bawarchis  and  rakabdars  of Awadh gave birth to the  dum  style of cooking  or the art of cooking over a slow fire, which has become synonymous with Lucknow today. [193]  Their spread consisted of elaborate dishes like  kebabs ,  kormas ,  biryani ,  kaliya ,  nahari-kulchas ,  zarda ,  sheermal ,  roomali rotis , and  warqi parathas .
 The richness of Awadh cuisine lies not only in the variety of cuisine but also in the ingredients used like  mutton ,  paneer , and rich spices, including  cardamom  and  saffron .
 Mughlai cuisine  is a style of cooking developed in the Indian subcontinent by the  imperial  kitchens of the  Mughal Empire . It represents the cooking styles used in  North India  (especially  Uttar Pradesh ).
 The cuisine is strongly influenced by  Central Asian cuisine , the region where the  Chagatai-Turkic  Mughal rulers originally hailed from, and has strongly influenced the regional cuisines of  Kashmir  and the  Punjab  region. [194] [192] 
 The tastes of Mughlai cuisine vary from extremely mild to spicy, and is often associated with a distinctive  aroma  and the taste of ground and whole spices.
 A Mughlai course is an elaborate  buffet  of main course dishes with a variety of  accompaniments . [195] 
 
 Uttarakhand 
 Main article:  Kumauni cuisine 
   Saag , a popular Kumauni dish from Uttarakhand, made from green vegetables such as  spinach  and  fenugreek 
 Food from  Uttrakhand  is known to be healthy and wholesome to suit the high-energy necessities of the cold, mountainous region. It is a high-protein diet that makes heavy use of  pulses  and vegetables. Traditionally, it is cooked over wood or charcoal fire mostly using iron utensils.
 While making use of condiments such as  jeera ,  haldi  and  rai  common in other Indian cuisines, Uttarakhand cuisine also use exotic ingredients such as  jambu ,  timmer ,  ghandhraini  and  bhangira .
 Although the people in Uttarakhand also make dishes common in other parts of northern India, several preparations are unique to Uttarakhand such as  rus ,  chudkani , [196]   dubuk ,  chadanji , [197]   jholi ,  kapa , and more.
 Among dressed salads and sauces,  kheere ka raita , [198]   nimbu mooli ka raita , [199]   daarim ki khatai  and  aam ka fajitha [200]  are also popular.
 The cuisine mainly consists of food from two different sub-regions,  Garhwal  and  Kumaon , though their basic ingredients are the same. [201]  Both Kumaoni and Garhwali styles make liberal use of  ghee , lentils or pulses, vegetables and  bhaat  (rice). They also use  badi  (sun-dried  urad dal  balls) and  mungodi  (sun-dried  moong dal  balls) as substitutes for vegetables at times.
 During festivals and other celebrations, the people of Uttarakhand prepare special refreshments which include both salty preparations such as  bada  and sweet preparations such as  pua  and  singal . Uttarakhand also has several sweets ( mithai ) such as  singodi ,  bal-mithai , and  malai laddu , [202]  native to its traditions.
 
 Gallery 
 North India 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aloo Tikki 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Daulat Chaat in  Old Delhi 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Butter Chicken  & Butter Naan
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kashmiri Pulav
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Laal Maans 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mughlai Dum Biryani 
 
 
 
 
 West India 
 
 
 
 
 
 Locho  and Idada
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Zunka 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Puran Modak 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Chhole Upma
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tandoori Lemonfish fry
 
 
 
 
 East India 
 
 
 
 
 
 Plantain Dumplings
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Luchi  Alur Torkari
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bamboo steam rice
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tamul Paan
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Prosad Thali
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tan Ngang
 
 
 
 
 South India 
 
 
 
 
 
 Khotto
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Idli   Vada 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dosa 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tirunelveli Halwa 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Prawn Biryani
 
 
 
 
 Hindu fasting cuisine 
   Sabudana khichadi , a snack, popular on Hindu fasting days 
 Hindu people fast on days such as  Ekadashi , in honour of Lord  Vishnu  or his  Avatars ,  Chaturthi  in honour of  Ganesh , Mondays in honour of  Shiva , or Saturdays in honour of  Hanuman  or  Saturn . [203] 
 Only certain kinds of foods are allowed to be eaten. These include milk and other dairy products (such as  dahi ), fruit, and Western food items such as  sago , [204]   potatoes , [205]  purple-red  sweet potatoes ,  amaranth  seeds, [206]   nuts  and ( shama millet ). [207] 
 Popular fasting dishes include  farari chevdo , [208]   sabudana khichadi , and  peanut soup . [209] 
 
 Diaspora and fusion cuisines 
 The interaction of various  Indian diaspora  communities with the native cultures in their new homes has resulted in the creation of many  fusion cuisines , which blend aspects of Indian and other international cuisines. These cuisines tend to interpolate Indian seasoning and cooking techniques into their own national dishes.
 
 Indian Chinese cuisine 
 Main article:  Indian Chinese cuisine 
   Chicken Manchurian served in  Hyderabad 
 Indian Chinese cuisine, also known as Indo-Chinese cuisine originated in the 19th century among the  Chinese community of Calcutta , during the immigration of  Hakka Chinese  from  Canton  (present-day Guangzhou) seeking to escape the  First  and  Second Opium Wars  and political instability in the region. [210]  Upon exposure to local Indian cuisine, they incorporated many spices and cooking techniques into their  own cuisine , thus creating a unique fusion of Indian and Chinese cuisine. [210] 
 After 1947, many  Cantonese  immigrants opened their own restaurants in  Calcutta , whose dishes combined aspects of Indian cuisine with  Cantonese cuisine . [211]  In other parts of India, Indian Chinese cuisine is derived from  Calcutta - Chinese cuisine , but bears little resemblance to their Chinese counterparts [211]  as the dishes tend to be flavoured with  cumin ,  coriander  seeds, and  turmeric , which with a few regional exceptions, are not traditionally associated with Chinese cuisine. [212]   Chilli ,  ginger ,  garlic  and  dahi  (yogurt) are also frequently used in dishes. [212] 
 Popular dishes include  Chicken Manchurian ,  chicken lollipop ,  chilli chicken , Hakka noodles, Hunan chicken,  chow mein , and Szechwan  fried rice .
 Soups such as  Manchow soup  and  sweet corn soup  are very popular, whereas desserts include ice cream on honey-fried noodles and date pancakes.
 Chowmein is now known as one of the most favorite Chinese dishes in India. Especially in West Bengal, it is one of the most loved street foods.
 
 Indian Thai cuisine 
 Thai cuisine was  influenced  by Indian cuisine, like as recorded by the Thai monk  Buddhadasa  Bhikku in his writing ‘India's Benevolence to Thailand’. He wrote that Thai people learned how to use  spices  in their food in various ways from Indians. Thais also obtained the methods of making  herbal medicines  (Ayurveda) from the Indians. Some plants like sarabhi of family  Guttiferae , kanika or  harsinghar , phikun or  Mimusops elengi  and bunnak or the  rose chestnut  etc. were brought from India.
 
 Malaysian Indian cuisine 
 Main article:  Malaysian Indian cuisine 
   Indian  rojak  in Malaysia 
 Malaysian Indian cuisine, or the cooking of the ethnic Indian communities in Malaysia consists of adaptations of authentic dishes from India, as well as original creations inspired by the diverse food culture of Malaysia.
 A typical Malaysian Indian dish is likely to be redolent with curry leaves, whole and powdered spice, and contains fresh coconut in various forms.
 Ghee  is still widely used for cooking, although vegetable oils and refined palm oils are now commonplace in home kitchens.
 
 Indian Singaporean cuisine 
 Main article:  Indian Singaporean cuisine 
 Indian Singaporean cuisine refers to foods and beverages produced and  consumed  in  Singapore  that are derived, wholly or in part, from South Asian culinary traditions.
 The great variety of Singaporean food includes Indian food, which tends to be Tamil cuisine, especially local Tamil Muslim cuisine, although North Indian food [213]  has become more visible recently.
 Indian dishes have become modified to different degrees, after years of contact with other Singaporean cultures, and in response to locally available ingredients, as well as changing local tastes.
 
 Indian Indonesian cuisine 
 Main article:  Indian Indonesian cuisine 
   Roti canai  and  mutton curry , Indian influence on  Indonesian cuisine 
 Indian-Indonesian cuisine refers to food and beverages in Indonesian cuisine that have influenced Indian cuisine—especially from  Tamil ,  Punjabi , and  Gujarati cuisine . These dishes are well integrated, such as  appam ,  biryani ,  murtabak  and  curry .
 
 Indian Filipino cuisine 
 Filipino cuisine , found throughout the  Philippines  archipelago, has been  historically influenced by the Indian cuisine . Indian influences can also be noted in rice-based delicacies such as  bibingka  (analogous to the Indonesian  bingka ),  puto , and  puto bumbong , where the latter two are plausibly derived from the  south Indian   puttu , which also has variants throughout  Maritime Southeast Asia  (e.g.  kue putu ,  putu mangkok ).
 The  kare-kare , more popular in Luzon, on the other hand could trace its origins from the  Seven Years' War  when the  British occupied Manila  from 1762 to 1764 with a force that included Indian  sepoys , who had to improvise Indian dishes given the lack of spices in the Philippines to make  curry . This is said to explain the name and its supposed thick, yellow-to-orange  annatto  and peanut-based sauce, which alludes to a type of curry.
 Atchara  of Philippines originated from the Indian  achar , which was transmitted to the Philippines via the  acar  of the  Indonesia ,  Malaysia , and  Brunei .
 
 Anglo-Indian cuisine 
 Main article:  Anglo-Indian cuisine 
 Anglo-Indian cuisine  developed during the period of  British colonial rule  in India, as British officials interacted with their Indian cooks. [214] 
 Well-known Anglo-Indian dishes include  chutneys , salted  beef tongue ,  kedgeree , [215]  ball curry, fish  rissoles , and  mulligatawny soup . [214] [216] [217] 
 
 Desserts 
 Main article:  List of Indian sweets and desserts 
 Kheer Phirni Phirni  and  kheer  are two of the most popular  rice puddings  in India. 
 Many Indian desserts, or  mithai , are fried foods made with sugar, milk or  condensed milk . Ingredients and preferred types of dessert vary by region. In the eastern part of India, for example, most are based on milk products.
 Many are flavoured with almonds and pistachios, spiced with cardamon, nutmeg, cloves and black pepper, and decorated with nuts, or with gold or silver leaf. Popular Indian desserts include  rasogolla ,  gulab jamun ,  jalebi ,  laddu , and  peda . [218] 
 
 Beverages 
 See also:  List of Indian drinks 
 Non-alcoholic beverages 
 Tea  is a staple beverage throughout India, since the country is one of the largest producers of tea in the world. The most popular varieties of tea grown in India include  Assam tea ,  Darjeeling tea  and  Nilgiri tea . It is prepared by boiling the tea leaves in a mix of water, milk, and spices such as cardamom, cloves, cinnamon, and ginger. In India, tea is often enjoyed with snacks like  biscuits  and  pakoda . [ citation needed ] 
 Coffee  is another popular beverage, but more popular in South India. [ citation needed ]  Coffee is also cultivated in some parts of India. There are two varieties of coffee popular in India, which include  Indian filter coffee  and  instant coffee . [ citation needed ] 
 Lassi  is a traditional  dahi  (yogurt)-based drink in India. [219]  It is made by blending yogurt with water or milk and spices. Salted  lassi  is more common in villages of Punjab and in  Porbandar , Gujarat. [ citation needed ]  Traditional  lassi  is sometimes flavoured with ground roasted cumin.  Lassi  can also be flavoured with ingredients such as sugar, rose water,  mango ,  lemon ,  strawberry , and saffron. [220] 
 Sharbat  is a sweet cold beverage prepared from fruits or flower petals. [221]  It can be served in concentrate form and eaten with a spoon, or diluted with water to create a drink. Popular  sharbats  are made from plants such as  rose ,  sandalwood ,  bel ,  gurhal  ( hibiscus ), lemon,  orange ,  pineapple ,  sarasaparilla  and  kokum ,  falsa  ( Grewia asiatica ). In  Ayurveda ,  sharbats  are believed to hold medicinal value. [222] 
 Thandai  is a cold drink prepared with a mixture of  almonds ,  fennel  seeds,  watermelon  kernels,  rose  petals,  pepper ,  poppy seeds ,  cardamom ,  saffron ,  milk  and  sugar . It is native to  India  and is often associated with the  Maha Shivaratri  and  Holi  or  Holla mahalla  festival. Sometimes  bhaang  (cannabis) is added to prepare special thandai.
 Other beverages include  nimbu pani  (lemonade),  chaas ,  badam doodh  ( almond milk  with nuts and cardamom),  Aam panna ,  kokum  sharbat , and coconut water.
 Modern carbonated cold drinks unique to southern India include beverages, such as  panner soda  or  goli soda , a mixture of  carbonated water , rose water, rose milk, and sugar,  naranga soda , a mixture of  carbonated water , salt and lemon juice, and  nannari sarbath , a mixture with  sarasaparilla .
 
 Sharbats  with carbonated water are the most popular non-alcoholic beverages in Kerala and  Tamil Nadu . Street shops in Central Kerala and Madurai region of Tamil Nadu are well known for these drinks which are also called  kulukki sarbaths  in Kerala. 
 
 
 
 Darjeeling tea  in varieties.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Indian filter coffee  is popular in Southern India.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Badam  milk
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Holi Special Chilled  Thandai 
 
 
 
 
 Alcoholic beverages 
 Beer 
 Main article:  Beer in India 
   Bastar Beer prepared from Sulfi 
 Most  beers  in India are either lagers (4.8  percent alcohol ) or strong lagers (8.9 percent). The Indian beer industry has witnessed steady growth of 10–17 percent per year over the last ten years. Production exceeded 170 million cases during the 2008–2009 financial year. [223]  With the average age of the population decreasing and income levels on the rise, the popularity of beer in the country continues to increase.
 
 Others 
   Nepalese  chhaang  brewed from rice 
 Other popular alcoholic drinks in India include  fenny , a Goan liquor made from either coconut or the juice of the  cashew apple . The state of Goa has registered for a  geographical indicator  to allow its  fenny  distilleries to claim exclusive rights to production of liquor under the name " fenny ." [224] 
 Hadia  is a rice beer, created by mixing herbs with boiled rice and leaving the mixture to ferment for around a week. It is served cold and is less alcoholic than other Indian liquors.  Chuak  is a similar drink from  Tripura .
 Palm wine , locally known as  neera , is a sap extracted from  inflorescences  of various species of  toddy palms . [225] 
 Chhaang  is consumed by the people of  Sikkim  and the  Darjeeling Himalayan hill region  of West Bengal. It is drunk cold or at room temperature in summer, and often hot during cold weather.  Chhaang  is similar to traditional beer, brewed from barley, millet, or rice. [226] 
 Kallu  ( Chetthu Kallu ) is a popular natural alcohol extracted from coconut and pine trees in Kerala. It is sold in local  Kallu  shops and is consumed with fried fish and chicken. Its alcoholic content is increased by addition of distilled alcohol.
 
 Eating habits 
   Paan  is often eaten after a meal. 
 Indians consider a healthy breakfast important. They generally prefer to drink tea or coffee with breakfast, though food preferences vary regionally. North Indian people prefer  roti ,  parathas , and a vegetable dish accompanied by  achar  (a pickle) and some curd. [227]  Various types of packaged pickles are available in the market. One of the oldest pickle-making companies in India is Harnarains, [228]  which started in the 1860s in  Old Delhi .
 People of Gujarat prefer  dhokla  and milk, while south Indians prefer  idli  and  dosa , generally accompanied by  sambhar  or  sagu  and various  chutneys . [229] 
 Traditional lunch in India usually consists of a main dish of rice in the south and the east, and whole-wheat  rotis  in the north. It typically includes two or three kinds of vegetables, and sometimes items such as  kulcha ,  naan , or  parathas .  Paan  (stuffed, spiced and folded  betel leaves ) which aids digestion is often eaten after lunch and dinner in many parts of India. [34] 
 Indian families often gather for "evening snack time", similar to  tea time  to talk and have tea and snacks.
 Dinner is considered the main meal of the day. [230]  Also, many households, especially in north and central India, prefer having sweets after the dinner (similar to the Western concept of dessert after meals).
 
 Dietary practices 
 In India people often follow dietary practices based on their religious belief:
 
 Most  Hindu  communities consider beef taboo since they believed that Hindu scriptures condemn cow slaughter. Cow slaughter has been banned in many states of India. [231]  However, these restrictions are not followed in the North-Eastern states, West Bengal and Kerala. 
 Vaishnavism  followers generally are strict lacto-vegetarians due to an emphasis on  Ahimsa . They also do not consume garlic and onions. [ citation needed ] 
 Jains  follow a strict form of lacto-vegetarianism, known as  Jain vegetarianism , which in addition to being completely lacto-vegetarian, also excludes all root vegetables such as carrots and potatoes because when the root is pulled up, organisms that live around the root also die. [232] 
 Muslims  do not eat pork or pork products. 
 Except in certain  North-Eastern regions , canines are not considered suitable for consumption. 
 Etiquette 
 Main article:  Etiquette of Indian dining 
   Eating by hands 
 Traditionally, meals in India are eaten while seated either on the floor, or on very low stools or mattress. Food is most often eaten with the hands rather than cutlery.
 Often  roti  is used to scoop  curry  without allowing it to touch the hand. In the wheat-producing north, a piece of  roti  is gripped with the thumb and middle finger and ripped off while holding the  roti  down with the index finger.
 A somewhat different method is used in the south for  dosai ,  adai , and  uththappam , where the middle finger is pressed down to hold the bread and the forefinger and thumb used to grip and separate a small part. Traditional serving styles vary regionally throughout India.
 Contact with other cultures has affected Indian dining etiquette. For example, the Anglo-Indian middle class commonly uses spoons and forks, as is traditional in Western culture. [233] 
 In South India, cleaned  banana leaves , which can be disposed of after meals, are used for serving food. When hot food is served on banana leaves, the leaves add distinctive aromas and taste to the food. [234]  Leaf plates are less common today, except on special occasions.
 
 Outside India 
   Chicken tikka 
 Indian migration has spread the culinary traditions of the subcontinent throughout the world. These cuisines have been adapted to local tastes, and have also affected local cuisines. The international appeal of  curry  has been compared to that of  pizza . [235]  Indian  tandoor  dishes such as  chicken tikka  also enjoy widespread popularity. [236] 
 
 Australia 
 A  Roy Morgan Research  survey taken between 2013 and 2018 found that Indian cuisine was the top-rated international food among 51% of Australians, behind Chinese, Italian, and Thai. [237] 
 
 Canada 
 As in the United Kingdom and the United States, Indian cuisine is widely available in  Canada , especially in the cities of  Toronto , [238]   Vancouver , [239]  and  Ottawa  where the majority of Canadians of  South Asian heritage  live.
 
 China 
 Indian food is gaining popularity in  China , where there are many Indian restaurants in  Beijing ,  Shanghai , and  Shenzhen .  Hong Kong  alone has more than 50 Indian restaurants, some of which date back to the 1980s. Most of the Indian restaurants in Hong Kong are in  Tsim Sha Tsui . [240] 
 
 Fiji 
 Indo-Fijians  have a similar cuisine, often with  Fijian influence .
 
 Middle East 
 The Indian culinary scene in the  Middle East  has been influenced greatly by the large  Indian diaspora  in these countries. Centuries of trade relations and cultural exchange resulted in a significant influence on each region's cuisines. The use of the  tandoor , which originated in northwestern India, [241]  is an example.
 The large influx of Indian expatriates into Middle Eastern countries during the 1970s and 1980s led to a boom in Indian restaurants to cater to this population and was also widely influenced by the local and international cuisines.
 
 Nepal 
 Indian cuisine is available in the streets of Nepalese cities, including  Kathmandu  and  Janakpur .
 
 Southeast Asia 
   An Indian restaurant in  Singapore 
 Other cuisines which borrow inspiration from Indian cooking styles include  Cambodian ,  Lao ,  Filipino ,  Vietnamese ,  Indonesian ,  Thai , and  Burmese  cuisines. The spread of vegetarianism in other parts of Asia is often credited to Hindu and Buddhist practices. [242] 
 Indian cuisine is very popular in  Southeast Asia , due to the strong Hindu and Buddhist cultural influence in the region. Indian cuisine has had considerable influence on Malaysian cooking styles [5]  and also enjoys popularity in  Singapore . [243] [244]  There are numerous North and South Indian restaurants in Singapore, mostly in  Little India .
 Singapore is also known for  fusion cuisine  combining traditional  Singaporean cuisine  with Indian influences. Fish head curry, for example, is a local creation. Indian influence on  Malay cuisine  dates to the 19th century. [245] 
 
 United Kingdom 
   Chicken tikka masala , a modified version of Indian  chicken tikka , has been called "a true British  national dish ." [246] 
 The UK's first Indian restaurant, the  Hindoostanee Coffee House , opened in 1810. [247] [248]  By 2003, there were as many as 10,000 restaurants serving Indian cuisine in  England  and  Wales  alone. According to  Britain 's  Food Standards Agency , the Indian food industry in the United Kingdom is worth 3.2 billion  pounds , accounts for two-thirds of all eating out in the country, and serves about 2.5 million customers every week. [249] 
 One of the best known examples of British Indian restaurant cuisine is  chicken tikka masala , which has also been called "a true British national dish." [250] 
 
 Ireland 
 Ireland's first Indian restaurant, the Indian Restaurant and Tea Rooms, opened in 1908 on Sackville Street, now  O'Connell Street , in Dublin. [251]  Today, Indian restaurants are commonplace in most Irish cities and towns. Non-Chinese Asians are the fastest growing ethnic group in Ireland. [252] 
 
 United States 
 A survey by  The Washington Post  in 2007 stated that more than 1,200 Indian food products had been introduced into the  United States  since 2000. [253]  There are numerous Indian restaurants across the US, which vary based on regional culture and climate.  North Indian  and  South Indian  cuisines are especially well represented. Most Indian restaurants in the United States serve  Americanized  versions of North Indian food, which is generally less spicy than its Indian equivalents.
 At sit-down restaurants with  North Indian cuisine  (the most common), complimentary  papadum  is served with three dipping sauces—typically  hari chutney  (mint and cilantro),  imli chutney  (taramind), and a spicy red chili or onion  chutney —in place of European-style bread before the meal.
 
 See also 
 
 India portal Food portal 
 
 Buddhist vegetarianism 
 Diet in Hinduism 
 Diet in Sikhism 
 Jain vegetarianism 
 Indian bread 
 Indian Chinese cuisine 
 Indian tea culture 
 Indian bread 
 List of Indian dishes 
 List of Indian pickles 
 List of snack foods from the Indian subcontinent 
 List of Indian soups and stews 
 List of plants used in Indian cuisine 
 North East Indian cuisine 
 South Asian pickle 
 South Indian cuisine 
 Street food of Chennai 
 Street food of Mumbai 
 
 References 
 
 
 ^   Dias (1996).  The Steward . Orient Blackswan. p. 215.  ISBN   978-81-250-0325-0 . 
 
 ^   Gesteland, Richard R.; Gesteland, Mary C. (2010).  India: Cross-cultural Business Behavior : for Business People, Expatriates and Scholars . Copenhagen Business School Press DK. p. 176.  ISBN   978-87-630-0222-6 . 
 
 ^   Balasubramanian, D (16 October 2008).  "Potato: historically important vegetable" .  The Hindu . Chennai, India. Archived from  the original  on 20 October 2008 . Retrieved  26 June  2012 . 
 
 ^   Cornillez, Louise Marie M. (Spring 1999).  "The History of the Spice Trade in India" . 
 
 ^  a   b   "Nasi, Kari, Biryani & Mee" . Veg Voyages. Archived from  the original  on 28 June 2009 . Retrieved  23 June  2009 . 
 
 ^   "Asia Food Features" . Asiafood.org. Archived from  the original  on 25 May 2001 . Retrieved  23 June  2009 . 
 
 ^   Krishna Gopal Dubey (2011).  The Indian Cuisine . PHI Learning Pvt. Ltd.  ISBN   978-81-203-4170-8 . 
 
 ^  a   b   K T Achaya (2003).  The Story of Our Food . Universities Press.  ISBN   9788173712937 . 
 
 ^   Padmanabh S Jaini (2001), Collected papers on Buddhist Studies, Motilal Banarsidass,  ISBN   978-81-208-1776-0 , pages 57–77 
 
 ^   Padmanabh S Jaini (2000), Collected papers on Jaina Studies, Motilal Banarsidass,  ISBN   978-81-208-1691-6 , pages 3–14 
 
 ^   Autobiography of a Yogi , Paramahansa Yogananda, Self Realization Fellowship, 1973, p. 22 
 
 ^   Maharishi Mahesh Yogi on the Bhagavad Gita Translation and Commentary, Arkana, 1990 p. 236 
 
 ^   "Chapter 17, Verse 8,9,10" . Bhagavad-Gita . Retrieved  31 August  2011 . 
 
 ^   Sharpes, Donald K. (2006).  Sacred Bull, Holy Cow: A Cultural Study of Civilization's Most Important Animal . Peter Lang. p. 208.  ISBN   978-0-8204-7902-6 . 
 
 ^   "Beef eating: strangulating history" .  The Hindu . Chennai, India. 14 August 2001. Archived from  the original  on 28 March 2008. 
 
 ^  a   b   c   "The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01): Khândogya Upanishad: III, 14" . Sacred-texts.com . Retrieved  26 May  2019 . 
 
 ^   "The Devi Bhagavatam: The Sixth Book: Chapter 27" . Sacred-texts.com . Retrieved  26 May  2019 . 
 
 ^   "Breadfruit Fritters (Jeev Kadge Phodi)" . KonkaniFoodRecipes.com . Retrieved  17 February  2022 . 
 
 ^   "Kadachakka varuthath – fried breadfruit chips" .  OnManorama . Retrieved  25 April  2021 . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   Carr, Karen (20 July 2017).  "Indian food history – spices and sugar in ancient India" .  Quatr.us Study Guides . Retrieved  14 July  2019 . 
 
 ^  a   b   "Full text of "An English translation of the Sushruta samhita, based on original Sanskrit text. Edited and published by Kaviraj Kunja Lal Bhishagratna. With a full and comprehensive introd., translation of different readings, notes, comparative views, index, glossary and plates" " . Calcutta. 23 October 2016 . Retrieved  26 May  2019 . 
 
 ^   "BOOK V: Canto LXI.: The Feast of Honey" . Sacred-texts.com . Retrieved  26 May  2019 . 
 
 ^   "Satapatha Brahmana Part 1 (SBE12): First Kânda: I, 2, 2. Second Brâhmana" . Sacred-texts.com . Retrieved  26 May  2019 . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   "LXXIX" . Sacred-texts.com . Retrieved  26 May  2019 . 
 
 ^  a   b   Locricchio, Matthew; McConnell, Jack (2004).  The Cooking of India . Marshall Cavendish. p. 77.  ISBN   978-0-7614-1730-9 . 
 
 ^   Syed Zain Al-Mahmood (19 December 2008).  "Down the Surma – Origins of the Diaspora" .  Daily Star . Vol. 7, no. 49 . Retrieved  1 May  2019 . 
 
 ^   Robert Lindsay . "Anecdotes of an Indian life: Chapter VII".  Lives of the Lindsays, or, A memoir of the House of Crawford and Balcarres .  National Library of Scotland . Vol. 4. p. 99. 
 
 ^   Staelens, Stefanie.  "The Bhang Lassi Is How Hindus Drink Themselves High for Shiva" .  Vice.com . Retrieved  10 August  2017 . 
 
 ^   Johnston, Bruce F. (1958).  The Staple Food Economies of Western Tropical Africa . Stanford University Press. p. 14.  ISBN   978-0-8047-0537-0 . 
 
 ^   Seshadri, Diana (2007).  Food for The Gods . Lulu.com. p. 35.  ISBN   978-1-4303-1269-7 . [ self-published source ] 
 
 ^   Shi, John; Chi-Tang Ho; Shahidi, Fereidoon (2010).  Functional Foods of the East . CRC Press. p. 64.  ISBN   978-1-4200-7192-4 . 
 
 ^   Kumar, Arvind; Dubey, Pushpalata (2006).  Green Technologies for Sustainable Agriculture . Daya Publishing House. p. 28.  ISBN   978-81-7035-419-2 . 
 
 ^   Dr. J. P. Sharma (2008).  Academic Biology IX . Laxmi Publications. p. 97.  ISBN   978-81-7008-579-9 . 
 
 ^  a   b   Kapoor, Subodh (2002).  The Indian Encyclopaedia . Cosmo Publications. p. 1745.  ISBN   978-81-7755-257-7 . 
 
 ^   Kelley, Laura (2009).  The Silk Road Gourmet: Western and Southern Asia . iUniverse. p. 298.  ISBN   978-1-4401-4305-2 . [ self-published source ] 
 
 ^   Priti Chitnis Gress (2008).  Flavorful India: Treasured Recipes from a Gujarati Family . Hippocrene Books. p. 15.  ISBN   978-0-7818-1207-8 . 
 
 ^   Sanmugam, Devagi (2007).  Naturally Speaking: Indian: Recipes and Home Remedies . Marshall Cavendish. p. 69.  ISBN   978-981-232-715-4 . 
 
 ^   "Cuisines of Andaman and Nicobar Islands" .  Andaman and Nicobar Islands . indfy.com. Archived from  the original  on 22 April 2012 . Retrieved  4 June  2012 . 
 
 ^   Man, Edward Horace; Ellis, Alexander John (1 January 1932).  The Aboriginal Inhabitants of the Andaman Islands . Mittal Publications. 
 
 ^   "AP cuisine" .  Andhra Pradesh . indiasite.com. Archived from  the original  on 25 June 2012 . Retrieved  4 June  2012 . 
 
 ^   "Arunachal Pradesh staple food" .  Cuisine . amazingarunachal.com. Archived from  the original  on 28 April 2012 . Retrieved  4 June  2012 . 
 
 ^   "Cuisine" .  India cuisine .  Incredible India . Archived from  the original  on 2 June 2012 . Retrieved  4 June  2012 . 
 
 ^   "Arunachal Pradesh food" .  Arunachal Pradesh . ifood.tv. Archived from  the original  on 24 April 2013 . Retrieved  4 June  2012 . 
 
 ^   Edgar Thorpe and Showick Thorpe, ed. (2010).  The Pearson Concise General Knowledge Manual  (New ed.). Pearson Education India. p. 34.  ISBN   978-81-317-2766-9 . 
 
 ^   Assam General Knowledge . Bright Publications. p. 79.  ISBN   978-81-7199-451-9 . Retrieved  5 June  2012 . 
 
 ^   Rajatananda Das Gupta (1982).  Art of mediaeval Assam . Cosmo. p. 171. 
 
 ^   Norman Mosley Penzer (1980).  Poison-Damsels . Ayer Publishing. p. 253.  ISBN   978-0-405-13336-7 . 
 
 ^   "Historical Sketch | Bengal Cuisine" .  bengalcuisine.in . Retrieved  4 May  2019 . 
 
 ^   "Our Food Their Food: A Historical Overview of the Bengali Platter | Sahapedia" .  sahapedia.org . Retrieved  4 May  2019 . 
 
 ^   "Odia cooks to bring back forgotten Bengali recipes – Times of India" .  The Times of India . 
 
 ^   "Know All About the Famous Bengali Culinary Style Popular in the Eastern Part of the Indian Subcontinent" . 
 
 ^   Majumdar, Boria (2013).  Cooking on the run  (1st ed.). Delhi: Harper Collins India. p. 192. 
 
 ^   Laveesh, Bhandari (2009).  Indian States at a Glance 2008–09: Performance, Facts and Figures – West Bengal . Pearson Education India. p. 30.  ISBN   978-81-317-2352-4 . 
 
 ^  a   b   "Sweet War: This GI tag is for Banglar Rashogolla, it is not about the origin" . The New Indian Express. 14 November 2017 . Retrieved  20 February  2021 . 
 
 ^  a   b   Patnaik, Sampad (30 July 2019).  "Sweet success: Odisha receives GI tag for 'Rasagola' " . Bhubaneswar. The Indian Express . Retrieved  20 February  2021 . 
 
 ^   "Litti chokha recipe | litti recipe" . 26 September 2016. 
 
 ^   "Baingan Bharta – Roasted Eggplant Mash" . 22 August 2018. 
 
 ^  a   b   Hughes, Martin; Mookherjee, Sheema; Delacy, Richard (2001).  World Food India . Lonely Planet. p. 176.  ISBN   978-1-86450-328-9 . 
 
 ^   Laveesh, Bhandari (2009).  Indian States at a Glance 2008–09: Performance, Facts And Figures – Bihar . Pearson Education India. p. 30.  ISBN   978-81-317-2333-3 . 
 
 ^   "Mirch Ka Saalan recipe by Pankaj Bhadouria on Times Food" . 
 
 ^   "Dal Puri Recipe: How to make Dal Puri Recipe at Home | Homemade Dal Puri Recipe – Times Food" . 
 
 ^   admin (26 June 2019).  "The must eat 10 Bihari dishes" .  Patna Diaries . Retrieved  15 July  2022 . 
 
 ^   Chandigarh Cuisine   Archived  15 August 2021 at the  Wayback Machine . 
 
 ^   "Chhattisgarh Cuisine in India" . India9.com. 7 June 2005 . Retrieved  7 February  2011 . "Mahua flower liquor" .  Fieldsite in Central India . Retrieved  5 June  2012 . 
 
 ^   "Chhattisgarh Culture Department | Welcomes to you" .  www.cgculture.in . Retrieved  28 June  2021 . 
 
 ^   Kapoor, Subodh (2002).  The Indian Encyclopaedia . Cosmo Publications. p. 565.  ISBN   978-81-7755-257-7 . 
 
 ^   "Chhattisgarh delicacies" .  Chhattisgarh culture . journeymart.com . Retrieved  5 June  2012 . 
 
 ^   "Unearthing ubadiyu, a rustic winter favourite in Gujarat" . 21 February 2021. 
 
 ^   [1]   Archived  5 December 2008 at the  Wayback Machine 
 
 ^   Kumar Suresh Singh (1994).  People of India: Daman and Diu . Popular Prakashan. pp. 8–9.  ISBN   978-81-7154-761-6 . 
 
 ^   "Cuisines of Delhi, Famous Delhi Cuisine, Famous Delhi Food, Famous Food in Delhi" . Indiasite. Archived from  the original  on 22 September 2013 . Retrieved  9 December  2013 . 
 
 ^   "Indian Street Food in Delhi | A tour of authentic Indian street food in Delhi" . Foodtourindelhi.com. 28 December 2012 . Retrieved  9 December  2013 . 
 
 ^  a   b   Chapman, Pat (2009).  India: Food & Cooking: The Ultimate Book on Indian Cuisine . New Holland Publishers. p. 38.  ISBN   978-1-84537-619-2 . 
 
 ^   Thomas, Amelia; Karafin, Amy (2009).  Goa and Mumbai . Lonely Planet. p. 52.  ISBN   978-1-74104-894-0 . 
 
 ^   "Goan cuisine" .  Goa dining guides . Archived from  the original  on 10 July 2012 . Retrieved  5 June  2012 . 
 
 ^   "Gujurati Thali" .  Gujurati cuisine . indianfoodforever.com . Retrieved  5 June  2012 . 
 
 ^   "Gujurati cuisine" .  Gujurati recipes . khanapakana.com . Retrieved  5 June  2012 . 
 
 ^   "Sev Khamani – Pepkitchen" . 
 
 ^   "Dal vada recipe" . 29 August 2014. 
 
 ^   "Keda Methi Na Bhajiya" . 13 April 2020. 
 
 ^   Thaker, Aruna; Barton, Arlene (2012).  Multicultural Handbook of Food, Nutrition and Dietetics . John Wiley & Sons. p. 5.  ISBN   978-1-118-35046-1 . 
 
 ^   Murdoch Books Pty Limited; Murdoch Books Test Kitchen (2010).  India . Murdoch Books. p. 9.  ISBN   978-1-74196-438-7 . 
 
 ^   Wickramasinghe, Priya; Carol Selva Rajah (2005).  Food of India . Murdoch Books. p. 13.  ISBN   978-1-74045-472-8 . 
 
 ^   "Besan Masala Roti" . 27 April 2018. 
 
 ^   "Bajra Aloo Paratha Recipe" . 
 
 ^   "Bathua Raita | Delicious Raita Recipe" . 18 April 2020. 
 
 ^   "Gajar Methi Sabzi Recipe (Carrot Fenugreek Leaves Stir Fry)" . 
 
 ^   "Rajasthani Sangri Ki Sabji" . 21 June 2020. 
 
 ^   "Vegetable Pearl Millet Recipe – Bajra Khichdi" .  Enhance Your Palate . 9 December 2018 . Retrieved  27 April  2021 . 
 
 ^   "Traditional Onion Chutney Recipe | Sukhi's" . 11 February 2020 . Retrieved  27 April  2021 . 
 
 ^   "Bajra ki roti (Millet flour roti)" .  North Indian Cooking by..Geeta Seth . Retrieved  27 April  2021 . 
 
 ^   "Tandoori Kukkad Recipe: How to Make Tandoori Kukkad Recipe | Homemade Tandoori Kukkad Recipe" .  recipes.timesofindia.com . Retrieved  27 April  2021 . 
 
 ^   "Food of Haryana, Cuisine of Haryana, Famous Haryana Food, Recipes of Haryana, Haryana Food" . Richindianculture.com . Retrieved  7 February  2011 . 
 
 ^   "Himachal Style Pahari Sidu Recipe -Stuffed Bread Recipe" .  Archana's Kitchen . Retrieved  27 April  2021 . 
 
 ^   "Patande Recipe: How to Make Patande Recipe | Homemade Patande Recipe" .  recipes.timesofindia.com . Retrieved  27 April  2021 . 
 
 ^   "Himachal Pradesh specialities" .  Himachal cuisine . mapsofindia.com. Archived from  the original  on 11 June 2012 . Retrieved  5 June  2012 . 
 
 ^   "Kashmiri food" .  Kashmiri cuisine . food-india.com . Retrieved  5 June  2012 . 
 
 ^   "Kashmiri Wazwan" .  The Hindu . Metroplus. Chennai, India. 11 April 2012 . Retrieved  5 June  2012 . 
 
 ^   Anand, Karen (20 April 2012).  "Treats from the Valley" .  The Times of India . Archived from  the original  on 30 October 2012. 
 
 ^   "Kaddu ka Ambal , Kashmiri Sweet and Sour Pumpkin » Maayeka" .  Maayeka . 15 November 2017 . Retrieved  27 April  2021 . 
 
 ^   "Khatta Meat Recipe by Gopal" .  NDTV Food . Retrieved  27 April  2021 . 
 
 ^   "Kashmiri Kulith Ki Dal Recipe – Horse Gram Dal Recipe" .  Archana's Kitchen . Retrieved  27 April  2021 . 
 
 ^   "Dal Chawal: Simple Lentil Curry & Basmati Rice" .  The Spice Mess . 27 August 2020 . Retrieved  27 April  2021 . 
 
 ^   "Ma ki dal ka madra (Black gram lentils in yoghurt) recipe by Kalpana Vinay at BetterButter" . 
 
 ^   "Grilled Rajma Masala Sandwich Recipe" . 
 
 ^   Anantham, Nithya.  "Chilka Roti Recipe (Jharkhand Style Rice and Lentil Roti)" .  Archana's Kitchen . Retrieved  29 April  2021 . 
 
 ^   "Arsa Recipe: How to Make Arsa Recipe | Homemade Arsa Recipe" .  recipes.timesofindia.com . Retrieved  29 April  2021 . 
 
 ^   "10 Dishes of Cuisine of Jharkhand you must try at least once in Life" .  Great Indian Food . 30 September 2016. Archived from  the original  on 3 February 2017 . Retrieved  1 November  2018 . 
 
 ^   "::Jharkhand Tourism::Cuisines" .  jharkhandtourism.in . Retrieved  1 November  2018 . 
 
 ^   "High time to make most of mahua" .  The Times of India . Retrieved  1 November  2018 . 
 
 ^   "Karnataka Style Badanekai Yennegai Gojju Recipe (Stuffed Brinjal Recipe)" . 
 
 ^   "Karnataka Style Haalbai Recipe" . 
 
 ^   "Kodagu still swears by pork" .  The Times of India . 5 May 2009. Archived from  the original  on 30 October 2012 . Retrieved  27 June  2012 . 
 
 ^   "Taste of Mangalore" .  The Hindu . Chennai, India. 17 June 2002. Archived from  the original  on 5 January 2012 . Retrieved  27 June  2012 . 
 
 ^   Prabha Shastri Ranade (2009).  Infrastructure Development and Its Environmental Impact: Study of Konkan Railway . Concept Publishing Company. p. 162.  ISBN   978-81-8069-450-9 . 
 
 ^   "Cuisine of Kerala" . Retrieved  27 September  2016 . 
 
 ^   Zero Oil South Indian Cook Book . Dr. Bimal Chhajer. 21 February 2008.  ISBN   978-81-288-0512-7 . 
 
 ^   Planning Commission, Government of India (2008).  Kerala development report . New Delhi: Academic Foundation.  ISBN   978-81-7188-594-7 . 
 
 ^   Chatterjee, Meera (2008).  Ashok K. Dutt; H.N. Misra (eds.).  Explorations in applied geography  (Eastern economy ed.). New Delhi: Asoke K. Ghosh, Prentice-Hall of India, Private Limited.  ISBN   978-81-203-3384-0 . 
 
 ^   Laveesh, Bhandari (2009).  Indian States at a Glance 2008–09: Performance, Facts and Figures – Kerala . Pearson Education India. p. 36.  ISBN   978-81-317-2340-1 . 
 
 ^   "Malabar: Mecca of Muslim food" .  Deccan Chronicle . Retrieved  8 March  2015 . 
 
 ^   "Thalassery Biriyani" . mysingaporekitchen.com. 16 November 2012. Archived from  the original  on 21 September 2013 . Retrieved  4 July  2013 . 
 
 ^   Anand, Shilpa Nair; Menon, Anasuya (2 July 2015).  "Iftar from God's own country" .  The Hindu .  ISSN   0971-751X . Retrieved  13 August  2021 . 
 
 ^   Jayaprakash, K. (21 November 2019).  "Ambalapuzha Palpayasam: The Food of the God" .  KochiPost . Retrieved  12 August  2021 . 
 
 ^   "How the Kozhikode halwa became a celebrity in Kerala and abroad" . 
 
 ^   Motup, Sonam.  "Food & Cuisine: 10 Best Dishes to Eat in Leh-Ladakh 🥄🥣" . 
 
 ^   Namgail, T.; Jensen, A.; Padmanabhan, S.; Desor, S.; Dolma, R. (2019).  Dhontang: Food in Ladakh . Central Institute of Buddhist Studies, Local Futures. pp. 1–44.  ISBN   978-93-83802-15-9 . 
 
 ^   Norberg-Hodge, Helena (2000).  Ancient Futures: Learning from Ladakh . Oxford India Paperbacks. 
 
 ^   Krishnakumar, PK (4 March 2008).  "Cut in duty to boost packaged coconut water" .  The Economic Times . Retrieved  27 June  2012 . 
 
 ^   Gaur, Abhilash.  "Outdoor Indore Abhilash Gaur on the legendary street-food delicacies of this businesslike city" .  Outlook traveller . Archived from  the original  on 31 January 2013 . Retrieved  27 June  2012 . 
 
 ^   Esteves, Lesley A. (April 2008).  "FOOD COURT Nawabi Bhopal is a long and large meal, discovers Lesley A. Esteves" .  Outlook traveller . Archived from  the original  on 31 January 2013 . Retrieved  27 June  2012 . 
 
 ^   "India's bountiful breakfast options" .  The Times of India . 9 May 2010. Archived from  the original  on 30 October 2012 . Retrieved  27 June  2012 . 
 
 ^   "Masale bhat recipe | masala bhaat | maharashtrian masala bhaath" . January 2019. 
 
 ^   "Indian Food and the West | New Emissary" .  The Diplomat . Retrieved  27 June  2012 . 
 
 ^   "Poha recipe 2 ways | kanda poha | aloo poha | maharastrian kanda pohe" . 5 November 2021. 
 
 ^   "Aloo Poha Recipe – Batata Poha" . 
 
 ^   "Mutton Sukha Recipe: How to make Mutton Sukha Recipe at Home | Homemade Mutton Sukha Recipe – Times Food" . 
 
 ^   "Chicken Pandhra Rassa | Kolhapuri Pandhra Rassa" . 10 January 2019. 
 
 ^   "Tambda Rassa- Signature delicacy from Kolhapur" . 7 May 2017. 
 
 ^   [2]   Archived  9 May 2013 at the  Wayback Machine 
 
 ^   "Amti recipe | maharashtrian amti dal recipe | toor dal amti" . 21 February 2019. 
 
 ^   World and Its People: Eastern and Southern Asia . Marshall Cavendish. September 2007. p. 415.  ISBN   978-0-7614-7631-3 . 
 
 ^   "Flavours of Maharashtra at Renaissance" .  The Times of India . 12 July 2010. Archived from  the original  on 30 October 2012 . Retrieved  27 June  2012 . 
 
 ^   "Feed your 'Desi Mania' at Nirula's" .  Fnbnews . 10 May 2010 . Retrieved  27 June  2012 . 
 
 ^   "Rice Flour Bhakri Recipe (Maharashtrian Tandalachi Bhakri)" . 
 
 ^   "Maharashtrian Vegetable Amboli Recipe (Savory Lentil Pancake Topped with Vegetables)" . 
 
 ^   "Authentic Ukadiche Modak" . 2 September 2021. 
 
 ^   "Chana Manipuri – Chana Kanghou" . 2 October 2021. 
 
 ^   Lonely Planet blue list: the best in travel 2007 . Lonely Planet. 2006.  ISBN   9781741047356 . 
 
 ^   Mishra, Birendra Kumar; Hati, Subrota; Das, Sujit (1 August 2019).  "Bio-nutritional aspects of Tungrymbai, an ethnic functional fermented soy food of Khasi Hills, Meghalaya, India" .  Clinical Nutrition Experimental .  26 : 8–22.  doi : 10.1016/j.yclnex.2019.05.004 .  ISSN   2352-9393 . 
 
 ^   Bareh, Hamlet (2001).  Encyclopaedia of North-East India: Meghalaya . Mittal Publications. p. 47.  ISBN   978-81-7099-791-7 . 
 
 ^   "Mizo Cuisine in India" . India9.com. 7 June 2005 . Retrieved  7 February  2011 . 
 
 ^   "Food in Mizoram" . Mapsofindia.com. 28 June 2013 . Retrieved  9 December  2013 . 
 
 ^   Laveesh, Bhandari (2009).  Indian States at a Glance 2008–09: Performance, Facts And Figures – North-East And Sikkim . Pearson Education India. p. 48.  ISBN   978-81-317-2348-7 . 
 
 ^   Pran Nath Chopra (1992).  Encyclopaedia of India: Nagaland . Rima Publishing House. p. 63. 
 
 ^   "Gourmet Tours To India" . [ permanent dead link ] 
 
 ^   Tharu, Susie J.; Lalita, Ke (1993).  Women Writing in India: The Twentieth century . Feminist Press. p. 422.  ISBN   978-1-55861-029-3 . 
 
 ^   "Odisha Style Aloo Bharta Recipe -Aloo Mash Sabzi" . 
 
 ^   "Podanlangkai Chutney (Snake gourd Chutney)" . 
 
 ^   "Indian Cuisine:Puducherry" . 12 May 2011. 
 
 ^   Dalal, Tarla (2007).  Punjabi Khana . Sanjay & Co. p. 6.  ISBN   978-81-89491-54-3 . 
 
 ^   Colleen Taylor Sen (2004).  Food Culture in India . Greenwood Publishing Group. p. 94.  ISBN   978-0-313-32487-1 . 
 
 ^   Dalal, Tarla (2007).  Punjabi Khana . Sanjay & Co. p. 34.  ISBN   978-81-89491-54-3 . 
 
 ^   Ng, Franklin (1995).  The Asian American Encyclopedia: Ho-Kor . Marshall Cavendish.  ISBN   978-1-85435-680-2 . Retrieved  28 June  2012 . 
 
 ^   "Punjabi cuisine.Khana-Indian Recipes and Cuisines" . Archived from  the original  on 27 June 2012. 
 
 ^   "matar kulcha recipe | chole kulche recipe | kulche chole recipe" .  Hebbar's Kitchen . 2 January 2019 . Retrieved  4 May  2021 . 
 
 ^   Wright, Clifford A. (13 September 2005).  Some Like It Hot: Spicy Favorites From The World's Hot Zones . Harvard Common Press. pp.  236 –.  ISBN   978-1-55832-269-1 . Retrieved  29 June  2012 . 
 
 ^   Laveesh, Bhandari (2009).  Indian States at a Glance 2008–09: Performance, Facts And Figures – Rajasthan . Pearson Education India. p. 38.  ISBN   978-81-317-2346-3 . 
 
 ^   "Rajasthani Style Safed Maas Recipe" . 
 
 ^   "Khad Khargosh – Rabbit Curry Recipe – Great British Chefs" . 
 
 ^   Game cuisine: A Rajput legacy by madhulika dash 
 
 ^   Gall, Timothy L.; Hobby, Jeneen (2009).  Worldmark encyclopedia of cultures and daily life . Gale.  ISBN   978-1-4144-4891-6 . 
 
 ^   "Care for some Sindhi savouries?" .  Daily News and Analysis . 5 November 2010 . Retrieved  7 February  2011 . 
 
 ^   "Sindhi Kadhi Recipe" . 
 
 ^   "Sindhi Koki Recipe-Masala Roti with Onions and Green Chillies" . 
 
 ^   Moorjani, Lachu; Snortum, Marty (2005).  Ajanta: Regional Feasts of India . Gibbs Smith. p. 59.  ISBN   978-1-58685-777-6 . 
 
 ^   Lisa Maree Heldke (2003).  Exotic Appetites: Ruminations of a Food Adventurer . Routledge. p. 34.  ISBN   978-0-415-94385-7 . 
 
 ^   Cummings, Joe (2000).  Thailand . Lonely Planet. p. 46.  ISBN   978-1-86450-026-4 . 
 
 ^   Sanjeev Dak Kapoor (2009).  Shin Delights, 1/e 295.00 . Popular Prakashan. p. 8.  ISBN   978-81-7991-400-7 . Retrieved  29 June  2012 . 
 
 ^   Fodor, Eugene; Curtis, William (1964).  Fodor's guide to India . D. McKay. 
 
 ^   "Arachuvitta Sambar Recipe – Sambar with Fresh Ground Spices" . 
 
 ^   Dubey, Krishna gopal (2011).  The Indian cuisine . PHI Learning. p. 233.  ISBN   978-81-203-4170-8 . 
 
 ^   Chapman, Pat (2009).  India: food & cooking: The ultimate book on Indian cuisine .  New Holland Publishers . pp. 38–39.  ISBN   978-1-84537-619-2 . Archived from  the original  on 20 March 2015 . Retrieved  7 July  2012 . 
 
 ^  a   b   Edelstein, Sari (2011).  Food, Cuisine, and Cultural Competency for Culinary, Hospitality, and Nutrition Professionals . Jones & Bartlett Publishers. p. 276.  ISBN   978-1-4496-1811-7 . Retrieved  4 June  2012 . 
 
 ^   "Andhra Pradesh cuisine" . Indianfoodforever.com . Retrieved  4 June  2012 . 
 
 ^   "Dum Pukht cooking" .  Compendium of food terms . theflavoursofhistory.com. Archived from  the original  on 2 April 2012 . Retrieved  4 June  2012 . 
 
 ^   Kumar, Satinder (2000).  Encyclopaedia of South-Asian tribes . Anmol Publications. p. 3375.  ISBN   978-81-261-0517-5 . 
 
 ^   Krishna Prakash Bahadur; Sukhdev Singh Chib (1977).  Caste, Tribes & Culture of India: North-Eastern India . Ess Ess Publications. p. 244. 
 
 ^   Krishna Gopal Dubey (2011).  The Indian Cuisine . PHI Learning Pvt. Ltd. p. 86.  ISBN   978-81-203-4170-8 . 
 
 ^   Kapoor, Subodh (2002).  The Indian Encyclopaedia . Cosmo Publications. p. 1748.  ISBN   978-81-7755-257-7 . 
 
 ^   Abha Narain Lamba (2002).  India . DK Pub.  ISBN   978-0-7894-8395-9 . 
 
 ^  a   b   Mukherjee, Soma (2001).  Royal Mughal Ladies and Their Contributions .  ISBN   9788121207607 . Retrieved  6 March  2015 . 
 
 ^   The Sunday Tribune – Spectrum – Lead Article   Archived  14 June 2013 at the  Wayback Machine .  The Tribune . (13 July 2003). Retrieved 2012-08-06. 
 
 ^   "Indian Desi Dhaba" . 
 
 ^   "Mughlai cuisine tops popularity charts in capital" .  The Telegraph . Kolkota. 5 July 2008. Archived from  the original  on 13 September 2012 . Retrieved  9 December  2013 . 
 
 ^   "Bhatt Ki Dal Recipe – Traditional Kumaoni Black Bean Dal" .  Archana's Kitchen . Retrieved  6 May  2021 . 
 
 ^   "Chadanji – Kumaoni Black Chick Pea curry" . Retrieved  6 May  2021 . 
 
 ^   Paliwal, Anupama (9 June 2020).  "Cucumber Raita – Kheere Ka Raita" .  My Ginger Garlic Kitchen . Retrieved  6 May  2021 . 
 
 ^   "Mooli Raita Recipe or Radish Raita" .  Whisk Affair . 9 February 2018 . Retrieved  6 May  2021 . 
 
 ^   "Mango Kadhi or Fajeto" .  Whisk Affair . 12 April 2021 . Retrieved  6 May  2021 . 
 
 ^   Dewan, M. L.; Singh, Karan; Rautela, Piyoosh (2001).  People's Movement for Himalayan Rejuvenation . Concept Publishing Company. p. 93.  ISBN   978-81-7022-815-8 . 
 
 ^   "Malai Ladoo Recipe-how to make malai ladoo with Paneer" .  www.foodvedam.com . Retrieved  6 May  2021 . 
 
 ^   Dalal 2010 , p. 6. 
 
 ^   Arnott, Margaret L., ed. (1975).  Gastronomy : the anthropology of food and food habitys . The Hague: Mouton. p. 319.  ISBN   978-9027977397 . Retrieved  31 October  2016 . 
 
 ^   Walker, Harlan, ed. (1997).  Food on the move : proceedings of the Oxford Symposium on Food and Cookery 1996, [held in September 1996 at Saint Antony's College, Oxford] . Devon, England: Prospect Books. p. 291.  ISBN   978-0-907325-79-6 . Retrieved  31 October  2016 . 
 
 ^   Amaranth: Modern Prospects for an Ancient Crop . National Academies. 1984. p. 6.  ISBN   9780309324458 . NAP:14295. 
 
 ^   Dalal 2010 , p. 7. 
 
 ^   Bhavna (28 September 2017).  "Farali Chevdo" .  Bhavna's Kitchen & Living . Retrieved  6 May  2021 . 
 
 ^   Dalal 2010 , p. 63. 
 
 ^  a   b   Mannur, Anita (2004).  Culinary Fictions: Food in South Asian Diasporic Culture . Temple University Press. p. 233.  ISBN   978-1-4399-0078-9 . Retrieved  21 July  2012 . 
 
 ^  a   b   Banerjee, Himadri (2009).  Calcutta Mosaic: Essays and Interviews on the Minority Communities of Calcutta . Anthem Press. p. 132.  ISBN   978-81-905835-5-8 . Retrieved  21 July  2012 . 
 
 ^  a   b   Deshpande, Shubada (25 October 1999).  "Fare for the Desi Dragon" .  Rediff.com . Retrieved  21 July  2012 . 
 
 ^   "North Indian Food popularity in Singapore" . 
 
 ^  a   b   Davidson, Alan (2014).  Jaine, Tom (ed.).  The Oxford Companion to Food  (3rd ed.). Oxford:  Oxford University Press . pp. 21–22.  ISBN   978-0-19-967733-7 . 
 
 ^   "Sustainable shore – October recipe – Year of Food and Drink 2015 – National Library of Scotland" .  nls.uk . 
 
 ^   Roy, Modhumita (7 August 2010). "Some Like It Hot: Class, Gender and Empire in the Making of Mulligatawny Soup".  Economic and Political Weekly .  45  (32): 66–75.  JSTOR   20764390 . 
 
 ^   "Cooking under the Raj" . Retrieved  30 January  2008 . 
 
 ^   Davidson, Alan (2014).  Jaine, Tom (ed.).  The Oxford Companion to Food  (3rd ed.). Oxford:  Oxford University Press . pp. 410–411.  ISBN   978-0-19-967733-7 . 
 
 ^   Balasubramanian, Anuja; Jannu, Hetal; Raj R. Patel, M.d.; Raj R Patel M D (2011).  The Healthy Indian Diet . Raj Patel. p. 170.  ISBN   978-1-4611-2213-5 . 
 
 ^   Brown, Lindsay; Thomas, Amelia (2008).  Rajasthan, Delhi and Agra . Lonely Planet. p. 69.  ISBN   978-1-74104-690-8 . 
 
 ^   Sharon Tyler Herbst; Herbst, Ron (2007).  The New Food Lover's Companion . Barron's snippet.  ISBN   978-0-7641-3577-4 . 
 
 ^   Adak, Baishali (7 June 2012).  "This sharbat is cool" .  Deccan Herald . Retrieved  28 June  2012 . 
 
 ^   Menon, Ravi (21 June 2010).  "German froth Bitburger to debut in India" . Retrieved  28 June  2012 . 
 
 ^   "Goan fenny, Assam tea, Lucknow chikan to get GI registry soon" .  The Economic Times . New Delhi, India.  Press Trust of India . 21 September 2008 . Retrieved  28 June  2012 . 
 
 ^   All-Asia guide . Far Eastern Economic Review. 1978. p. 162.  ISBN   978-0-8048-1266-5 . 
 
 ^   Bamforth, Charles W. (2010).  Beer Is Proof God Loves Us: Reaching for the Soul of Beer and Brewing . FT Press. p. 84.  ISBN   978-0-13-706507-3 . 
 
 ^   Dalal, Tarla (2001).  Achaar Aur Parathe . Sanjay & Co. p. 85.  ISBN   978-81-86469-54-5 . 
 
 ^   "Harnarains International" . 
 
 ^   Pippa De Bruyn; Bain, Keith; Allardice, David; Joshi, Shonar (2010).  Frommer's India . John Wiley & Sons. p. 38.  ISBN   978-0-470-60264-5 . 
 
 ^   Pamela Goyan Kittler; Sucher, Kathryn P.; Nelms, Marcia (2011).  Food and Culture . Cengage Learning. p. 449.  ISBN   978-0-538-73497-4 . 
 
 ^   "Cowed down by the ban" .  Hindustan Times . Archived from  the original  on 20 February 2012. 
 
 ^   Shah, Natubhai (1998).  Jainism: The World of Conquerors . Sussex Academic Press. p. 249.  ISBN   978-1-898723-30-1 . 
 
 ^   Noel Pitts Gist; Roy Dean Wright (1973).  Marginality and Identity: Anglo-Indians as a Racially-mixed Minority in India . Brill Archive. p. 139.  ISBN   978-90-04-03638-3 . 
 
 ^   Krishna Gopal Dubey (2011).  The Indian Cuisine . PHI Learning Pvt. Ltd. p. 232.  ISBN   978-81-203-4170-8 . 
 
 ^   Collingham, Lizzie (1 February 2006).  "Curry" .  The New York Times Book Review . Retrieved  5 May  2010 . 
 
 ^   "Tandoori Village Restaurant Brisbane" . AsiaRooms.com. Archived from the original on 27 May 2008. {{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: unfit URL ( link ) 
 
 ^   "Chinese cuisine most popular, but Aussies still love McDonald's" . Roy Morgan. 15 February 2019. 
 
 ^   Davidson, Hilary (21 December 2009).  Frommer's Toronto 2010 . John Wiley & Sons. pp.  113 –.  ISBN   978-0-470-54126-5 . Retrieved  28 June  2012 . 
 
 ^   Olson, Donald (2009).  Frommer's Vancouver and Victoria 2010 . John Wiley & Sons. p. 91.  ISBN   978-0-470-50735-3 . 
 
 ^   Mathews, Gordon (2011).  Ghetto at the Center of the World: Chungking Mansions, Hong Kong . University of Chicago Press. p. 34.  ISBN   978-0-226-51020-0 . 
 
 ^   Civitello, Linda (2011).  Cuisine and Culture: A History of Food and People . John Wiley & Sons. p. 267.  ISBN   978-0-470-40371-6 . 
 
 ^   Ann Kondo Corum (2000).  Ethnic Foods of Hawai'i . Bess Press. p. 174.  ISBN   978-1-57306-117-9 . 
 
 ^   "Indian food gains popularity during Chinese New Year" . 20 February 2007. Archived from  the original  on 21 November 2008. 
 
 ^   Then, Viviane.  "Go India: Curry, my love?" . 
 
 ^   "About Food in Malaysia" . Travellers Worldwide. Archived from  the original  on 21 June 2012 . Retrieved  1 July  2012 . 
 
 ^   "Robin Cook's chicken tikka masala speech" .  The Guardian . London. 19 April 2001 . Retrieved  25 February  2002 . 
 
 ^   "Curry house founder is honoured" . BBC. 29 September 2005 . Retrieved  21 March  2012 . 
 
 ^   "[ARCHIVED CONTENT] Food Standards Agency – Curry factfile" . Food Standards Agency. Archived from  the original  on 14 October 2010 . Retrieved  12 September  2008 . 
 
 ^   "Food Standards Agency – Curry factfile" . Archived from  the original  on 14 October 2010 . Retrieved  12 September  2008 . 
 
 ^   "Robin Cook's chicken tikka masala speech" .  The Guardian . London . Retrieved  25 February  2002 . 
 
 ^   "Food:'Where's the Taj Mahal?': Indian restaurants in Dublin since 1908" .  History Ireland . 5 March 2013 . Retrieved  2 March  2017 . 
 
 ^   "Non-Chinese Asians are the fastest growing ethnic group in Ireland – CSO" . 19 October 2012. 
 
 ^   Bhide, Monica (24 January 2007).  "Tikka in No Time" .  The Washington Post . Retrieved  4 June  2012 . 
 
 
 
 Bibliography 
 
 Pat Chapman .  India: Food & Cooking , New Holland, London —  ISBN   978-1-84537-619-2  (2007) 
 Dalal, Tarla (2010).  Faraal Foods for fasting days . Mumbai: Sanjay and Co.  ISBN   9789380392028 . 
 
 External links 
 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons  has media related to: 
 Cuisine of India  ( category ) 
 
 
 
 
 Wikibooks  Cookbook  has a recipe/module on
 
  Cuisine of India 
 
 
 Indian cuisine  at  Curlie 
 v t e   Cuisine of India Regional cuisines North India 
 Main article 
 Awadhi 
 Bhojpuri 
 Punjabi 
 Kumauni 
 Mughlai 
 Kashmiri 
 Rajasthani 
 Uttar Pradeshi 
 South India 
 Main article 
 Andhra 
 Chettinad 
 Karnataka 
 Kerala 
 Tamil 
 Hyderabadi 
 Udupi 
 Mangalorean 
 Mangalorean Catholic 
 Saraswat 
 East/ North East India 
 Bihari 
 Maithil 
 Bengali 
 Assamese 
 Jharkhandi 
 Meghalayan 
 Manipuri 
 Naga 
 Sikkimese 
 Tripuri 
 Arunachali 
 Odia 
 West India 
 Goan 
 Gujarati 
 Marathi 
 Agri & Koli 
 Malvani & Konkani 
 Sindhi 
 Parsi 
 Other 
 Fast food 
 Anglo-Indian 
 Indian Chinese 
 Indian Indonesian 
 Indian Singaporean 
 Jain (Satvika) 
 Malaysian Indian 
 Ingredients / types of food 
 Main dishes 
 Soups and stews 
 Desserts 
 Bread 
 Drinks 
 Snack foods 
 Spices 
 Condiments 
 Preparation and cooking 
 Handi 
 Karahi 
 Tava 
 Tandoor 
 Uruli 
 Other 
 Related cuisines 
 Afghani 
 Bangladeshi 
 Bhutanese 
 Iranian 
 Pakistani 
 Nepalese 
 Sri Lankan 
 Tibetan 
 See also 
 History 
 Etiquette 
 Indian chefs 
 
   Category 
   Commons 
   Cookbook 
   India portal 
   Food portal 
 
 v t e Indian breads List of Indian breads 
 Baati 
 Benne dose 
 Bhakri 
 Bhatoora 
 Chapati 
 Dosa 
 Jolada rotti 
 Khakhra 
 Kulcha 
 Luchi 
 Makki di roti 
 Naan 
 Neer dosa 
 Papadum 
 Paratha 
 Parotta 
 Pashti 
 Pathiri 
 Pesarattu 
 Pitha 
 Puran poli 
 Puri 
 Rava dosa 
 Roti 
 Rumali roti 
 Sheermal 
 Taftan 
 Thalipeeth 
 Uttapam 
 
   Recipes on WikiBooks 
   Category:Indian breads 
     Food portal 
   The India Portal 
 
 v t e Asian cuisine Sovereign states 
 Afghanistan 
 Armenia 
 Azerbaijan 
 Bahrain 
 Bangladesh 
 Bhutan 
 Brunei 
 Burma (Myanmar) 
 Cambodia 
 China 
 Cyprus 
 East Timor (Timor-Leste) 
 Egypt 
 Georgia 
 India 
 Indonesia 
 Iran 
 Iraq 
 Israel 
 Japan 
 Jordan 
 Kazakhstan 
 North Korea 
 South Korea 
 Kuwait 
 Kyrgyzstan 
 Laos 
 Lebanon 
 Malaysia 
 Maldives 
 Mongolia 
 Nepal 
 Oman 
 Pakistan 
 Philippines 
 Qatar 
 Russia 
 Saudi Arabia 
 Singapore 
 Sri Lanka 
 Syria 
 Tajikistan 
 Thailand 
 Turkey 
 Turkmenistan 
 United Arab Emirates 
 Uzbekistan 
 Vietnam 
 Yemen 
 States with limited recognition 
 Abkhazia 
 Artsakh 
 Northern Cyprus 
 Palestine 
 South Ossetia 
 Taiwan 
 Dependencies and other territories 
 British Indian Ocean Territory 
 Christmas Island 
 Cocos (Keeling) Islands 
 Hong Kong 
 Macau 
 
 v t e Cuisines Continental 
 African 
 North 
 West 
 list 
 Americas 
 Caribbean 
 North 
 South 
 list 
 Asian 
 Caucasian 
 Central 
 Indian subcontinent 
 Levantine 
 list 
 European 
 Balkan 
 Central 
 Eastern 
 list 
 Oceanic 
 Intercontinental
 Global 
 Latin American 
 Mediterranean 
 Middle Eastern 
 National  and regional 
 Afghan 
 Albanian 
 Algerian 
 American 
 Californian 
 Floribbean 
 Hawaiian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Lowcountry (South Carolina) 
 New England 
 New Mexico 
 Pacific Northwest 
 Pennsylvania Dutch 
 Puerto Rican 
 Southern US 
 Southwest US 
 Texas 
 Angolan 
 Argentine 
 Armenian 
 Australian 
 Austrian 
 Azerbaijani 
 Bahraini 
 Bangladeshi 
 Barbadian 
 Belarusian 
 Belgian 
 Belizean 
 Beninese 
 Bhutanese 
 Bolivian 
 Bosnian-Herzegovinian 
 Botswana 
 Brazilian 
 British 
 Channel Islands 
 English 
 Gibraltarian 
 Northern Irish 
 Saint Helena 
 Scottish 
 Welsh 
 Bruneian 
 Bulgarian 
 Burkinabé 
 Burmese 
 Burundian 
 Cambodian 
 Cameroonian 
 Canadian 
 Acadian 
 Québécois 
 Central African Republic 
 Chadian 
 Chilean 
 Chinese 
 Cantonese 
 Hong Kong 
 Macanese 
 Tibetan 
 Xinjiang 
 Colombian 
 Congolese 
 Corsican 
 Croatian 
 Cuban 
 Cypriot 
 Czech 
 Danish 
 Faroese 
 Greenlandic 
 Djiboutian 
 Dominican 
 Dominican Republic 
 Dutch 
 East Timorese 
 Ecuadorian 
 Egyptian 
 Emirati 
 Equatorial Guinean 
 Eritrean 
 Estonian 
 Ethiopian 
 Fijian 
 Filipino 
 Finnish 
 French 
 Occitan 
 French Guianan 
 Gabonese 
 Gambian 
 Georgian 
 German 
 Ghanaian 
 Greek 
 Cretan 
 Epirotic 
 Greek Macedonian 
 Heptanesean 
 Guatemalan 
 Guinea-Bissauan 
 Guinean 
 Haitian 
 Honduran 
 Hungarian 
 Icelandic 
 Indian 
 Arunachalese 
 Assamese 
 Bengali 
 Bihari 
 Goan 
 Gujarati 
 Himachal Pradesh 
 Kashmiri 
 Jharkhandi 
 Karnataka 
 Kerala 
 Maharashtrian 
 Manipuri 
 Meghalayan 
 Mizo 
 Naga 
 Odia 
 Punjabi 
 Rajasthani 
 Sikkimese 
 Sindhi 
 Tamil 
 Telangana 
 Telugu 
 Indonesian 
 Acehnese 
 Balinese 
 Banjar 
 Batak 
 Betawi 
 Indo 
 Javanese 
 Madurese 
 Makassar 
 Minahasan 
 Minangkabau 
 Palembangese 
 Sundanese 
 Iranian 
 Iraqi 
 Irish 
 Israeli 
 Italian 
 Abruzzese 
 Ligurian 
 Lombard 
 Lucanian 
 Neapolitan 
 Roman 
 Sardinian 
 Sicilian 
 Venetian 
 Ivorian 
 Jamaican 
 Japanese 
 Okinawan 
 Jordanian 
 Kazakh 
 Kenyan 
 Korean 
 North Korean 
 South Korean 
 Kosovan 
 Kuwaiti 
 Kyrgyz 
 Lao 
 Latvian 
 Lebanese 
 Lesotho 
 Liberian 
 Libyan 
 Liechtensteiner 
 Lithuanian 
 Luxembourg 
 Macedonian 
 Malagasy 
 Malawian 
 Malaysian 
 Sabahan 
 Sarawakian 
 Maldivian 
 Malian 
 Maltese 
 Mauritanian 
 Mauritian 
 Mexican 
 Moldovan 
 Monégasque 
 Mongolian 
 Montenegrin 
 Moroccan 
 Mozambican 
 Namibian 
 Nauruan 
 Nepalese 
 New Zealand 
 Nicaraguan 
 Niger 
 Nigerian 
 Niuean 
 Norwegian 
 Omani 
 Pakistani 
 Palestinian 
 Panamanian 
 Peruvian 
 Polish 
 Portuguese 
 Qatari 
 Romanian  (incl.  Transylvanian Saxon ) 
 Russian 
 Bashkir 
 Chechen 
 Circassian 
 Komi 
 Mordovian 
 Sakha 
 Tatar 
 Udmurt 
 Yamal 
 Rwandan 
 Saint Lucian 
 Salvadoran 
 Sammarinese 
 São Tomé and Príncipe 
 Saudi Arabian 
 Senegalese 
 Serbian 
 Seychellois 
 Sierra Leonean 
 Singaporean 
 Slovak 
 Slovenian 
 Somali 
 South African 
 Spanish 
 Andalusian 
 Asturian 
 Balearic 
 Basque 
 Canarian 
 Cantabrian 
 Catalan 
 Extremaduran 
 Galician 
 Manchegan 
 Valencian 
 Sri Lankan 
 Sudanese 
 Swazi 
 Swedish 
 Swiss 
 Syrian 
 Taiwanese 
 Tajik 
 Tanzanian 
 Zanzibari 
 Thai 
 Togolese 
 Tunisian 
 Turkish 
 Turkmen 
 Trinidadian and Tobagonian 
 Ugandan 
 Ukrainian 
 Uruguayan 
 Uzbek 
 Venezuelan 
 Vietnamese 
 Western Saharan 
 Yemeni 
 Zambian 
 Zimbabwean 
 Ethnic 
 Ainu 
 Arab 
 Indonesian 
 Aromanian 
 Assyrian 
 Balochi 
 Berber 
 Cajun 
 Chinese 
 American 
 Canadian 
 Chifa 
 Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Crimean Tatar 
 Greek American 
 Hazaragi 
 Indian 
 Anglo-Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Indigenous American 
 Inuit 
 Italian American 
 Kurdish 
 Livonian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Malay 
 Ossetian 
 Parsi 
 Pashtun 
 Peranakan 
 Romani 
 Sámi 
 Soul food 
 Sylheti 
 Transylvanian Saxon 
 Yup'ik 
 Religious 
 Buddhist 
 Christian 
 Goan Catholic 
 Mangalorean Catholic 
 Mennonite 
 Hindu 
 Islamic 
 Chinese 
 Ital 
 Jain 
 Jewish 
 American 
 Ashkenazi 
 Bukharan 
 Ethiopian 
 Mizrahi 
 Sephardic 
 Syrian 
 Ritual slaughter 
 Sikh 
 Historical 
 Ancient Egyptian 
 Ancient Greek 
 Ancient Israelite 
 Ancient Roman 
 Antebellum America 
 Aztec 
 Byzantine 
 Early modern European 
 Historical Chinese 
 Historical Indian subcontinent 
 Historical North Indian and Pakistani 
 History of agriculture 
 History of alcoholic drinks 
 History of bread 
 History of seafood 
 History of vegetarianism 
 Historical Argentine 
 Historical Japanese 
 Inca 
 Mayan 
 Muisca 
 Mughal 
 Medieval 
 Ottoman 
 Peasant 
 Soviet 
 Thirteen Colonies 
 Styles 
 Classique 
 Fast food 
 Fusion 
 New American 
 Eurasian 
 Haute 
 Molecular gastronomy 
 Note by Note 
 Nouvelle 
 Lists 
 List of cuisines 
 List of historical cuisines 
 Lists of prepared foods 
 Related 
 Cookbook 
 Cooking 
 Culinary arts 
 Drink 
 Food 
 history 
 Diet 
 Meal preparation 
 
   Food portal 
   Drink portal 
   Category 
   Commons 
   Cookbook 
   WikiProject 
   Outline 
 
 Authority control : National libraries  
 France 
 BnF data 
 Israel 
 United States 
 Latvia 
 Japan 
 
  
NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw2365
Cached time: 20230311165358
Cache expiry: 1814400
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [no‐toc‐conversion, vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 2.832 seconds
Real time usage: 3.229 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 33087/1000000
Post‐expand include size: 595036/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 17293/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 82/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 784894/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.670/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 22865682/52428800 bytes
Lua Profile:
    ?                                                                340 ms       19.3%
    MediaWiki\Extension\Scribunto\Engines\LuaSandbox\LuaSandboxCallback::callParserFunction      260 ms       14.8%
    recursiveClone <mwInit.lua:41>                                   160 ms        9.1%
    dataWrapper <mw.lua:672>                                         140 ms        8.0%
    <mw.lua:694>                                                      60 ms        3.4%
    citation0 <Module:Citation/CS1:2512>                              60 ms        3.4%
    MediaWiki\Extension\Scribunto\Engines\LuaSandbox\LuaSandboxCallback::getAllExpandedArguments       60 ms        3.4%
    MediaWiki\Extension\Scribunto\Engines\LuaSandbox\LuaSandboxCallback::getExpandedArgument       60 ms        3.4%
    MediaWiki\Extension\Scribunto\Engines\LuaSandbox\LuaSandboxCallback::sub       60 ms        3.4%
    MediaWiki\Extension\Scribunto\Engines\LuaSandbox\LuaSandboxCallback::gsub       60 ms        3.4%
    [others]                                                         500 ms       28.4%
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/400
 
 
Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 2613.287      1 -total
 47.22% 1234.056      1 Template:Reflist
 17.77%  464.506     91 Template:Cite_book
 16.54%  432.251    117 Template:Cite_web
  8.55%  223.455      5 Template:Navbox
  6.48%  169.317      3 Template:Sfn
  5.83%  152.464      1 Template:Asian_topic
  5.21%  136.090     33 Template:Cite_news
  4.33%  113.156      1 Template:Lang-hi
  3.78%   98.912     52 Template:Iso2country
 
  Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:idhash:227809-0!canonical and timestamp 20230311165355 and revision id 1141670829. Rendering was triggered because: page-view
  
 esi <esi:include src="/esitest-fa8a495983347898/content" />  
 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Indian_cuisine&oldid=1141670829 " 
 Categories :  Indian cuisine South Asian cuisine Vegetarian dishes of India Hidden categories:  All accuracy disputes Accuracy disputes from February 2020 Webarchive template wayback links All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from December 2017 Articles with permanently dead external links CS1 maint: unfit URL Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Wikipedia pages semi-protected against vandalism Use British English from January 2013 Use dmy dates from July 2020 Articles needing additional references from May 2022 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from October 2018 All articles with self-published sources Articles with self-published sources from February 2020 Articles with unsourced statements from June 2018 Articles needing additional references from April 2020 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from May 2021 Articles with unsourced statements from February 2017 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from April 2021 Articles needing additional references from May 2021 Articles with unsourced statements from January 2014 Articles containing Hindi-language text Pages using multiple image with auto scaled images Articles with unsourced statements from February 2020 Articles with unsourced statements from June 2022 Articles with Curlie links Region topic template using suffix Articles with BNF identifiers Articles with J9U identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers Articles with LNB identifiers Articles with NDL identifiers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  This page was last edited on 26 February 2023, at 05:58  (UTC) . 
 Text is available under the  Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0 ;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the  Terms of Use  and  Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the  Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. 
 
 
 Privacy policy 
 About Wikipedia 
 Disclaimers 
 Contact Wikipedia 
 Mobile view 
 Developers 
 Statistics 
 Cookie statement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
