
 
 
 Jump to content 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle sidebar 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Create account Log in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Personal tools 
 
 
 
 
   Create account   Log in 
 
 
 
 
		Pages for logged out editors  learn more 
 
 
 Contributions Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Navigation 
 
 
 Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate 
 
 
 
 
 Contribute 
 
 
 Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file 
 
 
 
 
 Tools 
 
 
 What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item 
 
 
 
 
 Print/export 
 
 
 Download as PDF Printable version 
 
 
 
 
 In other projects 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons Wikivoyage 
 
 
 
 
 Languages 
 
 On this Wikipedia the language links are at the top of the page across from the article title.  Go to top . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CentralNotice  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Contents 
 move to sidebar 
 hide 
 
 
 
 
 (Top) 
 
 
 
 
 
 1 History 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 Customs, serving and consumption 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 Staples 
 
 
				Toggle Staples subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 3.1 Rice 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.2 Wheat 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.3 Other staples 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4 Vegetables 
 
 
				Toggle Vegetables subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 4.1 Vegetarianism in Indonesia 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5 Meat and fish 
 
 
				Toggle Meat and fish subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 5.1 Poultry 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5.2 Meat 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5.3 Fish 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5.4 Insects 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6 Spices and other flavourings 
 
 
				Toggle Spices and other flavourings subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 6.1 Sambal 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6.2 Sauces and seasonings 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6.3 Peanut sauce 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6.4 Coconut milk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 7 Cooking method 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8 National dishes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 9 Regional dishes 
 
 
				Toggle Regional dishes subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 9.1 Jakarta 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 9.2 West Java 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 9.3 Central Java 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 9.4 East Java 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 9.5 Madura 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 9.6 Bali 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 9.7 Aceh 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 9.8 North Sumatra 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 9.9 West Sumatra 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 9.10 East Sumatra 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 9.11 South Sumatra 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 9.12 North Sulawesi 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 9.13 South Sulawesi 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 9.14 Nusa Tenggara 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 9.15 Maluku and Papua 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 10 Foreign influences 
 
 
				Toggle Foreign influences subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 10.1 Arab influences 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 10.2 Indian influences 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 10.3 Chinese influences 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 10.4 Dutch influences 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 11 Influence abroad 
 
 
				Toggle Influence abroad subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 11.1 Malaysia 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 11.2 Thailand 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 11.3 Netherlands 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 11.4 Culinary diplomacy 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 12 Meal times 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 13 Feasts 
 
 
				Toggle Feasts subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 13.1 Tumpeng 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 13.2 Nasi Padang 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 13.3 Rijsttafel 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 13.4 Prasmanan 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 14 Beverages 
 
 
				Toggle Beverages subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 14.1 Non-alcoholic beverages 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 14.2 Alcoholic beverages 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 15 Eating establishment 
 
 
				Toggle Eating establishment subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 15.1 Restaurant and warung 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 15.2 Street food 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 16 Snacks 
 
 
				Toggle Snacks subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 16.1 Kue 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 16.2 Traditional crackers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 17 Fruits 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 18 Health 
 
 
				Toggle Health subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 18.1 Nutrition 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 18.2 Food safety 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 18.3 Hygiene 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 19 See also 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 20 Notes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 21 References 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 22 Bibliography 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 23 External links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
						Toggle the table of contents
					 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle the table of contents 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Indonesian cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 33 languages 
 
 
 
 العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Čeština Deutsch Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Jawa ქართული Македонски Bahasa Melayu Minangkabau မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Русский Svenska Tagalog ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 
 Edit links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Article Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 English 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 More 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
 
 
 Culinary traditions of Indonesia 
 See also:  List of Indonesian dishes 
 
 
   Example of Indonesian  Sundanese meal ;  ikan bakar  (grilled fish),  nasi timbel  (rice wrapped in banana leaf),  ayam goreng  (fried chicken),  sambal , fried  tempeh  and  tofu , and  sayur asem ; the bowl of water with lime is  kobokan . 
 This article is part of the series on Indonesian cuisine Masakan Indonesia 
 National dishes 
 Gado-gado 
 Nasi goreng 
 Rendang 
 Satay 
 Soto 
 Tumpeng 
 
 Regional and cultural cuisines 
 Acehnese 
 Arab 
 Balinese 
 Banjarese 
 Batak 
 Betawi 
 Chinese 
 Indian 
 Indo 
 Javanese 
 Madurese 
 Makassarese 
 Malay 
 Minahasan 
 Minangkabau 
 Palembangese 
 Peranakan 
 Sundanese 
 
 Ingredients 
 Bumbu 
 Condiments 
 Peanut sauce 
 Sambal 
 Santan 
 
 Types of food 
 Foods 
 Dishes 
 Noodles 
 Soups 
 Desserts 
 Snacks 
 Kue 
 Krupuk 
 Kripik 
 Drinks 
 Beverages 
 Alcohol 
 Coffee 
 
 Preparation and cooking 
 Main 
 Frying 
 Stir frying 
 Grilling 
 Roasting 
 Dry roasting 
 Sautéing 
 Boiling 
 Steaming 
 Other 
 Pepes 
 Pindang 
 Rendang 
 Semur 
 
 Styles 
 Nasi campur 
 Nasi padang 
 Rijsttafel 
 Tumpeng 
 Street food 
 
 Holidays and festivals 
 Kenduri 
 Lebaran  (Eid al-Fitr) 
 Naloni Mitoni 
 Natal  (Christmas) 
 Serak Gulo 
 Slametan 
 
 Related cuisines 
 Bruneian 
 Chinese 
 Dutch 
 East Timorese 
 Egyptian 
 Filipino 
 Indian 
 Malaysian 
 Portuguese 
 Singaporean 
 Sri Lankan 
 South African 
 Surinamese 
 Thai 
 Yemeni 
 
 See also 
 History 
 Etiquette 
 Cookbook: Cuisine of Indonesia 
 
   Indonesia portal   Food portal v t e 
 Part of  a series  on the Culture of Indonesia 
 History 
 People 
 Languages 
 Traditions 
 Etiquette in Indonesia 
 National costume of Indonesia 
 Dance in Indonesia 
 
 Mythology  and  Folklore 
 Cuisine 
 Religion 
 Islam 
 Christianity 
 Catholicism 
 Protestantism 
 Hinduism 
 Buddhism 
 Confucianism 
 Judaism 
 
 Art 
 Indonesian art 
 Architecture of Indonesia 
 
 Literature 
 Music  and  Performing arts 
 Media 
 Radio 
 Television 
 Cinema 
 
 Sport 
 Monuments 
 World Heritage Sites 
 
 Symbols 
 Flag 
 Coat of arms 
 National anthem 
 
   Indonesia portal v t e 
 Indonesian cuisine  is a collection of various regional  culinary  traditions that formed the archipelagic nation of  Indonesia . There are a wide variety of recipes and cuisines in part because Indonesia is composed of approximately 6,000 populated islands of the total 17,508 in the world's largest archipelago, [1] [2]  with more than  1,300 ethnic groups . [3]  Many regional cuisines exist, often based upon  indigenous culture  with some foreign influences. [2]  Indonesia has around 5,350 traditional recipes, with 30 of them considered the most important. [4]  Indonesia's cuisine may include rice, noodle and soup dishes in  modest local eateries  to street-side snacks and top-dollar plates.
 Indonesian cuisine varies greatly by region and has many different influences. [2] [5] [6]   Sumatran  cuisine, for example, often has  Middle Eastern  and  Indian  influences, featuring curried meat and vegetables such as  gulai  and  curry , while  Javanese cuisine  is mostly indigenous, [2]  with some hint of  Chinese influence . The cuisines of  Eastern Indonesia  are similar to  Polynesian and Melanesian cuisine . Elements of Chinese cuisine can be seen in Indonesian cuisine: foods such as  noodles ,  meat balls , and  spring rolls  have been completely assimilated.
 Throughout its history, Indonesia has been involved in trade due to its location and natural resources. Additionally, Indonesia's indigenous techniques and ingredients were influenced by India, the Middle East, China, and finally Europe. Spanish and Portuguese traders brought  New World   produce  even before the Dutch came to colonise most of the  archipelago . The Indonesian islands  the Moluccas  (Maluku), which are famed as "the Spice Islands", also contributed to the introduction of native spices, such as  cloves  and  nutmeg , to Indonesian and global cuisine.
 Indonesian cuisine often demonstrates complex  flavour , [7]  acquired from certain ingredients and  bumbu  spices mixture. Indonesian dishes have rich flavours; most often described as  savory ,  hot  and  spicy , and also combination of basic  tastes  such as  sweet ,  salty ,  sour  and  bitter . Most Indonesians favour hot and spicy food, thus  sambal , Indonesian hot and spicy chili sauce with various optional ingredients, notably shrimp paste, shallots, and others, is a staple condiment at all Indonesian tables. [8]  Seven main Indonesian  cooking  methods are  frying ,  grilling ,  roasting ,  dry roasting ,  sautéing ,  boiling  and  steaming .
 
   Opor ayam  (curry style),  gulai ,  ketupat , diced  potatoes  with spices, and  bawang goreng  served during  Lebaran  ( Eid al-Fitr ) in Indonesia 
 Some popular Indonesian dishes such as  nasi goreng , [9]   gado-gado , [10] [11]   satay , [12]  and  soto [13]  are  ubiquitous  in the country and are considered national dishes. The official  national dish  of Indonesia is  tumpeng , chosen in 2014 by  Indonesian Ministry of Tourism and Creative Economy  as the dish that binds the diversity of Indonesia's various culinary traditions. [4]  Later in 2018, the same ministry has chosen 5 national dish of Indonesia; they are  soto, rendang, satay, nasi goreng , and  gado-gado . [14] 
 
   Indonesia is the home of  sate ; one of the country's national dishes, there are many variants across Indonesia. 
 Today, some popular dishes that originated in Indonesia are now common to neighbouring countries, Malaysia and Singapore. Indonesian dishes such as  satay , beef  rendang , and  sambal  are favoured in  Malaysia  and  Singapore . Soy-based dishes, such as variations of  tofu  and  tempeh , are also very popular. Tempeh is regarded as a  Javanese  invention, a local adaptation of soy-based food fermentation and production. Another fermented food is  oncom , similar in some ways to tempeh but using a variety of bases (not only soy), created by different fungi, and particularly popular in  West Java .
 
 
 History [ edit ] 
   Bas-relief of Karmawibhanga of 9th century  Borobudur  depicts a  rice barn  and rice plants being infested by mouse pestilence.  Rice farming  has a long history in Indonesia. 
 Indonesian cuisine has a long history—although most of it is not well-documented, and relied heavily on local practice and oral traditions. A rare instance is demonstrated by  Javanese cuisine  that somewhat has quite a well-documented culinary tradition. The diversity ranges from ancient  bakar batu  or stone-grilled yams and boar practiced by  Papuan tribes  of eastern Indonesia, to sophisticated contemporary Indonesian fusion cuisine. The ethnic diversity of Indonesian archipelago provides an eclectic combination — mixing local Javanese, Sundanese, Balinese, Minang, Malay and other native cuisine traditions, with centuries worth of foreign contacts with Indian traders, Chinese migrants and Dutch colonials. [15] 
 Rice has been an essential staple for Indonesian society, as bas-reliefs of 9th century  Borobudur  and  Prambanan  describes rice farming in ancient Java. Ancient dishes were mentioned in many Javanese inscriptions and historians have succeeded in deciphering some of them. The inscriptions from  Kingdom of Mataram  era circa 8th to 10th century mentioned several ancient dishes, among others are  hadaŋan haraŋ  (minced water buffalo meat satay, similar with today Balinese  sate lilit ),  hadaŋan madura  (water buffalo meat simmered with sweet palm sugar), and  dundu puyengan  (eel seasoned with lemon basil). Also various  haraŋ-haraŋ  (grilled meats) either  celeṅ/wök  (pork),  hadahan/kbo  (water buffalo),  kidaŋ/knas  (deer) or  wḍus  (goat). [16]  Ancient beverages include  nalaka rasa  ( sugarcane juice ),  jati wangi  (jasmine beverage), and  kinca  (tamarind juice). Also various  kuluban  (boiled vegetables served in spices, similar with today  urap ) and  phalamula  (boiled yams and tubers served with liquid palm sugar). [17]  Other ancient vegetable dishes include  rumwah-rumwah  ( lalap ),  dudutan  (raw vegetables) and  tetis . [18] 
 The 9th century Old Javanese  Kakawin Ramayana  mentioned cooking technique as  Trijata  offered  Sita  some food (canto 17.101); scrumptious food of  landuga tatla-tila  (cooked with oil) and  modakanda sagula  ( sugared  delicacies). [18] 
 Several foods were mentioned in several Javanese inscriptions dated from the 10th to 15th centuries. Some of this dishes are identified with present-day Javanese foods. Among others are  pecel ,  pindang ,  rarawwan  ( rawon ),  rurujak  ( rujak ),  kurupuk  ( krupuk ), sweets like  wajik  and  dodol , also beverages like  dawet . [19] 
 In the 15th century Sundanese manuscript  Sanghyang Siksa Kandang Karesian , it was mentioned the common  Sundanese food  flavours of that times which includes;  lawana  (salty),  kaduka  (hot and spicy),  tritka  (bitter),  amba  (sour),  kasaya  (savoury), and  madura  (sweet). [20] 
 By the 13th to 15th century, coastal Indonesian polities began to absorb culinary influences from  India  and the Middle East, as evidence with the adoption of  curry -like recipes in the region. This was especially affirmative in the coastal towns of  Aceh ,  Minangkabau  lands of West Sumatra, and  Malay  ports of Sumatra and Malay peninsula. Subsequently, those culinary traditions displayed typical Indian culinary influences, such as  kare  (curry),  roti cane  and  gulai . This also went hand in hand with the adoption of Islamic faith, thus encouraged  halal  Muslim dietary law that omits pork. On the other hand, the indigenous inhabitant that resides inland—such as the  Bataks  and Dayaks, retains their older Austronesian culinary traditions, which incorporate  bushmeat , pork and  blood  in their daily diet.
 
   Indonesian spices ( bumbu ) including peppercorn, clove, cinnamon and nutmeg. The famed 16th century  spice trade  has prompted European traders to seek spices' sources as far as Indonesian archipelago. 
 According to the 17th century account of  Rijklof van Goens , the ambassador of the  VOC  for  Sultan Agung 's Javanese  Mataram court , [i]  the techniques of meat processing (sheep, goats, and buffalo) during celebration in Java, was by grilling and frying the seasoned meat. Unlike European, the Javanese primarily use coconut oil instead of butter. [18] 
 Chinese immigrants  has settled in Indonesian archipelago as early as  Majapahit  period circa 15th century CE, and accelerated during Dutch colonial period. The Chinese settlers introduced  stir-frying  technique that required the use of Chinese  wok  and small amount of cooking oil. [18]  They also introduced some new Chinese cuisine—including soy sauce, [ii]  noodles and soybean processing technique to make tofu. Subsequently, soybean processing led to the possibly accidental discovery of  tempeh  (fermented soybean cake). The earliest known reference to tempeh appeared in 1815 in the Javanese manuscript of  Serat Centhini . [21] 
 The vigor of  spice trade  during the  age of exploration  has brought European traders to Indonesian shores. Subsequently,  European colonialism  was established in the 19th century  Dutch East Indies . The influences of European cuisine—most notably the Portuguese and Dutch, has introduced European techniques, especially in bread-making, pastries, cookies and cake-baking.
 Indonesian culinary tradition has been exposed to various influences. Regarding the method of food processing techniques, each region has developed a specificity that ultimately leads to localization of regional taste. [18] 
 
 Customs, serving and consumption [ edit ] 
   Indonesian typical communal meal, consisting of  nasi  (steamed rice),  lauk-pauk  (side dishes), and  sayur-mayur  (vegetables). 
 Indonesian traditional meals usually consists of  steamed rice  as staple, surrounded by vegetables and soup and meat or fish side dishes. In a typical family meal, the family members gather around the table filled with steamed rice and several other dishes. [1]  Each dish is placed in a separate communal large plate or in bowls. Each of these dishes has its own serving spoons, used only to take parts of the dishes from the communal plate into one's own personal plate. Each of the family members has their own personal plate that is first filled with steamed rice. Usually the oldest family member or the husband has the right to initiate the meal, [22]  followed by the rest of the family to help themselves with the dishes. Each of them take some portion of dishes from the communal plates into their own individual plates.
 
   Nasi goreng -sate  combo with egg and  krupuk , popular Indonesian dish among foreigners. 
 On their personal plate, the steamed rice will soon be surrounded by two, three or more dishes; vegetables and fish or meat, and maybe some fried dishes,  sambal  and  krupuk . In Indonesian customs — unlike in Japanese counterpart — it is quite acceptable to be seen to mix the different flavoured dishes in a single personal plate during consumption. A practice commonly found in  nasi campur ,  nasi Padang , or during a buffet. The soupy dish might be served in a separate small personal bowl. Today in contemporary Indonesian restaurants, the set menu is often offered. This has led to the personal serving practice, in a similar fashion to those of  Japanese cuisine , with a personal plate on a tray, a rattan or bamboo container each with a separate small portion of dishes surrounding the rice. This can be found in the presentation of nasi Bali.
 
   Personal serving of nasi Bali, on a woven bamboo plate with rice surrounded by pieces of meat and vegetable side dishes. 
 Indonesian meals are commonly eaten with the combination of a  spoon  in the right hand and  fork  in the left hand (to push the food onto the spoon). Unlike the European dining custom,  knives  are absent from the dining table, thus most of the ingredients such as vegetables and meat are already cut into bite-size pieces prior to cooking. [22]  Although, in many parts of the country, such as  West Java  and  West Sumatra , it is also common to eat with one's bare hands. In restaurants or households that commonly use bare hands to eat, such as seafood food stalls, traditional  Sundanese  and  Minangkabau  restaurants, or East Javanese  pecel lele  (fried  catfish  with  sambal ) and  ayam goreng  (fried chicken) food stalls,  kobokan  is usually served along with the food.  Kobokan  is a bowl of tap water with a slice of lime in it to give a fresh scent, this bowl of water is not intended for consumption, rather it is used to wash one's hand before and after eating. Eating with  chopsticks  is generally only found in food stalls or restaurants serving Indonesian adaptations of Chinese cuisine, such as  bakmie  or  mie ayam  (chicken noodle) with  pangsit  (wonton),  mie goreng  (fried noodles), and  kwetiau goreng  (fried flat  rice noodles ). [23] 
 
 Staples [ edit ] 
 Rice [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Rice production in Indonesia 
   Using  water buffalo  to plough  rice fields  in  Java ;  rice  is a staple for all classes in contemporary; Indonesia is the world's third largest paddy rice producer and its cultivation has transformed much of Indonesia's landscape. 
 Rice is a staple for all classes in contemporary  Indonesia , [5] [24]  and it holds the central place in Indonesian culture: it shapes the landscape; is sold at markets; and is served in most meals both as a savoury and a sweet food. The importance of rice in Indonesian culture is demonstrated through the reverence of  Dewi Sri , the rice goddess of ancient  Java  and  Bali . Traditionally the agricultural cycles linked to rice cultivations were celebrated through rituals, such as  Seren Taun  rice harvest festival.
 Rice is most often eaten as plain rice with just a few protein and vegetable dishes as side dishes. It is also served as  nasi uduk  (rice cooked in  coconut milk ),  nasi kuning  (rice cooked with coconut milk and  turmeric ),  ketupat  (rice steamed in woven packets of coconut fronds),  lontong  (rice steamed in  banana  leaves),  intip  or  rengginang  (rice crackers), desserts,  vermicelli ,  noodles ,  arak beras  (rice wine), and  nasi goreng  ( fried rice ). [25]   Nasi goreng  is omnipresent in Indonesia and considered a  national dish . [9] 
 
   The ubiquitous  nasi goreng  (fried rice), considered one of Indonesia's national dishes, it has rich variants, this one uses green  stinky bean  and goat meat. 
 Rice was only incorporated into diets as either the technology to grow it, or the ability to buy it from elsewhere, was gained. Evidence of wild rice on the island of  Sulawesi  dates from 3000 BCE. Evidence for the earliest cultivation come from the eighth century stone inscriptions from the central island of  Java , which shows that kings levied taxes in rice. The images of rice cultivation, rice barns, and pest  mice  infesting a ricefield is evident in Karmawibhanga bas-reliefs of  Borobudur . Divisions of labour between men, women, and animals that are still in place in Indonesian rice cultivation, were carved into relief friezes on the ninth century  Prambanan temples  in  Central Java : a  water buffalo  attached to a plough; women planting seedlings and pounding grain; and a man carrying sheaves of rice on each end of a pole across his shoulders ( pikulan ). In the sixteenth century, Europeans visiting the Indonesian islands saw rice as a new prestige food served to the aristocracy during ceremonies and feasts. [24] 
 Rice production in Indonesian history is linked to the development of  iron  tools and the domestication of  wild Asian water buffalo  as  water buffalo  for cultivation of fields and  manure  for fertiliser. Rice production requires exposure to the sun. Once covered in dense forest, much of the Indonesian landscape has been gradually cleared for permanent fields and settlements as rice cultivation developed over the last fifteen hundred years. [24] 
 
 Wheat [ edit ] 
   Mie goreng  (fried noodle), a wheat-based Chinese dish completely assimilated into Indonesian mainstream cuisine. 
 Wheat  is not a native plant to Indonesia. Through imports and foreign influences — most notably Chinese and Dutch — Indonesians began to develop a taste for wheat-based foodstuff, especially Chinese  noodles , Indian  roti , and Dutch  bread . Other than common steamed rice, the Chinese in Indonesia also considered noodles,  bakpao  and  cakwe  as staples. Yet in Indonesia, especially in Java and Sumatra, the rice culture was so prevalent that sometimes these wheat-based dishes, such as noodles are treated as side dishes and are consumed with rice, while others such as Chinese buns and  cakwe  are treated as snacks. The European, especially the Portuguese and the Dutch, introduced bread and various type of bakery and pastry. These European staples have now become alternatives for a quick breakfast.
 The Indonesian wheat consumption reached a new height after the advent of Indonesian  instant noodle  industry back in the 1970s. Since then Indonesia has become one of the world's major producers and consumers of instant noodles. Indonesia is the world's second largest instant noodle market only after China, with demand reaching 12.54 billion servings in 2018, [26]  Today, instant noodles have become a staple in Indonesian households for quick hot meals. Certain brands such as  Indomie  have become household names.
 
 Other staples [ edit ] 
   Papeda , staple food of eastern Indonesia, served with yellow soup and grilled mackerel. 
 Other staple foods in Indonesia include a number of starchy  tubers  such as  yam ,  sweet potato ,  potato ,  taro  and  cassava . Starchy fruit such as  breadfruit  and  jackfruit  and grains such as  maize  are eaten. A  sago   congee  called  papeda  is a staple food especially in  Maluku  and  Papua . Sago is often mixed with water and cooked as a simple pancake. Next to sago, people of eastern Indonesia consume wild tubers as staple food.
 Many types of tubers such as  talas  (a type of taro but larger and more bland) and breadfruit are native to Indonesia, while others were introduced from elsewhere.  Yam  was introduced from Africa; while potato, sweet potato, cassava and maize were introduced from the Americas through Spanish influence and reached Java in the 17th century. Cassava is usually boiled, steamed, fried or processed as a popular snack  kripik singkong  (cassava crackers). Dried cassava, locally known as  tiwul , is an alternate staple food in arid areas of Java such as Gunung Kidul and Wonogiri, while other roots and tubers are eaten especially in hard times. Maize is eaten in drier regions such as  Madura  and islands east of the  Wallace Line , such as the Lesser Sunda Islands.
 
 Vegetables [ edit ] 
   Indonesian food includes many vegetables as ingredients like this  Sayur oyong  made with  Luffa acutangula 
 A number of  leaf vegetables  are widely used in Indonesian cuisine, such as  kangkung ,  spinach ,  genjer ,  melinjo ,  papaya  and  cassava  leaves. These are often sauteed with  garlic . Spinach and corn are used in simple clear watery vegetable soup  sayur bayam bening  flavoured with  temu kunci , garlic and  shallot . Clear vegetable soup includes  sayur oyong . Other vegetables like  calabash ,  chayote ,  kelor ,  yardlong bean ,  eggplant ,  gambas  and  belustru , are cut and used in stir fries, curries and soups like  sayur asem ,  sayur lodeh  or  laksa .  Daun ubi tumbuk  is pounded cassava leaves dish, commonly found in  Sumatra ,  Kalimantan  and  Sulawesi .  Sayur sop  is  cabbage ,  cauliflower ,  potato ,  carrot , with  macaroni  spiced with  black pepper , garlic and shallot in chicken or beef  broth . The similar mixed vegetables are also stir fried as  cap cai , a popular dish of the  Chinese Indonesian cuisine .  Tumis kangkung  is a popular stir-fried water spinach dish.
 Vegetables like  winged bean ,  tomato ,  cucumber  and the small variety of  bitter melon  are commonly eaten raw, like in  lalab . The large bitter melon variety is usually boiled.  Kecombrang  and  papaya  flower buds are a common Indonesian vegetable.  Urap  is seasoned and spiced shredded  coconut  mixed together with vegetables,  asinan betawi  are preserved vegetables.  Gado-gado  and  pecel  are a salad of boiled vegetables dressed in a  peanut -based spicy sauce, while  karedok  is its raw version.
 
 Vegetarianism in Indonesia [ edit ] 
   Tempeh burger , a fusion vegan dish. 
 Vegetarianism  is well represented in Indonesia, as there is a wide selection of vegetarian dishes and meat substitutes that may be served. Dishes such as  gado-gado ,  karedok ,  ketoprak ,  tauge goreng ,  pecel ,  urap ,  rujak  and  asinan  are vegetarian dishes. However, dishes that use  peanut sauce  such as  gado-gado, karedok  or  ketoprak , might contain small amounts of  shrimp paste , called "terasi", for flavor. Shrimp paste is also often used to add flavour to spicy  sambal  chili paste served with  lalap  assorted fresh vegetables. Fermented  soy  products, such as  tempeh , "tahu" ( tofu ) and  oncom  are prevalent as meat substitutes and as a source of vegetable  protein . In contemporary fusion cuisine, tempeh is used to replace meat patties and served as tempeh burger. [27] 
 Most Indonesians do not practice strict vegetarianism and may consume vegetables or vegetarian dishes for their taste, preference, economic and health reasons. [ citation needed ]  Nevertheless, there are small numbers of Indonesian Buddhists that practice vegetarianism for religious reasons. [ citation needed ] 
 
 Meat and fish [ edit ] 
 The main animal  protein  sources in the Indonesian diet are mostly  poultry  and  fish , while meats such as  beef ,  water buffalo ,  goat  and  mutton  are commonly found in the Indonesian marketplaces.
 
 Poultry [ edit ] 
   Ayam goreng kalasan , from  Kalasan ,  Yogyakarta . 
 The most common poultry consumed is  chicken  and  duck  to a lesser amount,  pigeon , quail and wild swamp bird such as  watercock  are also consumed. Traditionally, Indonesians breed free-ranged chicken in the villages known as  ayam kampung  (village chicken). Compared to common domesticated chicken, these village chicken are thinner and their meat are slightly firmer. Various recipes of  ayam goreng  (fried chicken) and  ayam bakar  (grilled chicken) are commonly found throughout Indonesia. Other than frying or grilling, chicken might be cooked as soup, such as  sup ayam  and  soto ayam , or cooked in  coconut milk  as  opor ayam . Chicken  satay  is also commonly found in Indonesia, it is a barbecued meat on skewer served with peanut sauce. [8]  Popular chicken recipes such as  ayam goreng kalasan  from  Yogyakarta ,  ayam bakar padang  from  Padang ,  ayam taliwang  from Lombok,  ayam betutu  from  Bali , and  ayam goreng lengkuas  (galangal fried chicken).
 
 Meat [ edit ] 
   Rendang daging , a beef, mutton or goat meat dish, that has been marinated with various different spices for several hours, and slow-cooked with coconut milk. 
 Beef  and  goat meat  are the most commonly consumed meats in Indonesia, while  kerbau  ( water buffalo ) and  domestic sheep  are also consumed to a lesser degree, since water buffalo are more useful for ploughing the  rice  paddies, while sheep are kept for their wool or to be used for the traditional entertainment of  ram fighting . As a country with an  Islamic  majority, Indonesian Muslims follow the Islamic  halal  dietary law which forbids the consumption of  pork . In other parts of Indonesia where there are significant numbers of non-Muslims, boar and pork are commonly consumed. Dishes made of non-halal meats can be found in provinces such as  Bali ,  North Sumatra ,  North Sulawesi ,  East Nusa Tenggara ,  Maluku ,  West Kalimantan ,  Central Kalimantan ,  North Kalimantan ,  West Papua ,  Papua , and also in the  Chinatowns  of major Indonesian cities. Today to cater for the larger Muslim market, most of the restaurants and eating establishments in Indonesia put halal signs that signify that they serve neither pork nor any non-halal meats, nor do they use  lard  in their cooking. With an overwhelming Muslim population and a relatively small population of cattle, today Indonesians rely heavily on imported  beef  from  Australia ,  New Zealand  and the  United States  which often results in a scarcity and raised prices of beef in the Indonesian market.
 The meat can be cooked in rich spices and  coconut milk  such as beef, goat or lamb  rendang , skewered, seasoned and grilled chicken or mutton as  satay , barbecued meats, or sliced and cooked in rich broth soup as  soto . Muttons and various  offals  can be use as ingredients for soto soup or  gulai  curry. In Bali, with its Hindu majority, the  babi guling  (pig roast) is popular among locals as well as non-Muslim visitors, while the  Batak  people of  North Sumatra  have  babi panggang  that is a similar dish.  Wild boar  are also commonly consumed in  Papua . The meat also can be processed to be thinly-sliced and dried as  dendeng  (jerky), or made into abon ( meat floss ).  Dendeng celeng  is Indonesian "dried, jerked" boar meat. [28]  Raised  rabbits  are also consumed as food in mountainous region of Indonesia.
 Some game meat such as  venison  might be sold and consumed in some areas of Indonesia. In  Kalimantan ,  West Nusa Tenggara ,  East Nusa Tenggara , and  Papua ,  deer  meat can be found, usually wildly acquired by hunting. Other unusual and often controversial exotic meats include  frog legs  and  softshell turtle  consumed in  Chinese Indonesian  and  Javanese  cuisine,  horse meat  consumed in  Yogyakarta ,  West Nusa Tenggara , and  South Sulawesi ,  turtle  meat consumed in  Bali  and Eastern Indonesia,  snake ,  biawak  ( monitor lizard ),  paniki  ( fruit bats ),  dog meat ,  cat meat , and field  rats  consumed in  Minahasan  cuisine of  North Sulawesi .  Batak  cuisine of  North Sumatra  is also familiar with cooking dog meat, while its consumption is diminishing in Central Java. Exotic and rare game meat such as  crocodile ,  squirrel ,  civet , and  monkey  might also be sold and consumed in wilder parts of Indonesia.
 
 Fish [ edit ] 
   Grilling  ikan bakar   baronang  in  Mamuju ,  West Sulawesi . 
 In an archipelagic nation,  seafood  is abundant, and it is commonly consumed especially by Indonesian residents in coastal areas. Fish is especially popular in the eastern Indonesian regions of  Sulawesi  and  Maluku , where most of the people work as fishermen. Both areas have a vast sea which brings them many different kinds of seafood. [29]  Popular seafood in Indonesian cuisine among others;
 skipjack tuna ,  tuna ,  mackerel ,  pomfret ,  wahoo ,  milkfish ,  trevally ,  rabbitfish ,  garoupa ,  red snapper ,  anchovy ,  swordfish ,  shark ,  stingray ,  squid  or  cuttlefish ,  shrimp ,  crab ,  blue crab , and  mussel . Seafood is commonly consumed across Indonesia, but it is especially popular in  Maluku islands  and Minahasa ( North Sulawesi ) cuisine. Seafood is usually grilled, boiled or fried.  Ikan bakar  is a popular grilled fish dish that can be found throughout Indonesia. The method of cooking like stir fried in spices or in soup is also possible.  Salted fish  is preserved seafood through cured in salt, it also can be found in Indonesian market.
 Fresh water fisheries can be found in inland regions or in areas with large rivers or lakes. Fresh water fishes are popular in  Sundanese cuisine  of West Java, caught or raised in  Lake Toba  in Batak lands of  North Sumatra , or taken from large rivers in  Malay  lands of  Riau ,  Jambi  and  South Sumatra , or large rivers in  Kalimantan . Popular fresh water fish among others;  carp ,  gourami ,  catfish ,  pangasius ,  snakehead ,  trichogaster ,  climbing gourami ,  Nile tilapia , and  Mozambique tilapia .
 
 Insects [ edit ] 
 Further information:  List of edible insects by country 
   Botok tawon ,  botok  made from bee larvae. 
 Unlike Thailand, in Indonesia  insect  is not a popular food ingredient nor widely available as street food. In Java, locals do catch, breed and sell certain species of insects, usually sold fresh or alive as pet bird feed. Nevertheless, traditionally several cultures in Indonesia are known to consume insects, especially  grasshopper ,  cricket ,  termite , also the  larvae  of  sago palm weevil ,  bee  and  dragonfly . In Java and Kalimantan, grasshoppers and crickets are usually lightly battered and deep fried in palm oil as crispy  kripik  snack. [30]  Smaller grasshoppers, crickets and termites might be made as  rempeyek  batter cracker which resembles insect fossil. During monsoon rainy season, flying termites are abundant being attracted to lightbulbs to mate. Locals usually put a bucket of water under the lamp to trap the flying termites, pluck the wings, and roast the termites as additional protein-rich snack. In  Banyuwangi , East Java, there is a specialty dish called  botok  tawon  (honeybee botok), which is  beehives  that contains bee larvae, being seasoned in shredded coconut and spices, wrapped inside  banana leaf  package and steamed. [31]   Dayak  tribes of Kalimantan, also Moluccans and Papuan tribes in Eastern Indonesia, are known to consumes  ulat sagu  (lit. sagoo caterpillar) or larvae of  sago palm weevil . This protein-rich larvae is considered a delicacy in  Papua , and often being roasted prior of consumption. Locals may also commonly eat the larvae raw or alive. [32]  In  Bali , dragonflies are also consumed by processing them into  pepes .
 
 Spices and other flavourings [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Bumbu (seasoning) 
   Various Indonesian spices 
 "Rempah" is the Indonesian word for spice, while " bumbu " is the Indonesian word for a spice mixture or seasoning, and it commonly appears in the names of certain spice mixtures, sauces and seasoning pastes. [33]  Known throughout the world as the "Spice Islands", the Indonesian islands of  Maluku  contributed to the introduction of its native spices to world cuisine. Spices such as  nutmeg or mace ,  clove ,  pandan leaves ,  keluwak  and  galangal  are native to Indonesia. It is likely that  black pepper ,  turmeric ,  lemongrass ,  shallot ,  cinnamon ,  candlenut ,  coriander  and  tamarind  were introduced from  India , while  ginger ,  scallions  and  garlic  were introduced from  China . Those spices from mainland Asia were introduced early, in ancient times, thus they became integral ingredients in Indonesian cuisine.
 In ancient times, the  kingdom of Sunda  and the later  sultanate of Banten  were well known as the world's major producers of  black pepper . The maritime empires of  Srivijaya  and  Majapahit  also benefited from the lucrative spice trade between the spice islands with China and India. Later the  Dutch East India Company  controlled the spice trade between Indonesia and the world.
 
 Sambal [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Sambal 
   Sambal  ulek , a common Indonesian spicy condiment. 
 The Indonesian fondness for hot and spicy food was enriched when the Spanish introduced  chili pepper  from the  New World  to the region in the 16th century. After that hot and spicy  sambals  have become an important part of Indonesian cuisine. [34] 
 Indonesia has perhaps the richest variants of sambals. In the Indonesian archipelago, there are as many as 300 varieties of  sambal . [35]  The intensity ranges from mild to very hot. Sambal evolved into many variants across Indonesia, ones of the most popular is  sambal terasi  ( sambal belacan ) and  sambal mangga muda  (unripe mango sambal).  Sambal terasi  is a combination of chilies, sharp fermented shrimp paste ( terasi ), tangy lime juice, sugar and salt all pounded up with mortar and pestle. [8]   Dabu-dabu  is  North Sulawesi  style of sambal with chopped fresh  tomato , chili, and  lime  juice.
 
   The savoury and sweet  shrimp paste  from  Lombok , West Nusa Tenggara, is called  lengkare or terasi lombok 
 Sambal, especially sambal ulek, or sambal terasi can also become a base ingredient for many dishes, such as sambal raja (a dish from Kutai), terong balado, dendeng balado, ayam bumbu rujak, sambal goreng ati, among other things.
 
 Sauces and seasonings [ edit ] 
 Soy sauce  is also an important flavourings in Indonesian cuisine.  Kecap asin  (salty or common soy sauce) was adopted from Chinese cuisine, however Indonesian developed their own  kecap manis  (sweet soy sauce)  with generous addition of  palm sugar  into soy sauce. Sweet soy sauce is an important  marinade  for barbecued meat and fish, such as satay and grilled fishes. Sweet soy sauce is also an important ingredient for  semur , Indonesian  stew .
 
 Peanut sauce [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Peanut sauce 
   Peanut sauce  is important part of  gado-gado . 
 One of the main characteristics of Indonesian cuisine is the wide application of  peanuts  in many Indonesian signature dishes, such as  satay ,  gado-gado ,  karedok ,  ketoprak , and  pecel . All of these dishes applied ample of  bumbu kacang  ( peanut sauce ) for flavouring.  Gado-gado  and  Satay  for example have been considered Indonesian national dishes. [11] [12] 
 Introduced from  Mexico  by  Portuguese  and  Spanish  merchants in the 16th century, peanuts assumed a place within Indonesian cuisine as a key ingredient. Peanuts thrived in the tropical environment of Southeast Asia, and today they can be found, roasted and chopped finely, in many recipes. Whole, halved, or crushed peanuts are used to garnish a variety of dishes, and used in  marinades  and dipping sauces such as  sambal kacang  (a mixture of ground chilies and fried peanuts) for  otak-otak  or  ketan .  Peanut oil , extracted from peanuts, is one of the most commonly used cooking oils in Indonesia.
 Bumbu kacang  or  peanut sauce  represents a sophisticated, earthy seasoning rather than a sweet, gloppy sauce. [36]  It should have a delicate balance of savoury, sweet, sour, and spicy flavours, acquired from various ingredients, such as fried peanuts,  gula jawa  ( coconut sugar ),  garlic ,  shallots ,  ginger ,  tamarind ,  lemon  juice,  lemongrass ,  salt ,  chilli ,  peppercorns , sweet  soy sauce , ground together and mixed with water to form the right consistency. The secret to good peanut sauce is "not too thick and not too watery". Indonesian peanut sauce tends to be less sweet than the  Thai  version, which is a hybrid adaptation.  Gado-gado  is a popular dish particularly associated with  bumbu kacang , and is eaten across Indonesia.
 
 Coconut milk [ edit ] 
 
   Shredding coconut flesh to make  coconut milk . 
 
 
 Main article:  Coconut milk 
 Coconuts  are abundant in tropical Indonesia, and since ancient times Indonesians developed many and various uses for this plant. The broad use of  coconut milk  in dishes throughout the archipelago is another common characteristic of Indonesian cuisine. It is used in recipes ranging from savoury dishes – such as  rendang ,  soto ,  gulai ,  mie koclok ,  sayur lodeh ,  gudeg , and  opor ayam  – to  desserts  – such as  es  cendol  and  es doger .  Soto  is ubiquitous in Indonesia and considered one of Indonesia's  national dishes . [13] 
 The use of coconut milk is not exclusive to Indonesian cuisine. It can also be found in Indian, Samoan, Thai, Malaysian, Filipino, and Brazilian cuisines. Nonetheless, the use of coconut milk is quite extensive in Indonesia, especially in  Minangkabau cuisine , although in  Minahasan  ( North Sulawesi ) cuisine, coconut milk is generally absent, except in Minahasan cakes and desserts such as  klappertaart .
 
   Cooking  gulai , a type of spicy Indonesian curry, in ample of spices and coconut milk 
 In Indonesian cuisine, two types of coconut milk are found, thin coconut milk and thick coconut milk. The difference depends on the water and oil content. Thin coconut milk is usually used for soups such as  sayur lodeh  and  soto , while the thicker variety is used for  rendang  and desserts. It can be made from freshly shredded coconut meat in traditional markets, or can be found processed in cartons at the supermarket.
 After the milk has been extracted from the shredded coconut flesh to make coconut milk, the  ampas kelapa  (leftover coconut flesh) can still be used in  urap , seasoned and spiced shredded coconut meat mixed together with vegetables. Leftover shredded coconut can also be cooked,  sauteed  and seasoned to make  serundeng , almost powdery sweet and spicy finely shredded coconut.  Kerisik  paste, added to thicken  rendang , is another use of coconut flesh. To acquire a rich taste, some households insist on using freshly shredded coconut, instead of leftover, for  urap  and  serundeng .  Serundeng  can be mixed with meat in dishes such as  serundeng daging  (beef serundeng) or sprinkled on top of other dishes such as  soto  or  ketan  ( sticky rice ). An example of the heavy use of coconut is  Burasa  from  Makassar , rice wrapped in banana leaf cooked with coconut milk and sprinkled with powdered coconut similar to  serundeng .
 
 Cooking method [ edit ] 
   A traditional humble  kitchen  in Indonesia using  firewood  for cooking. 
 Most of the common Indonesian dishes are named according to their main ingredients and cooking method. For example,  ayam goreng  is  ayam  (chicken) and  goreng  (frying), which denotes  fried chicken .  Mie goreng  is fried noodle,  ikan bakar  is grilled fish,  udang rebus  is boiled shrimp,  babi panggang  is roasted pork and  tumis kangkung  is stir fried  water spinach . Cooking methods in Indonesian kitchen are  goreng  ( frying ) either in a small amount of oil or  deep frying  with a lot of cooking oil,  tumis  ( stir frying ),  sangrai  ( sautéing ). Roasting methods are  bakar  ( grilling ) usually employing  charcoal ,  firewood , or coconut shell,  panggang  ( baking / roasting ) usually refer to baking employing  oven . Other methods are  rebus  ( boiling ),  kukus  ( steaming ) and  asap / salai  ( smoking ).
 The fire used in cooking can be either a strong fire or a small fire for slow cooking. Cooking  nasi goreng  usually employs strong fire, while authentic  rendang  for example requires a small fire for slow cooking of beef, spices, and coconut milk until the meat is caramelised and all the coconut milk's liquid has evaporated. Traditional Indonesian  dapur  ( kitchen ) usually employs firewood-fuelled  kitchen stove , while the contemporary household today uses  liquefied petroleum gas -fuelled stove or an electric stove. The ingredients could be cut into pieces, sliced thinly, or ground into a paste. Cooking utensils are  wajan  ( wok ),  penggorengan  ( frying pan ),  panci  ( cauldron ),  knives , several types of  spoon  and  fork ,  parutan  (shredder),  cobek  and  ulekan  (stone  mortar and pestle ). Traditionally Indonesians use a stone mortar and a pestle to grind the spices and ingredients into coarse or fine pastes. Today most households use  blender  or  food processor  for the task. Traditional Indonesian cooking wares are usually made from stone,  earthenware   pottery , wood, and woven bamboo or a rattan container or filter, while contemporary cooking wares, plates and containers use metals – iron, tin, stainless steel, aluminium, ceramics, plastics, and also glass.
 
 National dishes [ edit ] 
 Indonesian national dishes Nasi goreng Tumpeng Gado-gado Satay Soto Rendang 
 Initially during the early years of Indonesian independence, the  ubiquitous  and extremely popular  nasi goreng  was considered the  national dish  of the republic, albeit at that time was unofficial. [37] [9]  Its simplicity and versatility has contributed to its popularity and made it as a staple among Indonesian households—colloquially considered the most "democratic" dish since the absence of an exact and rigid recipe has allowed people to do anything they want with it. [38]   Nasi goreng  that is commonly consumed daily in Indonesian households was considered the quintessential dish that represent an Indonesian family. It is in the menu, introduced, offered and served in Indonesian Theatre Restaurant within the Indonesian pavilion at the  1964 New York World's Fair .  Howard Palfrey Jones , the US ambassador to Indonesia during the last years of  Sukarno 's reign in the mid 1960s, in his memoir "Indonesia: The Possible Dream", said that he likes  nasi goreng . He described his fondness for  nasi goreng  cooked by Hartini, one of Sukarno's wives, and praised it as the most delicious  nasi goreng  he ever tasted. [37]  Nevertheless, other widely popular Indonesian dishes, such as  satay , [12]   soto [13]  and  gado-gado [11]  are also considered strong contenders.
 In 2014, the  Indonesian Ministry of Tourism and Creative Economy  in an effort to promote Indonesian cuisine, has chosen  tumpeng  as an official Indonesian national dish. Technically  tumpeng  refer to the rice cone in the center, while the surrounding various dishes might be taken from any choice of various Indonesian dishes—thus was considered ideal as a national dish that binds the diversity of Indonesia's various culinary traditions. [4]  Subsequently the designation of  tumpeng  as the single national dish of Indonesia was considered insufficient to describe the diversity of Indonesian culinary traditions. Later in 2018, the same ministry has chosen another additional 5 national dishes of Indonesia; they are  soto ,  satay ,  nasi goreng ,  rendang  and  gado-gado . [14] 
 Satay and  soto  are notable and the natural choice to be promoted as Indonesian national dish, since they had transcends the cultural boundaries of myriad  ethnic groups of Indonesia —those dishes has been extremely localised and has branched into various recipes nationwide. For example, there are rich variants of satay and  soto  recipes throughout Indonesia; from Sumatra to Eastern Indonesia. Each cultures, ethnics, or even cities had adopted these dishes, and thus developed their own version in accordance to their own culture, tradition, creativity, localised taste and preference, also the availability of local ingredients.
 
 Regional dishes [ edit ] 
   Array of  Minangkabau dishes  on display named  Nasi Kapau or Nasi Padang or Masakan Padang 
 Jakarta [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Betawi cuisine 
 Diverse and eclectic,  Betawi cuisine  of  Jakarta  draw culinary influences from  Chinese ,  Malay ,  Sundanese , to Arab, Indian and European. [39]  Popular Betawi dishes include  nasi uduk  (coconut rice),  sayur asem  (sweet and sour vegetable soup),  asinan  (salad of pickled vegetables),  gado-gado , (boiled or blanched vegetables salad in peanut sauce),  ketoprak , (vegetables, tofu, rice vermicelli and rice cake in peanut sauce), and  kerak telor  (spiced coconut omelette). Born from a creole or hybrid phenomena, the Betawi cuisine is quite similar to the  Peranakan cuisine .
 
 West Java [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Sundanese cuisine 
   Examples of  Sundanese cuisine ; rich in fresh vegetables and adoring  salted fish . 
 A textural speciality of  Sunda  ( West Java ) is  karedok , a fresh salad made with long beans, bean sprouts, and cucumber with a spicy peanut sauce.  Lalab  fresh vegetables served with spicy  sambal  dipping sauce is ubiquitous in Sundanese households and eating establishments. Other Sundanese dishes include  mie kocok  which is a beef and egg noodle soup, and  Soto Bandung , a beef and vegetable soup with daikon and lemon grass. A hawker favourite is  kupat tahu  (pressed rice, bean sprouts, and tofu with soy and peanut sauce).  Colenak  (roasted fermented cassava tapai with sweet coconut sauce) and  ulen  (roasted brick of sticky rice with peanut sauce) are dishes usually eaten warm.
 
 Central Java [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Javanese cuisine 
   Various  Javanese cuisine  in  lesehan  (seat on the mat) style 
 The food of  Central Java  is renowned for its sweetness, and the dish of  gudeg , a  curry  made from  jackfruit , is a particularly sweet. The city of  Yogyakarta  is renowned for its  ayam goreng  (fried  chicken ) and  klepon  (green rice-flour balls with  palm sugar  filling).  Surakarta 's (Solo) specialities include  Nasi liwet  (rice with coconut milk, unripe  papaya ,  garlic  and  shallots , served with chicken or egg) and  serabi  (coconut milk pancakes topped with  chocolate ,  banana  or jackfruit). Other Central Javanese specialities  pecel  (peanut sauce with  spinach  and bean sprouts),  lotek  (peanut sauce with vegetable and pressed rice), and  opor ayam  (braised chicken in coconut sauce).
 
 East Java [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Javanese cuisine 
 The food of  East Java  is similar to that of Central Java. East Java foods tend to be less sweet and more spicier compare to the Central Javanese ones. Fish and fish/seafood products are quite extensively, e.g.  terasi  (dried  shrimp  paste) and  petis udang  (shrimp paste). Some of the more popular foods are lontong kupang (tiny clams soup with rice cakes),  lontong balap  (bean sprouts and  tofu  with rice cakes),  sate klopo [40]  (coconut beef satay),  semanggi surabaya  ( marsilea  leaves with spicy  sweet potato  sauce),  pecel lele  (deep fried  catfish  served with rice and sambal),  rawon  (dark beef soup). Food from  Malang  includes  bakwan Malang  (meatball soup with  won ton  and noodles) and  arem-arem  (pressed rice,  tempe , sprouts, soy sauce, coconut, and peanuts). 
 
 Madura [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Madurese cuisine 
   Grilling  sate Madura . 
 Madura  is an island on the northeastern coast of Java and is administered as part of the East Java province. Like the Eastern Javanese foods which use  petis udang , Madura foods add  petis ikan  which is made from fish instead of shrimp. The Madura style  satay  is probably the most popular satay variants in Indonesia. Some of its popular dishes are  sate ayam Madura [41]  (chicken satay with peanut sauce),  soto Madura  (beef soup). There is also a mutton variant of Madura satay, Madura goat satay.  Sup Kambing  mutton soup is also popular in Madura. As a leading  salt  production center in Indonesian archipelago, Madura dishes are often saltier compared to other Eastern Javanese foods.
 
 Bali [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Balinese cuisine 
   Nasi Bali  in Balinese cuisine 
 Balinese cuisine  dishes include  lawar  (chopped  coconut ,  garlic ,  chilli , with  pork  or  chicken  meat and blood).  Bebek betutu  is  duck  stuffed with spices, wrapped in  banana  leaves and coconut husks cooked in a pit of embers. Balinese  sate , known as  sate lilit , is made from spiced mince pressed onto skewers which are often made from  lemon grass  sticks.  Babi guling  is a spit-roasted pig stuffed with chilli,  turmeric , garlic, and  ginger .
 Basa gede  or  basa rajang  is a spice paste that is a basic ingredient in many Balinese dishes. [42] 
 
 Aceh [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Acehnese cuisine 
 Arab ,  Persian , and  Indian  traders influenced food in Aceh although flavours have changed a lot their original forms. Amongst these are  curry  dishes known as  kare  or  gulai , which are rich,  coconut -based dishes traditionally made with  beef ,  goat ,  fish  or  poultry , but are now also made with  tofu , vegetables, and  jackfruit . The popular Aceh food such as  roti cane ,  mie aceh  and  nasi gurih .
 
 North Sumatra [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Batak cuisine 
   Batak dishes,  saksang ,  babi panggang  and  daun ubi tumbuk . 
 Batak people  use either  pork  or even  dog  to make  saksang . Another Batak pork speciality is  babi panggang  in which the meat is boiled in  vinegar  and pig blood before being roasted. Another batak dish,  ayam namargota , is  chicken  cooked in spices and blood. Another notable Batak dish is  arsik , the  carp  fish cooked with spices and herbs.  Lada rimba  is strong  pepper  used by Bataks.
 
 West Sumatra [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Minangkabau cuisine 
   The  hidang  style Padang food served at  Sederhana restaurant , all of the plates of food are laid out in front of customer, the customer only pays for whichever bowl they eat from. 
 Buffaloes  are a symbol of West Sumatra and are used in  rendang , a rich and spicy buffalo meat or beef dish, which is also the signature dish of Minangkabau culture. In 2017,  rendang  was chosen as the "World's Most Delicious Food" by the  CNN  Travel reader's choice. [43]   Padang food  comes from West Sumatra, and they have perhaps the richest variants of  gulai , a type of curried meat, offal, fish or vegetables. Padang favourite includes  asam padeh  (sour and spicy fish stew),  sate Padang  (Padang satay),  soto Padang  (Padang soto) and  katupek sayua  (ketupat  rice  dumpling in vegetable soup). Dishes from the region include  nasi kapau  from  Bukittinggi , which is similar to Padang food but uses more vegetables.  Ampiang dadiah  (buffalo  yogurt  with  palm sugar  syrup,  coconut  flesh and rice) and  bubur kampiun  ( Mung bean  porridge with  banana  and rice yogurt) are other West Sumatran specialties.
 Traditionally,  Minangkabau people  adheres to  merantau  (migrating) culture, and they are avid restaurant entrepreneurs. As a result, Padang food  restaurant chains  can be found throughout Indonesia and neighbouring countries, likely making it the most popular regional dish in Indonesia. In outside West Sumatra such as in  Java , most of Padang Restaurants still use buffalo to make rendang, but claim as Rendang Sapi for selling purposes due to buffalo meat is more inferior and cheaper than cow meat. Buffalo meat is harder, so suitable for rendang with cooking time at least 3 hours, the texture is also coarse and the color is more red than cow meat even when is already cooked.
 
 East Sumatra [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Malay cuisine 
   Gulai  ikan kerapu , grouper curry. 
 The cuisine of east coast of Sumatra is referring to the culinary tradition of  ethnic Malays  of  Indonesian  Sumatran provinces facing  Malacca strait ; which includes  Riau ,  Riau Islands ,  Jambi  provinces and coastal  North Sumatra  in Melayu Deli areas in and around  Medan . Because of close ethnic kinship and proximity to  Malaysian Malays , many dishes are shared between the two countries. For example  nasi lemak , the national dish of Malaysia, and also  nasi ulam  are considered native dishes in Riau and Jambi. Malay cuisine also shares many similarities with neighboring Minangkabau cuisine of West Sumatra, South Sumatra, and also  Aceh ; such as sharing  gulai ,  asam pedas ,  pindang ,  kari ,  lemang  and  rendang . This is due to the fact that the Minangkabau are culturally closely related to the Malays.  Tempoyak  fermented durian sauce and  sambal belacan  are the familiar condiments in both Sumatra and Malay Peninsula. Variants of  peranakan  cuisine such as  laksa  spicy noodle and  otak-otak  are also can be found in Riau Islands and Medan. Seafood dishes are popular in archipelagic Riau Islands province, while fresh water fishes from Sumatran rivers, such as  patin ,  catfish ,  carp  and  gourami  are popular in Riau and Jambi.  Gulai ikan patin  is a signature dish of  Pekanbaru , while  gulai ketam  (crab gulai) and  nasi goreng teri Medan  (Medan anchovy fried rice) are the signature dishes of Medan.
 
 South Sumatra [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Palembangese cuisine 
   Tempoyak ikan patin  a Palembang dish of pangasius fish in fermented durian sauce. 
 The city of  Palembang  is the culinary centre of South Sumatra and is renowned for its  pempek , a deep fried fish and  sago  dumpling that is also known as  empek-empek .  Pempek  is served in distinctive  kuah cuko , a sweet, sour and spicy sauce made from palm sugar, chili, tamarind and vinegar.  Pempek  derivatives dishes are  tekwan  soup of  pempek  dumpling,  mushroom , vegetables, and  shrimp ,  lenggang  or  pempek  slices in  omelette .  Mie celor  is a noodle dish with egg in coconut milk and dried shrimp, it is a Palembang speciality.
 The cuisine of Palembang demonstrates various influences, from native Palembang Malay taste to Chinese and Javanese influences.  Pempek  is said to be influenced by Chinese fish cake akin to  surimi , while the preference of mild sweetness is said to be of Javanese influence. South Sumatra is home to  pindang , a sweet, sour and spicy fish soup made from  soy  sauce and  tamarind .  Pindang  dishes usually uses either freshwater fishes and seafood as ingredients.  Ikan brengkes  is fish in a spicy  durian -based sauce.  Tempoyak  is a sauce of shrimp paste,  lime  juice, chilli and fermented durian, and  sambal buah  is a chilli sauce made from fruit.
 
 North Sulawesi [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Minahasan cuisine 
   Paniki , fruit  bat  in spicy  bumbu  rica-rica green chili pepper 
 Manado cuisine  of  Minahasan  people from  North Sulawesi  features the heavy use of meat such as  pork ,  fowl , and  seafood . " Woku " is a type of seafood dish with generous use of spices, often making up half the dish. The ingredients include  lemongrass ,  lime  leaves,  chili peppers , spring  onion ,  shallots , either sautéed with meat or wrapped around fish and grilled covered in  banana  leaves. Other ingredients such as  turmeric  and  ginger  are often added to create a version of woku. Other Minahasan signature dishes are  tinutuan , chicken  tuturuga ,  rica-rica  and  cakalang fufu .
 Foreign colonial influence played a role in shaping Minahasan cuisine. Several cakes and pastries explicitly show Dutch, Portuguese and Spanish influences such as  klappertaart  and  panada . Brenebon (from  Dutch  "bruin" (brown) and "boon" (bean)) is a pork shank bean stew spiced with  nutmeg  and  clove . Minahasan roast pork similar to  lechon  in the  Philippines  or pig roast in  Hawaii  are served in special occasions, especially weddings. Other unusual and exotic meats such as  dog ,  bat , and  forest rat  are regularly served in North Sulawesi region.  Paniki  is the bat dish of Minahasa.
 
 South Sulawesi [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Makassarese cuisine 
   Sop saudara  and  ikan bolu bakar  (grilled  milkfish ). Specialty of Makassar. 
 Makassar  is one of the culinary centres in Indonesia. Home of some Bugis and Makassar delicacies such as  Coto ,  Konro ,  Pallubasa  and  Mie Kering . All of these Makassar foods are usually consumed with  burasa , a coconut milk rice dumpling wrapped in a banana leaf, to replace steamed rice or ketupat. As a big fish market centre, Makassar is also famous for its  seafood . Various  ikan bakar  or grilled fish are popular and commonly served in Makassar restaurants,  warung  and foodstalls, such as  ikan bolu bakar  (grilled  milkfish ).  Sop saudara  from  Pangkep  and  Kapurung  from  Palopo  are also famous dishes of South Sulawesi. Another popular cuisine from Makassar is  Ayam Goreng Sulawesi  (Celebes fried chicken); the chicken is marinated in a traditional soy sauce for up to 24 hours before being fried into a golden colour. The dish is usually served with chicken broth, rice and special  sambal  (chilli sauce).
 In addition, Makassar is also home of traditional sweet snacks such as  pisang epe  (pressed banana), as well as  pisang ijo  (green banana).  Pisang Epe  is a flat-grilled banana which is pressed, grilled, and covered with palm sugar sauce and sometimes eaten with  durian . Many street vendors sell  pisang epe , especially around the area of Losari beach.  Pisang ijo  is a banana covered with green colored flours, coconut milk, and syrup.  Pisang ijo  is sometimes served iced, and often sold and consumed as  iftar  to break the fast during  Ramadhan .
 
 Nusa Tenggara [ edit ] 
   Se'i  babi , smoked pork from  Kupang , West Timor, East Nusa Tenggara. 
 With a drier climate in  Nusa Tenggara  archipelago, there is less rice and more sago, corn, cassava, and taro compared to central and western Indonesia. Fishes are popularly consumed, including  sepat  ( Trichogaster ), which is shredded fish in coconut and young-mango sauce.  Lombok 's  sasak people  enjoy spicy food such as  ayam taliwang  which is roasted chicken served with peanut, tomato chilli and lime dip.  Pelecing  is a spicy sauce used in many dishes made with chilli, shrimp paste, and tomato. A local shrimp paste called  lengkare  is used on the island of Lombok.  Sares  is made from chilli, coconut juice and banana palm pith and is sometimes mixed with meat. Non meat dishes include  kelor  (hot soup with vegetables),  serebuk  (vegetables mixed with coconut), and  timun urap  (cucumber with coconut, onion and garlic).
 In  East Nusa Tenggara , majority of its inhabitants are  Catholics , hence pork is commonly consumed. Popular Timor dishes are  Se'i  smoked meat (usually pork), and  katemak  vegetable soup.
 
 Maluku and Papua [ edit ] 
   Maluku dishes,  ikan kuah kuning  ( fish  in a yellow soup),  papeda ,  ikan bakar , and  sambal colo-colo . 
 The  Maluku Islands ' cuisine is rich with seafood, while the native Papuan food usually consists of roasted  boar  with  tubers  such as  sweet potato . Various types of  ikan bakar  (grilled fish) or seafood are eaten with spicy  colo-colo  condiment. The staple food of Maluku and  Papua  is  sago , either as a pancake or sago congee called  papeda , usually eaten with yellow soup made from  tuna ,  red snapper  or other fishes spiced with  turmeric ,  lime , and other spices.
 
 Foreign influences [ edit ] 
   Martabak  telur , a savoury egg, leek and meat omelette. 
 Arab influences [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Arab Indonesian cuisine 
 Further information:  Arab cuisine 
 Arab Indonesians brought their legacy of Arab cuisine—originally from Hadhramaut, Hejaz and Egypt—and modified some of the dishes with the addition of Indonesian ingredients. The Arabs arrived in the Nusantara archipelago to trade and spread Islam. In Maluku,  kue asida  served during Ramadan for iftar, is believed to be derived from the Middle Eastern  asida  that was introduced by Arab merchants throughout the Maluku Islands.
 
 Indian influences [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Indian Indonesian cuisine 
 Further information:  Indian cuisine 
 Indian  influence can be observed in Indonesia as early as the 4th century. Following the spread of Islam to Indonesia, Muslim Indian as well as Arab influences made their way into Indonesian cuisine. Examples include Indian  martabak  and  kari  ( curry ) that influenced Sumatran cuisines of Aceh, Minangkabau, and Malay; in addition to  Betawi  and coastal Javanese cuisine. Some of Aceh and Minangkabau dishes such as  roti cane ,  nasi biryani ,  nasi kebuli , and  gulai  kambing  can trace its origin to Indian influences.
 
 Chinese influences [ edit ] 
   Siomay , popular Indonesian Chinese-influenced dish. 
 Main article:  Chinese Indonesian cuisine 
 Further information:  Chinese cuisine 
 Chinese immigration to Indonesia  started in the 7th century, and accelerated during Dutch colonial times, thus creating the fusion of Chinese cuisine with indigenous Indonesian style. Similar Chinese-native fusion cuisine phenomena is also observable in neighbouring Malaysia and Singapore as  peranakan cuisine . Some popular Indonesian dishes trace its origin to Chinese influences such as;  bakmi ,  bakso ,  soto mie ,  soto ,  bakpau ,  nasi goreng ,  mie goreng ,  tahu goreng ,  siomay ,  pempek ,  lumpia ,  nasi tim ,  cap cai ,  fu yung hai  and  swikee . Some of this Chinese-influenced dishes has been so well-integrated into Indonesian mainstream cuisine that many Indonesian today might not recognise their Chinese-origin and considered them their own.
 
 Dutch influences [ edit ] 
   Selat solo  (solo salad), an adaptation of European cuisine into Javanese taste. 
 Main article:  Indo cuisine 
 Further information:  Dutch cuisine 
 The Dutch arrived in Indonesia in the 16th century in search of spices. When the Dutch East India Company (VOC) went bankrupt in 1800,  Indonesia  became a treasured colony of the Netherlands. [44]  Through colonialism, Europeans introduced  bread ,  cheese , barbecued  steak  and  pancake . Bread,  butter  and  margarine , chocolate  sprinkles , sandwiches filled with ham, cheese or fruit jam,  poffertjes ,  pannekoek  and  Dutch cheeses  are commonly consumed by colonial Dutch and  Indos  during the colonial era. Some of native upperclass  ningrat  (nobles) and educated native were exposed to European cuisine; This cuisine was held in high esteem as the cuisine of the upper class of  Dutch East Indies  society.
 This led to adoption and fusion of European cuisine into Indonesian cuisine. Several Indonesian food can trace its origin from Dutch influence, such as  kue odading  that was derived from Dutch  oliebollen ,  semur  from Dutch  smoor ,  perkedel  from  frikadeller ,   sop senerek  from  erwtensoep ,  selat solo  (solo salad) from  holland biefstuk . [45] 
 Some dishes created during the colonial era were influenced by  Dutch cuisine , including  roti bakar  (grilled bread),  roti buaya ,  macaroni schotel  (macaroni casserole),  pastel tutup  (Shepherd's pie),  bistik jawa  (Javanese beef steak),  erten  (pea soup),  brenebon  (kidney bean soup) and  sop buntut . [46] 
 Many pastries, cakes and cookies such as  kue bolu  (tart),  lapis legit  ( spekkoek ),  lapis Surabaya  ( spiku ),  kroket  (croquette),  kue bolu kenari  ( ontbijtkoek ), and  kastengel  ( kaasstengels  or cheese sticks) are come from Dutch influence. [45]  Some recipes were invented as Dutch Indies fusion cuisine, using native ingredients but employing European pastry techniques. These include  pandan cake  and  klappertaart  (coconut tart).  Kue cubit , commonly sold as a snack at schools and marketplaces, are believed to be derived from  poffertjes . [46] [45] 
 
 Influence abroad [ edit ] 
 Conversely, Indonesian cuisine also had influenced the Dutch through their shared colonial heritage. Indonesian cuisine also influencing neighbouring countries through Indonesians migration across the  straits  to Malaysia.
 
 Malaysia [ edit ] 
   Beef  rendang  with  ketupat palas  also served in Malaysia. 
 Further information:  Malaysian cuisine 
 Because of their proximity, historic migrations and close cultural kinship, Indonesian cuisine also has influenced neighbouring cooking traditions; most notably  Malaysian cuisine . Indonesian influence is pervasive in the central state of  Negeri Sembilan , which was settled largely by  Minangkabau people  hailing from West Sumatra and is, thus, reflected in their culture, history and cuisine. [47]   Minangkabau cuisine  influences is profound in  Malay cooking tradition , as the result both traditions share same dishes; including  rendang ,  gulai ,  asam pedas  and  tempoyak .  Rendang  is a typical example that has been well-integrated into mainstream Malaysian cuisine and is now considered their own, and popular especially during  Hari Raya Aidil Fitri . In the early 20th century, there are large influx of Sumatrans to Kuala Lumpur and other parts of Malaysia heartland, that led to the popularity of  Nasi Padang  (originated from  Padang  city, West Sumatra) not only in Malaysia, but also in Singapore. [48] 
 The Malay cuisine of southernmost state of  Johor , reflects the influences of  Javanese  who settled there for over past two centuries. [48]  Popular Javanese-origin dishes in Johor includes  ayam penyet ,  nasi ambeng ,  telur pindang ,  sayur lodeh ,  mee rebus  and  pechal . [47] 
 
 Thailand [ edit ] 
 Further information:  Thai cuisine 
   Thai pork satay 
 To a lesser extent, Indonesian cuisine also had influenced  Thai cuisine  — probably through Malaysian intermediary — such as the introduction of  satay , from Java to Sumatra, Malay Peninsula, and reached Thailand. [49]   Achat  ( Thai :  อาจาด   pronounced  [ʔāː.t͡ɕàːt] ), is a Thai pickles which believed to be derived from Indonesian  acar . It is made with cucumber, red chilies, red onions or shallots, vinegar, sugar and salt. It is served as a side dish with the Thai version of satay ( Thai :  สะเต๊ะ ).
 
 Netherlands [ edit ] 
   Kipsate met friet , Dutch take on Indonesian chicken  satay , served with  Peanut sauce , fried onions,  kroepoek ,  friet , and mayonnaise. 
 Main article:  Dutch cuisine § Colonial influences 
 During the  colonial period , the Dutch embraced Indonesian cuisine both at home and abroad. [44]  The Indonesian cuisine had influenced colonial Dutch and  Indo people  that brought Indonesian dishes back to the  Netherlands  due to repatriation following the independence of Indonesia. [46] 
 C.  Countess   van Limburg Stirum  writes in her book "The Art of Dutch Cooking" (1962):  There exist countless Indonesian dishes, some of which take hours to prepare; but a few easy ones have become so popular that they can be regarded as "national dishes" . She then provides recipes for  nasi goreng  (fried rice),  pisang goreng  (battered, deep fried bananas),  lumpia goreng  (fried spring rolls),  bami  (fried noodles),  satay  (grilled skewered meat),  satay  sauce ( peanut sauce ), and  sambal oelek  (chilli paste). [50] 
 Dutch-Indonesian fusion dishes also exist, of which the most well-known is the  rijsttafel  ("rice table"), which is an elaborate meal consisting of many (up to several dozens) small dishes (hence filling "an entire table"). [46]  While popular in the Netherlands, Rijsttafel is now rare in Indonesia itself. Today, there are many Indonesian restaurants in the Netherlands, especially in large cities like  Amsterdam ,  The Hague ,  Utrecht  and  Rotterdam . [44] 
 
 Culinary diplomacy [ edit ] 
   Indonesian restaurant in Hong Kong 
 Indonesian cuisine traditionally enjoyed popularity in neighbouring countries; e.g. Malaysia, Singapore and Australia, as well as nations that shares historical ties with Indonesia; such as the Netherlands, Suriname, and South Africa. It is also increasingly popular in Japan and Korea. [51] [52] 
 Learning from the success of other countries  culinary diplomacy , especially those of Thailand, Korea and Japan, in 2021, the Indonesian government has launched the "Indonesia Spice Up The World" program, which is a form of coordinated gastrodiplomacy efforts. [53] [54]  The programme was launched to promote Indonesian cuisine abroad, to assist Indonesian culinary industry; by helping the local spice products and processed food to find their ways into the global market, and also to assist Indonesian restaurants abroad. [55] 
 The "Indonesia Spice Up The World" program involves government's inter-ministerial institutions, Indonesian food industry, and also the public. The objective of the program is to boost the export value of Indonesian spices and herbs to US$2 billion, and increasing the presence of four thousand Indonesian restaurants abroad by 2024. [53] [55] 
 
 Meal times [ edit ] 
   Traditional  slametan  meal in  Java  during  colonial period . 
 Indonesians might consume snacks or varieties of small dishes throughout the day. If separate scheduled larger meal is observed, they usually consists of  sarapan  or  makan pagi  (breakfast),  makan siang  (lunch) is often the main meal of the day, followed by  makan malam  (dinner). [1]  Mealtime is typically a casual and solitary affair, and might be observed differently across region.
 In  western and central Indonesia , the main meal is usually cooked in the late morning, and consumed around midday. In many families there is no set meal time when all members are expected to attend. For this reason, most of the dishes are made so that they can remain edible even if left on the table at  room temperature  for many hours. The same dishes are then re-heated for the final meal in the evening. Most meals are built around a cone-shaped pile of long-grain, highly polished rice. A meal may include a soup, salad (or more commonly vegetables sautéed with garlic), and another main dish. Whatever the meal, it is accompanied by at least one, and often several, relishes called  sambals . Especially for Javanese family, on the table, it is also common to always have chips, that can be  kerupuk ,  rempeyek , or any other chips to accompany the meal.
 In  eastern Indonesia , such as on the islands of  Papua  and  Timor , where the climate is often much drier, the meals can be centred around other sources of carbohydrates such as  sago  or root vegetables and starchy  tubers . Being east of the  Wallace line , the  biogeographic realm , and hence the  flora  and  fauna , are quite different from those of the islands to the west, and so the food stuffs are as well.
 
 Feasts [ edit ] 
 Tumpeng [ edit ] 
   Tumpeng   nasi kuning , the cone shaped yellow rice is served during a feast. 
 Main article:  Tumpeng 
 Many Indonesian traditional customs and ceremonies incorporate food and feast, one of the best examples is  tumpeng . Originally from  Java , tumpeng is a cone shaped mound of rice surrounded by an assortment of other dishes, officially chosen as Indonesian  national dish  in 2014. [4]  Traditionally featured in  slametan  ceremonies, the cone of rice is made by using bamboo leaves woven into a cone-shaped container. The rice itself can be plain white steamed rice,  uduk  (rice cooked with coconut milk), or  yellow rice  (rice coloured with  kunyit , i.e.,  turmeric ). After it is shaped, the rice cone is surrounded by assorted dishes, such as  urap  vegetables, fried chicken,  semur  (beef in sweet soy sauce), teri kacang (little dried fish fried with peanuts), fried prawns,  telur pindang  (marbleized boiled eggs), shredded omelette,  tempe orek  (sweet, dry fried  tempeh ),  perkedel kentang  (mashed potato fritters),  perkedel  jagung  (corn fritters),  sambal goreng ati  (liver in chilli sauce), and many other dishes. Nasi tumpeng probably comes from an ancient Indonesian tradition that revers mountains as the abode of the ancestors and the gods. Rice cone is meant to symbolise the holy mountain. The feast served as some kind of thanksgiving for the abundance of harvest or any other blessings. Because of its festivities and celebratory value, even now tumpeng is sometimes used as an Indonesian counterpart to  birthday cake .
 
 Nasi Padang [ edit ] 
   Hidang  presentation of  nasi padang . 
 Main article:  Nasi padang 
 Having  Nasi Padang  in festive  hidang  (serve) style provides opportunity to sample wide array of  Padang food  in a single setting.  Nasi Padang  (Padang-style rice) is the  steamed rice  served with various choices of pre-cooked  dishes  originated from  Padang  city,  West Sumatra . It is a miniature banquet of meats, fish, vegetables, and spicy  sambals  eaten with plain white rice. It is the Minangkabau's great contribution to Indonesian cuisine. [56] 
 After the customers are seated, they do not have to order. The waiter with stacked plates upon their hands will immediately serves the dishes directly to the table. The table will quickly be set with dozens of small dishes filled with richly flavoured foods such as beef  rendang , various  gulais , curried fish, stewed  greens , chili  eggplant , curried beef liver, tripe, intestines, or foot tendons, fried beef lung, fried chicken, and of course,  sambal . A dozen of dishes is a normal number, it could reach 14 dishes or more.  Nasi Padang  is an at-your-table, by-the-plate buffet. [56]  Customers take — and pay for — only what they have consumed from this array. [57] 
 
 Rijsttafel [ edit ] 
   Rijsttafel in 1936 Dutch East Indies. 
 Main article:  Rijsttafel 
 Another Indonesian feast, the  Rijsttafel  (from Dutch, meaning 'rice table'), demonstrates both colonial opulence and the diversity of Indonesian cuisine at the same time. The classic style rijsttafel involved serving of up to 40 different dishes by 40 male waiters, bare foot but dressed in formal white uniforms with  blangkon  (traditional Javanese caps) on their heads and  batik  cloth around their waists. [58]  In contemporary Indonesian cuisine, it has been adapted into a western style  prasmanan   buffet .
 
 Prasmanan [ edit ] 
   Prasmanan, an Indonesian style  buffet . 
 When attending the reception of an Indonesian traditional wedding party, office lunch-time meeting, a seminar or dinner gathering, one usually will find themselves queuing to Indonesian  prasmanan ; a long table filled with wide array of Indonesian dishes. A  prasmanan  is quite similar with rijsttafel but minus the ceremonial waiters and usually served fewer choices of dishes compared to its flamboyant colonial predecessor. It is an Indonesian  buffet  as it employs a long table with a wide range of dishes, both savoury and sweet, served on it. It can usually be found in wedding ceremonies or any other festivities. The layout for an Indonesian wedding ceremony buffet is usually: plates, eating utensils (spoon and fork), and paper napkins placed on one end, followed by rice (plain or fried), a series of Indonesian (and sometimes international) dishes,  sambal  and  krupuk  (shrimp crackers), and ending with glasses of water on the other end of the table.
 
 Beverages [ edit ] 
 See also:  List of Indonesian beverages 
 Non-alcoholic beverages [ edit ] 
   A cup of Java, Javanese kopi tubruk 
 The most common and popular Indonesian drinks and beverages are  teh  ( tea ) and  kopi  ( coffee ). Indonesian households commonly serve  teh manis  (sweet tea) or  kopi tubruk  to guests. Since the colonial era of Netherlands East Indies, plantations, especially in Java, were major producers of  coffee ,  tea  and  sugar . Since then hot and sweet coffee and tea beverages have been enjoyed by Indonesians.  Jasmine tea  is the most popular tea variety drunk in Indonesia, however recent health awareness promotions have made  green tea  a popular choice. Usually coffee and tea are served hot, but cold iced sweet tea is also frequently drunk.  Kopi luwak  is Indonesian exotic and expensive coffee beverage made from the beans of coffee berries which have been eaten by the  Asian palm civet  ( Paradoxurus hermaphroditus ) and other related civets. [59]   Teh botol , bottled sweet jasmine tea, is now quite popular and locally competes favourably with international bottled soda beverages such as  Coca-Cola  and  Fanta . [60]   Kopi susu  (coffee with sweetened  condensed milk ) is an Indonesian version of  Café au lait .  Es kelapa muda  or young coconut ice is fresh drink which is made from chilled young coconut water, coconut flesh and syrup. It is among favourite beverage in Indonesia.
 Fruit juices ( jus ) are very popular. Varieties include  orange  ( jus jeruk ),  guava  ( jus jambu ),  mango  ( jus mangga ),  soursop  ( jus sirsak ) and  avocado  ( jus alpokat ), the last of these being commonly served with condensed milk and chocolate syrup as a dessert-like treat.  Durian  can be made into ice cream called  es durian .
 
   Indonesian dessert  es teler , consisting of avocado, jackfruit, and young coconut in shredded ice and condensed milk. 
 Many popular drinks are based on ice ( es ) and can also be classified as desserts. Typical examples include young coconut ( es kelapa muda ),  grass jelly  ( es cincau ),  cendol  ( es cendol  or  es dawet ), avocado,  jackfruit  and coconut with shredded ice and condensed milk ( es teler ), mixed ice ( es campur ),  kidney beans  ( es kacang merah ),  musk melon  ( es blewah ), and seaweed ( es rumput laut ).
 Hot sweet beverages can also be found, such as  bajigur  and  bandrek  which are particularly popular in West Java. Both are coconut milk or coconut sugar ( gula jawa ) based hot drinks, mixed with other spices.  Sekoteng , a  ginger  based hot drink which includes peanuts, diced bread, and  pacar cina , can be found in Jakarta and West Java.  Wedang jahe  (hot  ginger drink ) and  wedang ronde  (a hot drink with  sweet potato  balls) are particularly popular in Yogyakarta, Central Java, and East Java.
 
 Alcoholic beverages [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Alcohol in Indonesia 
   Balinese  brem  with 5% alcohol content. 
 As a  Muslim -majority country, Indonesian Muslims share  Islamic dietary laws  that prohibit alcoholic beverages. Since ancient times, local alcoholic beverages were developed in the archipelago. According to a Chinese source, people of ancient Java drank wine made from palm sap called  tuak  ( palm wine ). Today  tuak  continues to be popular in the  Batak  region,  North Sumatra . A traditional Batak bar serving tuak is called  lapo tuak . In Solo, Central Java,  ciu  (a local adaptation of Chinese wine) is known. Bottled  brem bali  (Balinese rice wine) is popular in Bali. In  Nusa Tenggara  and  Maluku Islands  the people also drink palm wine, locally known as  sopi . [61]  In the  Minahasa  region of North Sulawesi, the people drink a highly alcoholic drink called  Cap Tikus . Indonesians developed local brands of beer, such as  Bintang Beer  and Anker Beer.
 
 Eating establishment [ edit ] 
 In Indonesia, dishes are served from a fine dining restaurant in five-star hotel, a simple  restaurant  downtown, humble street side  warung  under the tent, to street hawker peddling their  gerobak  (cart) or  pikulan  (carrying using rod).
 
 Restaurant and warung [ edit ] 
 Further information:  Warung 
   Floating  warung  boat attached to the bank of  Musi river ,  Palembang , selling local favourite such as  pempek . 
 In Indonesia  rumah makan  means  restaurant , while  warung  means small and humble shop. [1]  From these eating establishments, a warteg ( warung Tegal ) and  rumah makan Padang  are particularly notable for their ubiquitousness in Indonesian cities and towns.
 A warteg or  warung tegal  is a more specific warung nasi, established by  Javanese people  from the town  Tegal  in  Central Java . They sells favourite  Javanese dishes  and rice, the wide array of pre-cooked dishes are arranged in glass windowed cupboard. They are well known on selling modestly-priced meals, popular among working class such as low-skilled labours in the cities. While  rumah makan Padang  is a  Padang  restaurant, a smaller scale Padang eateries might be called  warung Padang .
 Most of Indonesian restaurants are based upon specific regional cuisine tradition. For example, rumah makan Padang are definitely Minangkabau cuisine.  Sundanese   saung  restaurant or colloquially called as  kuring  restaurants are selling  Sundanese dishes . This includes  Bataks '  lapo ,  Manado  and  Balinese  restaurants. While other restaurants might specifically featuring their best specific dishes, for example  Ayam goreng  Mbok Berek,  Bakmi  Gajah Mada,  Satay  Senayan,  Rawon  Setan Surabaya,  Pempek  Pak Raden, etc.
 
 Street food [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Street food of Indonesia 
   Soto mie  cart  street vendor 
 Indonesian street food are usually cheap, offer a great variety of food of different tastes, and can be found on every corner of the city. [62] 
Street and street-side vendors are common, in addition to hawkers peddling their goods on bicycles or carts. These carts are known as  pedagang kaki lima . These food hawkers on carts or bicycles might be travelling on streets, approaching potential buyers through residential areas whilst announcing their presence, or stationing themselves on a packed and busy street side, setting simple seating under a small tent and waiting for customers. Many of these have their own distinctive call, tune, or noise to announce their presence. For example,  bakso  sellers will hit the side of a soup bowl using a spoon, whereas  nasi goreng  sellers announce themselves by hitting their  wok .
 
   Bakso  (meatball) seller in  Bandung 
 In most cities, it is common to see Chinese dishes such as bakpao (steamed buns with sweet and savoury fillings),  bakmie  (noodles), and  bakso  (meatballs) sold by street vendors and restaurants, often adapted to become Indonesian-Chinese cuisine. One common adaptation is that pork is rarely used since the majority of Indonesians are Muslims. Other popular Indonesian street food and snacks are  siomay  and  batagor  (abbreviated from Bakso Tahu Goreng),  pempek  (deep fried fish cake),  bubur ayam  (chicken  congee ),  bubur kacang hijau  (mung beans  porridge ),  satay ,  nasi goreng  (English: fried rice),  soto mie  (soto noodle),  mie ayam  (chicken noodle) and  mie goreng  (fried noodle),  taoge goreng  (mung bean sprouts and noodle salad),  asinan  (preserved vegetables or fruits salad),  laksa ,  kerak telor  (spicy omelette),  gorengan  (Indonesian assorted fritters) and  Bakwan  (fried dish of beansprouts and batter).
 Indonesian street snacks include iced and sweet beverages, such as  es   cendol  or  es dawet ,  es teler ,  es cincau ,  es doger ,  es campur ,  es potong , and  es puter . Indonesian cakes and cookies are often called  jajanan pasar  (market munchies).
 
 Snacks [ edit ] 
 See also:  List of Indonesian snacks 
 Kue [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Kue 
   Indonesian snacks, such as  tahu isi ,  pisang goreng ,  risoles , timpan,  lemper , and  kue pisang . 
 Indonesia has a rich collection of snacks called  kue  (cakes and pastry), both savoury and sweet. Traditional kue usually made from  rice flour , coconut milk,  coconut sugar  and mostly steamed or fried instead of baked. Traditional kue are popularly known as  kue basah  ("wet kue") that has moisty and soft texture because of rich coconut milk. The  kue kering  (dried kue) is local name for cookies.
 Indonesia has rich variations of kue, both native-origin or foreign-influenced. Popular ones include  Bika Ambon ,  kue pisang ,  kue cubit ,  klepon ,  onde-onde ,  nagasari ,  kue pandan ,  lupis ,  lemang ,  lemper ,  lontong ,  tahu isi ,  getuk ,  risoles ,  pastel ,  lumpia ,  bakpia ,  lapis legit ,  soes ,  poffertjes  and  bolu kukus .
 
 Traditional crackers [ edit ] 
 Main articles:  Krupuk  and  kripik 
   Krupuks  in air-tight tin cans. 
 Traditional crackers are called  krupuk , made from bits of shrimp, fish, vegetables or nuts, which are usually consumed as a crunchy snack or to accompany main meals. [63]  These crispy snacks sometimes are added upon the main meal to provide crunchy texture; several Indonesian dishes such as gado-gado, karedok, ketoprak, lontong sayur, nasi uduk, asinan and bubur ayam are known to require specific type of krupuk as toppings. There are wide variations of  krupuk  available across Indonesia. The most popular ones would be  krupuk udang  ( prawn crackers ) and  krupuk kampung  or  krupuk putih  (cassava crackers).
 Other popular types include  krupuk kulit  (dried buffalo-skin crackers),  emping  melinjo  ( gnetum gnemon  crackers), and  kripik  (chips or crisps), such as  kripik pisang  ( banana chips ) and  keripik singkong  ( Cassava  chips),  rempeyek , is a flour-based cracker with brittle of peanuts, anchovies or shrimp bound by crispy flour cracker,  rengginang  or  intip  ( Javanese ) is rice cracker made from sun-dried and deep fried leftover rice.
 
 Fruits [ edit ] 
   Selection of tropical fruits sold in  Bali . 
 Indonesian markets abound with many types of tropical fruit. These are an important part of the Indonesian diet, either eaten freshly, or made into juices (such as  jus alpukat ), desserts (such as  es buah  and  es teler ), processed in savoury and spicy dishes like  rujak , fried like  pisang goreng  (fried banana), cooked into cakes (such as  kue pisang  or  bika ambon ), sweetened and preserved such as  sale pisang  and  manisan buah , or processed into kripik (crispy chips) as snacks like jackfruit or banana chips.
 
   Fruit  rujak , consists of slices of unripe mango, jambu air, kedondong,  jicama , papaya and pineapple. These fruits are served with thick and spicy coconut sugar and spicy salt. 
 Many of these tropical fruits such as  mangga  ( mango ),  manggis  ( mangosteen ),  rambutan ,  cempedak ,  nangka  ( jackfruit ),  durian ,  jambu air ,  duku  ( langsat ),  jeruk bali  ( pomelo ),  belimbing  ( carambola ),  kedondong  and  pisang  ( banana ), are indigenous to  Indonesian archipelago ; while others have been imported from other tropical countries, although the origin of many of these fruits might be disputed.  Klengkeng  ( longan ) were introduced from India,  semangka  ( watermelon ) from Africa,  kesemek  from China, while  alpukat  ( avocado ),  sawo ,  markisa  ( passionfruit ),  sirsak  ( soursop ),  nanas  ( pineapple ),  jambu biji  ( guava ) and  pepaya  ( papaya ) were introduced from the  Americas . Many of these tropical fruits are seasonally available, according to each species flowering and fruiting seasons. While certain fruits such as banana, watermelon, pineapple and papaya are available all year round.
 Today, Indonesian markets is also enrichen with selections of home-grown non-tropical fruits that is not native to Indonesia.  Strawberry ,  melon ,  apple ,  pear  and  dragonfruit  are introduced and grown in cooler Indonesian highlands such as  Malang  in mountainous East Java,  Puncak  and  Lembang  near  Bandung , to mimic their native  subtropics  habitat.
 
   Rambutan  for sale at a market in Jakarta. 
 In the last few years, fruit chips have been more and more various. In the old times, banana and jackfruit chips were the most common, but now Indonesian fruit chips are also made from strawberry, apple, dragonfruit, pepino, watermelon, melon, more. Malang, a city in East Java, is the centre of fruit chip production aside from tempeh chips.
 Banana and coconut are particularly important, not only to Indonesian cuisine, but also in other uses, such as timber, bedding, roofing, oil, plates and packaging.  Banana leaf  and  janur  (young coconut leaf) are particularly important for packaging and cooking process, employed to make pepes, lontong and ketupat.
 
 Health [ edit ] 
 Nutrition [ edit ] 
   Deep frying  mendoan  tempeh, Indonesian food is often prepared by  deep frying  which adds saturated fat and cholesterol. 
 Much  carbohydrate  intake in Indonesian cuisine comes from  rice , while in eastern parts of Indonesia, yam and sago are common. Indonesian  protein  intake comes from  soy  bean products that are processed into tofu and tempeh. Chicken eggs, poultry and meats are also consumed. Most of the  fat  intake comes from  cooking oil  ( coconut oil ) of fried dishes, coconut milk,  peanuts , as well as meats and  offals . [ citation needed ] 
 Some Indonesian fruit and vegetable dishes such as fruit rujak, gado-gado, karedok, pecel, lalab, capcay, tofu and tempeh are foods with low fat and high fibre. Tempeh, for example, is a vegetarian substitute for meat. [64]  Some dishes, especially  gorengan  (deep-fried fritters) and those dishes infused or caramelised with coconut milk, such as rendang and gulai, might taste succulent but are rich in  saturated fat .
 
 Food safety [ edit ] 
 The authentic traditional Indonesian home cooking is freshly made and consumed daily with minimal or no processed, canned or preserved foods, which means there is a minimal amount of  preservatives  and  sodium . Most ingredients are bought fresh very early in the morning from local traditional markets, cooked around the late morning and consumed mainly for lunch. The leftovers are stored in the cupboard or on the table covered with  tudung saji  (weaved bamboo food cover to protect the food from insects or other animals), all in room temperature to be heated and consumed again for dinner. [1]  Traditionally, Indonesian dishes are rarely stored for long periods of time, thus most of these dishes are cooked and consumed in the same day. Some exceptions apply to dried, salted, and processed food. For example, dry rendang may still be safe to consume for several days. Modern refrigeration technology is available in most households.
 
 Hygiene [ edit ] 
 While most of Indonesian grocery products and food served in mid to upperscale eating establishments maintain  food hygiene  standard ranges from good to acceptable — regulated and supervised by  Badan Pengawasan Obat dan Makanan  (Indonesian Food and Drug Administration) — some  warung  traditional foodstalls and street vendors might have poor hygiene. The tropical microbes also might contribute to  food poisoning  cases mostly  gastroenteritis , especially among foreigners during their stay in Indonesia. [65]  It is advisable to drink bottled or boiled drinking water, or choose cooked hot food instead of uncooked room temperatured ones sold by street vendors. For example, when consuming food sold by street vendors, consuming hot cooked  mie ayam  or soto is much safer than having gado-gado or fruit rujak.
 
 See also [ edit ] 
 
 Bumbu (seasoning) 
 Indonesian noodles 
 Kue 
 Thai cuisine 
 Filipino cuisine 
 Malaysian cuisine 
 List of Indonesian beverages 
 List of Indonesian condiments 
 List of Indonesian desserts 
 List of Indonesian dishes 
 List of Indonesian snacks 
 List of Indonesian soups 
 
 Portals :   Food   Drink   Indonesia 
 Notes [ edit ] 
 
 
 ^   as mentioned in Anthony Reid "Southeast Asia in Commerce 1450–1680 Volume I: The Land Below the Winds" 
 
 ^   later was localized as  kecap manis  (sweet soy sauce) with generous addition of palm sugar 
 
 
 References [ edit ] 
 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   e   "Food in Indonesia" .  Food by Country . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   "Indonesian Cuisine."   Archived  23 August 2017 at the  Wayback Machine   Epicurina.com  . Accessed July 2011. 
 
 ^   "Mengulik Data Suku di Indonesia" .  Badan Pusat Statistik . 18 November 2015 . Retrieved  12 February  2020 . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   Nadya Natahadibrata (10 February 2014).  "Celebratory rice cone dish to represent the archipelago" . The Jakarta Post . Retrieved  9 July  2014 . 
 
 ^  a   b   "Indonesian food."   Archived  10 September 2011 at the  Wayback Machine   Belindo.com   Archived  7 September 2011 at the  Wayback Machine . Accessed July 2011. 
 
 ^   "Indonesian Cuisine" . Diner's Digest. Archived from  the original  on 9 April 2011 . Retrieved  11 July  2010 . 
 
 ^   "Flavours of Indonesia, Balinese Food" . Destination Asia. Archived from  the original  on 17 August 2014 . Retrieved  26 August  2014 . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   Sara Schonhardt (25 February 2016).  "40 Indonesian foods we can't live without" .  CNN . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   "Nasi Goreng: Indonesia's mouthwatering national dish" . Archived from  the original  on 6 July 2010 . Retrieved  5 July  2010 . 
 
 ^   Gado-Gado | Gado-Gado Recipe | Online Indonesian Food and Recipes at IndonesiaEats.com 
 
 ^  a   b   c   "National Dish of Indonesia Gado Gado" . Archived from  the original  on 12 June 2010 . Retrieved  5 July  2010 . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   "Indonesian food recipes: Satay" . Archived from  the original  on 12 August 2010 . Retrieved  5 July  2010 . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   "A Soto Crawl" . Eating Asia . Retrieved  5 July  2010 . 
 
 ^  a   b   Senja, Anggita Muslimah Maulidya Prahara.  Nursastri, Sri Anindiati (ed.).  "Kemenpar Tetapkan 5 Makanan Nasional Indonesia, Ini Daftarnya - Kompas.com" .  KOMPAS.com  (in Indonesian).  Jakarta : Kompas Cyber Media . Retrieved  18 April  2018 . 
 
 ^   Buxton, Kira Jane.  "Incredible Indonesian dishes you need to try immediately" .  Mashed.com . Retrieved  11 December  2017 . 
 
 ^   "Makanan Zaman Kuno" .  Jawa Kuno  (in Indonesian). Archived from  the original  on 14 June 2021 . Retrieved  29 September  2017 . 
 
 ^   "Hanya Ada Di Candi Sojiwan: Menu Hidangan Raja Mataram Kuno" .  TEMPO.CO  (in Indonesian). 22 February 2017. 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   e   Yudi Anugrah Nugroho (18 December 2013).  "Cita Rasa Kuliner Nusantara" .  Historia  (in Indonesian). 
 
 ^   "Menguak Fakta Menu Lalapan Sunda Lewat Prasasti Taji" .  beritasatu.com  (in Indonesian) . Retrieved  23 December  2017 . 
 
 ^   "Terungkap, Asal Mula Menu Lalapan | Dream.co.id" .  Dream.co.id  (in Indonesian) . Retrieved  23 December  2017 . 
 
 ^   The Book of Tempeh , 2nd ed., by W. Shurtleff and A. Aoyagi (2001, Ten Speed Press, p. 145) 
 
 ^  a   b   Mike, Lininger.  "International Dining Etiquette — Indonesia" . Etiquette Scholar . Retrieved  28 May  2015 . 
 
 ^   Heinz Von Holzen (2014).  A New Approach to Indonesian Cooking . Marshall Cavendish International Asia Pte Ltd. p. 15.  ISBN   9789814634953 . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   Taylor, Jean Gelman (2003).  Indonesia: Peoples and Histories . New Haven and London: Yale University Press. pp.  8–9 .  ISBN   0-300-10518-5 . 
 
 ^   Witton, Patrick (2002).  World Food: Indonesia .  Melbourne :  Lonely Planet . p. 29.  ISBN   1-74059-009-0 . 
 
 ^   "Global Demand, World Instant Noodles Association" .  instantnoodles.org . Retrieved  12 January  2020 . 
 
 ^   "Grilled tempeh burgers" .  Rachael Ray . 21 July 2009. Archived from  the original  on 14 February 2015. 
 
 ^   Scott, Janny (20 April 2011).  "Obama's Young Mother Abroad" .  The New York Times . 
 
 ^   "Ikan Bakar" .  Tasty Indonesian Food.com . Tasty Indonesian Food.com . Retrieved  11 August  2013 . 
 
 ^   "Mencicipi Gurihnya Keripik Olahan Jangkrik" .  Kompas.com  (in Indonesian). 13 September 2016. 
 
 ^   Ira Rachmawati (12 December 2014).  "Menikmati Sepincuk Botok Tawon di Banyuwangi" .  Kompas.com  (in Indonesian). 
 
 ^   Fidel Ali (18 June 2017).  "Apa Rasanya Makan Ulat Sagu Hidup-hidup di Raja Ampat?" .  Kompas.com  (in Indonesian). 
 
 ^   Kumar's Curries & Bumbus (2011).  "Curries and Bumbus" . Verstegen. Archived from  the original  on 22 April 2017 . Retrieved  24 October  2011 . 
 
 ^   Elliott, Petty (2011).  "Food Talk: Spice Up Your Prawns With Sambal" . Jakarta Globe, Indonesian Embassy in Athens. Archived from  the original  on 18 March 2012 . Retrieved  24 October  2011 . 
 
 ^   "Some Like It Hot! Bali Safari and Marine Park Holds Its 3rd Chili Festival" . Bali Discovery Tours. Archived from  the original  on 17 May 2012 . Retrieved  23 February  2018 . 
 
 ^   James Oseland,  Cradle Of Flavor  (W.W. Norton & Co., 2006) 
 
 ^  a   b   Sitompul, Martin (28 July 2017).  "Pesona Nasi Goreng" .  Historia – Obrolan Perempuan Urban  (in Indonesian) . Retrieved  19 September  2018 . 
 
 ^   "Indonesian Nasi Goreng: Stir-Fried Rice in Soy Sauce" .  asianfoodnetwork.com . Retrieved  21 August  2020 . 
 
 ^   Maria Endah Hulupi (22 June 2003).  "Betawi cuisine, a culinary journey through history" .  The Jakarta Post . Archived from  the original  on 14 September 2015 . Retrieved  30 January  2015 . 
 
 ^   Sate Klopo | Sate Klopo Recipe | Online Indonesian Food and Recipes at IndonesiaEats.com 
 
 ^   Sate Ayam Madura | Sate Ayam Madura Recipe | Online Indonesian Food and Recipes at IndonesiaEats.com 
 
 ^   Bali: A Day At The Market And Cooking Class 
 
 ^   Cheung, Tim (12 July 2017).  "Your pick: World's 50 best foods" . CNN Travel.  Archived  from the original on 11 October 2017 . Retrieved  11 October  2017 . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   "A Guide to Dutch Indonesian Cuisine" . Awesome Amsterdam. Archived from  the original  on 6 July 2014 . Retrieved  15 August  2014 . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   Setyaningrum, Puspasari (2 January 2023).  "10 Kuliner Khas Indonesia yang Mirip Masakan Belanda, Ada Oliebollen dan Smoor" .  KOMPAS.com  (in Indonesian) . Retrieved  1 March  2023 . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   Luke Nguyen (5 December 2016).  "Crocodile bread and spekkoek: the tasty intersection of Dutch-Indo food" .  SBS . 
 
 ^  a   b   "Cuisine of the southern states" .  Food and Travel . 
 
 ^  a   b   Kosaku Yoshino.  "Malaysian Cuisine: A Case of Neglected Culinary Globalization"   (PDF) . Sophia University Institute of Comparative Culture, Tokyo. p. 3. Archived from  the original   (PDF)  on 2 May 2014 . Retrieved  2 May  2014 . 
 
 ^   "Consumers love succulent Satay, Peanut ingredients for global success"   (PDF) . USA Peanuts. p. 1. Archived from  the original   (PDF)  on 2 May 2014 . Retrieved  2 May  2014 . 
 
 ^   C. Countess van Limburg Stirum:  The Art of Dutch Cooking ; First published in 1962 by Andre Deutsch Limited, London; p.179-p.185 
 
 ^   "Check Out Indonesian Food in Seoul: Lilin Indonesian Restaurant" .  KoreabyMe . 12 May 2021 . Retrieved  27 March  2022 . 
 
 ^   "Indonesian Food Popular among North Koreans" .  Tempo.co . 17 May 2015. 
 
 ^  a   b   "Indonesia Spice Up the World, Homepage" .  Indonesia Spice Up the World . 29 October 2021 . Retrieved  27 March  2022 . 
 
 ^   Wahyuni, Natasia Christy (29 July 2021).  "Oktober, Jokowi Akan Luncurkan "Indonesia Spice Up The World" dalam Expo Dubai" .  beritasatu.com  (in Indonesian).  Jakarta : BeritaSatu.com . Retrieved  27 March  2022 . 
 
 ^  a   b   Rochman, Fathur (20 July 2021).  " "Indonesia Spice Up the World" to boost culinary industry: Uno" .  Antara News . Retrieved  27 March  2022 . 
 
 ^  a   b   "Padang's Feast Fit for a King" . Eating Asia. 10 July 2006 . Retrieved  20 August  2013 . 
 
 ^   "A Unique of Padang" . Padangbaycity.com. Archived from  the original  on 14 December 2010 . Retrieved  22 September  2010 . 
 
 ^   Fadly Rahman (16 December 2010).  "Rijsttafel: The History of Indonesian Foodways" .  Kompasiana . Kompasiana. Archived from  the original  on 21 September 2013. 
 
 ^   
 Hyon Jung Lee (20 June 2007).  "Most Expensive Coffee" .  Forbes.com . Retrieved  24 October  2011 . 
 
 ^   P.T. Data Consult, Inc (1999).  "The Sinar Sosro Group: The Market Leader for Traditional Drinks" . The Free Library . Retrieved  24 October  2011 . 
 
 ^   Andreas D. Arditya (14 April 2013).  "A taste for spirits" .  The Jakarta Post . Retrieved  22 June  2017 . 
 
 ^   "Most popular 'kaki lima' in Jakarta" .  The Jakarta Post . Jakarta. 18 June 2016. 
 
 ^   Heinz Von Holzen; Lother Arsana (2015).  Food of Indonesia: Delicious Recipes from Bali, Java and the Spice Islands . Tuttle Publishing.  ISBN   9781462914913 . 
 
 ^   Mandy Oaklander (21 May 2015).  "Should I Eat Tempeh?" .  TIME Health . 
 
 ^   "Gastroenteritis and Food/Waterborne Diseases" .  Living in Indonesia . 
 
 
 Bibliography [ edit ] 
 Owen, Sri . "Indonesian Food and Cookery"  ISBN   978-0907325000  Prospect Books, 1980 
 Owen, Sri. "Sri Owen's Indonesian Food"  ISBN   978-1910496718  Pavilion Books, 2015 
 Wongso, William. "Flavors of Indonesia: William Wongso's Culinary Wonders"  ISBN   978-9798926327  Bab Publishing, 2016 
 Ford, Eleanor. "Fire Islands: Recipes from Indonesia"  ISBN   978-1911632047  Murdoch Books, 2019 
 External links [ edit ] 
 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons has media related to  Cuisine of Indonesia . 
 
 
 
 
 Wikibooks  Cookbook  has a recipe/module on
 
  Cuisine of Indonesia 
 
 
 v t e Indonesia   articles History 
 Timeline 
 Prehistoric 
 Hinduism-Buddhism era 
 Spread of Islam 
 Portuguese era (1512–1605) 
 VOC era (1603–1800) 
 French and British era (1806–1816) 
 Dutch East Indies (1800–1942) 
 Japanese occupation (1942–45) 
 National Revolution (1945–49) 
 Liberal democracy era (1950–59) 
 Guided Democracy (1959–65) 
 Transitional period (1965–66) 
 New Order (1966–98) 
 Reformasi  (since 1998) 
 Geography 
 Borders 
 Cities 
 Climate 
 Climate change 
 Biosphere reserves 
 Deforestation 
 Earthquakes 
 Environmental issues 
 Geology 
 Islands 
 Lakes 
 Mountains 
 Provincial highest points 
 National parks 
 Natural history 
 Fauna 
 Flora 
 Regions 
 Rivers 
 Volcanoes 
 Politics 
 Administrative divisions 
 Cabinet 
 Constitution 
 Elections 
 Foreign relations 
 Human rights 
 Refugees 
 Law 
 Censorship 
 Enforcement 
 Military  ( Babinsa ) 
 National capital 
 Pancasila 
 People's Consultative Assembly 
 Police 
 Political parties 
 President  ( List ) 
 Wawasan Nusantara 
 Economy 
 Agriculture 
 Automotive 
 Aviation 
 Banks 
 Energy 
 History 
 Science and technology 
 Stock Exchange 
 Telecommunications 
 Tourism 
 Transport 
 Water supply and sanitation 
 Society 
 Crime 
 Piracy 
 Prostitution 
 Culture 
 Architecture 
 Candi 
 Colonial 
 Mosques 
 Rumah adat 
 Art 
 Cinema 
 Cuisine 
 Dance 
 Legends 
 Literature 
 Martial arts 
 Media 
 Music 
 National heroes 
 Painting 
 Properties 
 Public holidays 
 Sport 
 Theatre 
 Video games 
 Demographics 
 Education 
 Ethnic groups 
 Health 
 Healthcare 
 Homelessness 
 Languages 
 Nusantara 
 Religion 
 Women 
 LGBT rights 
 Symbols 
 Anthem 
 Costume 
 Emblem 
 Historical 
 Subdivision 
 Faunal emblems 
 Flag 
 Floral emblems 
 Garuda Pancasila 
 Motto 
 Personification 
 Songs 
 Outline Index 
 Category 
 Portal 
 Gallery 
 Atlas 
 v t e   Indonesian cuisine  by  ethnicity Dishes Common Indonesian dishes 
 Abon 
 Acar 
 Ayam bakar 
 Ayam goreng 
 Ayam kecap 
 Ayam kodok 
 Bakmi 
 Bakpau 
 Bakso 
 Bakwan 
 Bihun goreng 
 Bubur ayam 
 Bubur kacang hijau 
 Bubur ketan hitam 
 Bubur sumsum 
 Gado-gado 
 Gorengan 
 Gulai 
 Ikan asin 
 Ikan bakar 
 Ikan goreng 
 Jagung rebus 
 Kacang rebus 
 Kari 
 Kari ayam 
 Kari domba 
 Kari kambing 
 Kari udang 
 Kuaci 
 Ketupat 
 Laksa 
 Lontong 
 Macaroni schotel 
 Martabak 
 Mi bakso 
 Mi goreng 
 Mi kuah 
 Nasi campur 
 Nasi goreng 
 Nasi kari 
 Nasi kuning 
 Nasi bakar 
 Otak-otak 
 Panekuk 
 Pastel tutup 
 Perkedel 
 Perkedel jagung 
 Pindang 
 Rendang 
 Rijsttafel 
 Roti bakar 
 Roti bolen 
 Roti meses 
 Rujak 
 Sambal 
 Sambal goreng udang 
 Satay 
 Sayur bayam 
 Sayur sop 
 Semur 
 Serundeng 
 Sop buntut 
 Soto 
 Soto ayam 
 Soto mi 
 Sup ayam 
 Sup ercis 
 Sup makaroni 
 Sup wortel 
 Tahu 
 Tahu goreng 
 Telur asin 
 Telur pindang 
 Tempeh 
 Tumis kangkung 
 Tumpeng 
 Acehnese 
 Meuseukat 
 Mi aceh 
 Mi caluk 
 Nasi gurih 
 Sate matang 
 Arab 
 Asida 
 Falafel 
 Hummus 
 Kofta 
 Manakish 
 Katayef 
 Nasi kabsah 
 Nasi mandi 
 Maamoul 
 Marak 
 Roti maryam 
 Roti pita 
 Saltah 
 Shawarma 
 Tabbouleh 
 Tharid 
 Balinese 
 Babi guling 
 Betutu 
 Be urutan 
 Iga babi 
 Laklak 
 Lawar 
 Matah 
 Nasi bali 
 Nasi jinggo 
 Pai susu 
 Rawon babi 
 Rujak kuah pindang 
 Sate babi 
 Sate lilit 
 Soto babi 
 Tipat cantok 
 Banjarese 
 Bingka 
 Laksa banjar 
 Pekasam 
 Soto banjar 
 Batak 
 Arsik 
 Babi panggang Karo 
 Dali ni horbo 
 Dengke mas na niura 
 Itak gurgur 
 Lampet 
 Manuk napinadar 
 Mi gomak 
 Na tinombur 
 Ombusombus 
 Pagit-pagit 
 Pohulpohul 
 Saksang 
 Sasagun 
 Sate kerang 
 Tipatipa 
 Tuktuk 
 Betawi 
 Asinan betawi 
 Bubur cha cha 
 Kerak telor 
 Ketoprak 
 Ketupat sayur 
 Laksa betawi 
 Lontong sayur 
 Mi kangkung 
 Nasi goreng kambing 
 Nasi kebuli 
 Nasi uduk 
 Nasi ulam 
 Pindang 
 Roti buaya 
 Roti gambang 
 Rujak juhi 
 Sate taichan 
 Sayur asem 
 Semur jengkol 
 Soto betawi 
 Soto kaki 
 Soto tangkar 
 Sup kambing 
 Buginese  and Makassar 
 Burasa 
 Coto makassar 
 Dangke 
 Jalangkote 
 Kaledo 
 Konro 
 Mi kering 
 Pallubasa 
 Sop saudara 
 Chinese 
 Babi hong 
 Babi kecap 
 Bak kut teh 
 Bakkwa 
 Banmian 
 Bihun goreng 
 Cakwe 
 Cap cai 
 Chai tow kway 
 Char kway teow 
 Cha sio 
 Fu yung hai 
 Fish ball 
 Haisom cah 
 Ifumi 
 Kembang tahu 
 Kepiting saus tiram 
 Kuaci 
 Kwetiau ayam 
 Kwetiau goreng 
 Kwetiau siram sapi 
 Lapchiong 
 Locupan 
 Lontong cap go meh 
 Lumpia 
 Mi ayam 
 Mi lor 
 Mi pangsit 
 Mi tarik 
 Mun tahu 
 Nasi ayam hainan 
 Nasi bebek 
 Nasi campur 
 Nasi tim 
 Ngo hiang 
 Pangsit 
 Popiah 
 Rujak shanghai 
 Sapo tahu 
 Sate babi 
 Sekba 
 Siomay 
 Soto 
 Sup hisit 
 Sup sarang burung 
 Swikee 
 Tahu sumedang 
 Tauge ayam 
 Tee long pan 
 Telur pitan 
 Telur teh 
 Tong sui 
 Yong tau fu 
 Yusheng 
 Cirebonese 
 Empal gentong 
 Docang 
 Kue gapit 
 Mi koclok 
 Nasi jamblang 
 Nasi lengko 
 Tahu gejrot 
 Indian 
 Ayam mentega 
 Ayam tandori 
 Chapati 
 Chutney 
 Dosa 
 Idli 
 Laddu 
 Kari kambing 
 Kari kepala ikan 
 Korma 
 Modak 
 Naan 
 Nasi biryani 
 Raita 
 Roti canai 
 Sambar 
 Samosa 
 Indo 
 Ayam kodok 
 Babi panggang 
 Bitterballen 
 Erwtensoep 
 Hutspot 
 Makaroni schotel 
 Oliebol 
 Ontbijtkoek 
 Pannenkoek 
 Poffertjes 
 Shepherd's pie 
 Spekkoek 
 Javanese 
 Apem 
 Arem-arem 
 Ayam bumbu rujak 
 Ayam geprek 
 Ayam goreng kalasan 
 Ayam penyet 
 Bakso 
 Bakpia 
 Bakpia pathok 
 Botok 
 Brongkos 
 Buntil 
 Gudeg 
 Iga penyet 
 Kamir 
 Kelan antep 
 Krechek 
 Kuluban 
 Lepet 
 Lontong balap 
 Lontong dekem 
 Lontong kupang 
 Lumpia 
 Lumpia goreng 
 Lumpia semarang 
 Sumpia 
 Mendoan 
 Mi bakso 
 Mi goreng 
 Mi jawa 
 Mi rebus 
 Nasi ambeng 
 Nasi bebek 
 Nasi bogana 
 Nasi empal 
 Nasi gandul 
 Nasi goreng 
 Nasi goreng jawa 
 Nasi kare 
 Nasi kucing 
 Nasi liwet 
 Nasi megono 
 Nasi pecel 
 Nasi tempong 
 Opor 
 Opor ayam 
 Pecel 
 Pecel ayam 
 Pecel lele 
 Rambak petis 
 Rawon 
 Roti ganjel rel 
 Roti konde 
 Rujak cingur 
 Rujak soto 
 Sambal ulek 
 Sate ambal 
 Sate blora 
 Sate kambing 
 Sate hati 
 Sate kelinci 
 Sate kikil 
 Sate klatak 
 Sate madura 
 Sate ponorogo 
 Sate tegal 
 Sate udang 
 Sayur lodeh 
 Selat solo 
 Serundeng 
 Soto babat 
 Soto ceker 
 Tahu campur 
 Telur pindang 
 Tempe bacem 
 Tempe goreng 
 Tempe mendoan 
 Tongseng 
 Trancam 
 Tumpeng 
 Urap 
 Madurese 
 Rujak 
 Rujak cingur 
 Sate madura 
 Serundeng 
 Soto madura 
 Malay 
 Amplang 
 Ayam goreng 
 Ayam pansuh 
 Bubur cha cha 
 Bubur pedas 
 Cincalok 
 Epok-epok 
 Gulai 
 Ikan bakar 
 Ikan patin 
 Kangkung belacan 
 Kari 
 Kemplang 
 Laksa 
 Mi kari 
 Mi rebus 
 Nasi berlauk 
 Nasi briyani 
 Nasi dagang 
 Nasi goreng 
 Nasi goreng pattaya 
 Nasi lemak 
 Nasi minyak 
 Otak-otak 
 Pekasam 
 Pulut 
 Roti canai 
 Roti jala 
 Roti john 
 Roti tisu 
 Sayur lodeh 
 Siput gonggong 
 Soto 
 Sup kambing 
 Tahu goreng 
 Tempoyak 
 Ulam 
 Minahasan 
 Ayam rica-rica 
 Brenebon 
 Cakalang fufu 
 Dabu-dabu 
 Klappertaart 
 Mi cakalang 
 Nasi kuning 
 Panada 
 Paniki 
 Rica-rica 
 Rintek wuuk 
 Tinorangsak 
 Tinutuan 
 Woku 
 Minangkabau 
 Asam pedas 
 Ayam pop 
 Balado 
 Daun ubi tumbuk 
 Dendeng 
 Gulai 
 Gulai ayam 
 Gulai kambing 
 Gulai otak 
 Kalio 
 Kepiting saus padang 
 Keripik sanjai 
 Lemang 
 Lontong gulai pakis 
 Nasi kapau 
 Nasi kari 
 Nasi padang 
 Palai bada 
 Rendang 
 Sambal lada muda 
 Sate padang 
 Soto padang 
 Udang balado 
 Moluccan and  Papuan 
 Asida 
 Babi bakar 
 Bibingka 
 Colo-colo 
 Papeda 
 Puding sagu 
 Sagu 
 Soto ambon 
 Palembang 
 Burgo 
 Gulai 
 Kemplang 
 Laksan 
 Lakso 
 Mi celor 
 Nasi minyak 
 Otak-otak 
 Pempek 
 Pindang 
 Tekwan 
 Tempoyak ikan patin 
 Peranakan 
 Bubur cha cha 
 Cincalok 
 Laksa 
 Pai ti 
 Swikee 
 Sasak 
 Ayam taliwang 
 Plecing kangkung 
 Sate ampet 
 Sate belut 
 Sate pusut 
 Sundanese 
 Asinan bogor 
 Batagor 
 Empal gepuk 
 Karedok 
 Kupat tahu 
 Laksa bogor 
 Laksa tangerang 
 Lalab 
 Mi kocok 
 Nasi timbel 
 Nasi tutug oncom 
 Oncom 
 Pepes 
 Rujak tumbuk 
 Sate bandeng 
 Sate maranggi 
 Sayur asem 
 Seblak 
 Soto bandung 
 Tauge goreng 
 Uli bakar 
 Timorese 
 Feijoada 
 Ikan bakar 
 Katemak 
 Pastel de nata 
 Se'i 
 Snacks Krupuk 
 Amplang 
 Emping 
 Kemplang 
 Krupuk 
 Krupuk ikan 
 Krupuk kulit 
 Krupuk udang 
 Kripik 
 Kripik sanjai 
 Rempeyek 
 Rengginang 
 Kue 
 Agar-agar 
 Apam 
 Ape 
 Arem-arem 
 Asida 
 Bagea 
 Bahulu 
 Bakcang 
 Bakpau 
 Bakpia 
 Bakpia pathok 
 Bangkit 
 Bibingka 
 Bika ambon 
 Bingka 
 Bitterballen 
 Bolen 
 Bolu gulung 
 Bolu kukus 
 Bolu pandan 
 Bugis 
 Bulan 
 Busa 
 Cakwe 
 Cilok 
 Clorot 
 Cubit 
 Cucur 
 Dadar gulung 
 Dodol 
 Donat jawa 
 Donat kentang 
 Gapit 
 Geplak 
 Gethuk 
 Jalangkote 
 Jemput-jemput 
 Kaak 
 Kaasstengels 
 Kamir 
 Karipap 
 Kembang goyang 
 Keranjang 
 Klappertaart 
 Klepon 
 Kochi 
 Kroket 
 Ku 
 Kukis jagung 
 Laddu 
 Laklak 
 Lapis 
 Lapis legit 
 Leker 
 Lemper 
 Lidah kucing 
 Lumpia 
 Lumpia goreng 
 Lumpia semarang 
 Sumpia 
 Lupis 
 Madumongso 
 Makmur 
 Martabak 
 Mangkok 
 Mochi 
 Modak 
 Nagasari 
 Nastar 
 Ombusombus 
 Onde-onde 
 Pai susu 
 Pai ti 
 Panada 
 Pancong 
 Pastel 
 Pastel de nata 
 Pinyaram 
 Pisang cokelat 
 Pisang goreng 
 Poffertjes 
 Popiah 
 Pukis 
 Putri salju 
 Putu 
 Putu mangkok 
 Putu mayang 
 Rangi 
 Rempah udang 
 Risoles 
 Samosa 
 Satu 
 Semar mendem 
 Semprit 
 Semprong 
 Serabi 
 Seri muka 
 Sus 
 Spekulaas 
 Stroopwafel 
 Talam 
 Tapai 
 Timphan 
 Terang bulan 
 Untir-untir 
 Wajik 
 Wingko 
 Beverages Alcoholic 
 Arak 
 Beer 
 Brem 
 Cap tikus 
 Ciu 
 Lapen 
 Saguer 
 Sopi 
 Tuak 
 Non-alcoholic 
 Adon-adon coro 
 Angsle 
 Bajigur 
 Bandrek 
 Bir jawa 
 Bir kocok 
 Bir pletok 
 Cendol 
 Chocolate milk 
 Cincau 
 Dadiah 
 Es asam jawa 
 Es buah 
 Es campur 
 Es doger 
 Es durian 
 Es goyobod 
 Es kelapa muda 
 Es kopyor 
 Es selendang mayang 
 Es tebak 
 Es tebu 
 Es teler 
 Hot chocolate 
 Jahe telur 
 Jamu 
 Java coffee 
 Kembang tahu 
 Kopi luwak 
 Kopi susu 
 Kopi tarik 
 Kopi tiam 
 Kopi tubruk 
 Lahang 
 Laksamana mengamuk 
 Legen 
 Milo 
 Moke 
 Ronde 
 Sarsi 
 Badak 
 Indo saparelle 
 Sekoteng 
 Soda gembira 
 Susu kedelai 
 Sweet tea 
 Teh botol 
 Teh krisan 
 Teh liang 
 Teh poci 
 Teh jahe 
 Teh tarik 
 Teh talua 
 Wedang jahe 
 Wedang uwuh 
 Bumbu Spices 
 Adas manis 
 Andaliman 
 Asam jawa 
 Bawang bombai 
 Bawang merah 
 Bawang perei 
 Bawang putih 
 Bunga lawang 
 Bunga pala 
 Cabai rawit 
 Cabai merah 
 Cengkih 
 Daun bawang 
 Daun jeruk 
 Daun kari 
 Daun kemangi 
 Daun pandan 
 Daun salam 
 Jahe 
 Jeruk purut 
 Jeruk nipis 
 Jintan 
 Kapulaga 
 Kayu manis 
 Kecombrang 
 Kencur 
 Kemiri 
 Ketumbar 
 Keluak 
 Kunyit 
 Lengkuas 
 Lada hitam 
 Lada putih 
 Lokio 
 Pala 
 Peterseli 
 Seledri 
 Serai 
 Temu kunci 
 Temu lawak 
 Seasonings and condiments 
 Abon 
 Acar 
 Balado 
 Bawang goreng 
 Budu 
 Coconut jam 
 Cuka 
 Dabu-dabu 
 Hagelslag 
 Kecap asin 
 Kecap ikan 
 Kecap inggris 
 Kecap manis 
 Kerisik 
 Lalab 
 Mayones 
 Minyak samin 
 Minyak wijen 
 Minyak zaitun 
 Moster 
 Muisjes 
 Nata de coco 
 Peanut sauce 
 Petis 
 Petis ikan 
 Rica-rica 
 Sambal 
 Sambal goreng teri 
 Serundeng 
 Saus tiram 
 Saus tomat 
 Tapai 
 Tauco 
 Tempoyak 
 Terasi 
 Tongcai 
 Tuktuk 
 Vlokken 
 Influences  and overseas dishes 
 Achat 
 Asam pedas 
 Ayam penyet 
 Babi pangang 
 Bami 
 Bamischijf 
 Begedil 
 Biryani 
 Bobotie 
 Bobotok 
 Boeber 
 Dendeng 
 Kaassoufflé 
 Kalu dodol 
 Koe'sister 
 Lumpia 
 Martabak 
 Mie goreng 
 Mie rebus 
 Nasi ambeng 
 Nasi goreng 
 Nasi kuning 
 Nasischijf 
 Pechal 
 Pisang goreng 
 Rawon 
 Rendang 
 Rojak 
 Roti canai 
 Satay 
 Sayur lodeh 
 Serundeng 
 Sosatie 
 Soto 
 Telur pindang 
 Tempeh 
 Tomato bredie 
 List articles 
 Indonesian beverages 
 Indonesian condiments 
 Indonesian desserts 
 Indonesian dishes 
 Indonesian noodles 
 Indonesian snacks 
 Indonesian soups 
 Related topics 
 List of Indonesian dishes 
 Alcohol in Indonesia 
 Jamu 
 Bumbu (seasoning) 
 Street food of Indonesia 
 Jajan pasar 
 Sri Owen 
 
   Food portal 
   Category: Indonesian cuisine 
 
 v t e Asian cuisine Sovereign states 
 Afghanistan 
 Armenia 
 Azerbaijan 
 Bahrain 
 Bangladesh 
 Bhutan 
 Brunei 
 Burma (Myanmar) 
 Cambodia 
 China 
 Cyprus 
 East Timor (Timor-Leste) 
 Egypt 
 Georgia 
 India 
 Indonesia 
 Iran 
 Iraq 
 Israel 
 Japan 
 Jordan 
 Kazakhstan 
 North Korea 
 South Korea 
 Kuwait 
 Kyrgyzstan 
 Laos 
 Lebanon 
 Malaysia 
 Maldives 
 Mongolia 
 Nepal 
 Oman 
 Pakistan 
 Philippines 
 Qatar 
 Russia 
 Saudi Arabia 
 Singapore 
 Sri Lanka 
 Syria 
 Tajikistan 
 Thailand 
 Turkey 
 Turkmenistan 
 United Arab Emirates 
 Uzbekistan 
 Vietnam 
 Yemen 
 States with limited recognition 
 Abkhazia 
 Artsakh 
 Northern Cyprus 
 Palestine 
 South Ossetia 
 Taiwan 
 Dependencies and other territories 
 British Indian Ocean Territory 
 Christmas Island 
 Cocos (Keeling) Islands 
 Hong Kong 
 Macau 
 
 v t e Cuisines Continental 
 African 
 North 
 West 
 list 
 Americas 
 Caribbean 
 North 
 South 
 list 
 Asian 
 Caucasian 
 Central 
 Indian subcontinent 
 Levantine 
 list 
 European 
 Balkan 
 Central 
 Eastern 
 list 
 Oceanic 
 Intercontinental
 Global 
 Latin American 
 Mediterranean 
 Middle Eastern 
 National  and regional 
 Afghan 
 Albanian 
 Algerian 
 American 
 Californian 
 Floribbean 
 Hawaiian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Lowcountry (South Carolina) 
 New England 
 New Mexico 
 Pacific Northwest 
 Pennsylvania Dutch 
 Puerto Rican 
 Southern US 
 Southwest US 
 Texas 
 Angolan 
 Argentine 
 Armenian 
 Australian 
 Austrian 
 Azerbaijani 
 Bahraini 
 Bangladeshi 
 Barbadian 
 Belarusian 
 Belgian 
 Belizean 
 Beninese 
 Bhutanese 
 Bolivian 
 Bosnian-Herzegovinian 
 Botswana 
 Brazilian 
 British 
 Channel Islands 
 English 
 Gibraltarian 
 Northern Irish 
 Saint Helena 
 Scottish 
 Welsh 
 Bruneian 
 Bulgarian 
 Burkinabé 
 Burmese 
 Burundian 
 Cambodian 
 Cameroonian 
 Canadian 
 Acadian 
 Québécois 
 Central African Republic 
 Chadian 
 Chilean 
 Chinese 
 Cantonese 
 Hong Kong 
 Macanese 
 Tibetan 
 Xinjiang 
 Colombian 
 Congolese 
 Corsican 
 Croatian 
 Cuban 
 Cypriot 
 Czech 
 Danish 
 Faroese 
 Greenlandic 
 Djiboutian 
 Dominican 
 Dominican Republic 
 Dutch 
 East Timorese 
 Ecuadorian 
 Egyptian 
 Emirati 
 Equatorial Guinean 
 Eritrean 
 Estonian 
 Ethiopian 
 Fijian 
 Filipino 
 Finnish 
 French 
 Occitan 
 French Guianan 
 Gabonese 
 Gambian 
 Georgian 
 German 
 Ghanaian 
 Greek 
 Cretan 
 Epirotic 
 Greek Macedonian 
 Heptanesean 
 Guatemalan 
 Guinea-Bissauan 
 Guinean 
 Haitian 
 Honduran 
 Hungarian 
 Icelandic 
 Indian 
 Arunachalese 
 Assamese 
 Bengali 
 Bihari 
 Goan 
 Gujarati 
 Himachal Pradesh 
 Kashmiri 
 Jharkhandi 
 Karnataka 
 Kerala 
 Maharashtrian 
 Manipuri 
 Meghalayan 
 Mizo 
 Naga 
 Odia 
 Punjabi 
 Rajasthani 
 Sikkimese 
 Sindhi 
 Tamil 
 Telangana 
 Telugu 
 Indonesian 
 Acehnese 
 Balinese 
 Banjar 
 Batak 
 Betawi 
 Indo 
 Javanese 
 Madurese 
 Makassar 
 Minahasan 
 Minangkabau 
 Palembangese 
 Sundanese 
 Iranian 
 Iraqi 
 Irish 
 Israeli 
 Italian 
 Abruzzese 
 Ligurian 
 Lombard 
 Lucanian 
 Neapolitan 
 Roman 
 Sardinian 
 Sicilian 
 Venetian 
 Ivorian 
 Jamaican 
 Japanese 
 Okinawan 
 Jordanian 
 Kazakh 
 Kenyan 
 Korean 
 North Korean 
 South Korean 
 Kosovan 
 Kuwaiti 
 Kyrgyz 
 Lao 
 Latvian 
 Lebanese 
 Lesotho 
 Liberian 
 Libyan 
 Liechtensteiner 
 Lithuanian 
 Luxembourg 
 Macedonian 
 Malagasy 
 Malawian 
 Malaysian 
 Sabahan 
 Sarawakian 
 Maldivian 
 Malian 
 Maltese 
 Mauritanian 
 Mauritian 
 Mexican 
 Moldovan 
 Monégasque 
 Mongolian 
 Montenegrin 
 Moroccan 
 Mozambican 
 Namibian 
 Nauruan 
 Nepalese 
 New Zealand 
 Nicaraguan 
 Niger 
 Nigerian 
 Niuean 
 Norwegian 
 Omani 
 Pakistani 
 Palestinian 
 Panamanian 
 Peruvian 
 Polish 
 Portuguese 
 Qatari 
 Romanian  (incl.  Transylvanian Saxon ) 
 Russian 
 Bashkir 
 Chechen 
 Circassian 
 Komi 
 Mordovian 
 Sakha 
 Tatar 
 Udmurt 
 Yamal 
 Rwandan 
 Saint Lucian 
 Salvadoran 
 Sammarinese 
 São Tomé and Príncipe 
 Saudi Arabian 
 Senegalese 
 Serbian 
 Seychellois 
 Sierra Leonean 
 Singaporean 
 Slovak 
 Slovenian 
 Somali 
 South African 
 Spanish 
 Andalusian 
 Asturian 
 Balearic 
 Basque 
 Canarian 
 Cantabrian 
 Catalan 
 Extremaduran 
 Galician 
 Manchegan 
 Valencian 
 Sri Lankan 
 Sudanese 
 Swazi 
 Swedish 
 Swiss 
 Syrian 
 Taiwanese 
 Tajik 
 Tanzanian 
 Zanzibari 
 Thai 
 Togolese 
 Tunisian 
 Turkish 
 Turkmen 
 Trinidadian and Tobagonian 
 Ugandan 
 Ukrainian 
 Uruguayan 
 Uzbek 
 Venezuelan 
 Vietnamese 
 Western Saharan 
 Yemeni 
 Zambian 
 Zimbabwean 
 Ethnic 
 Ainu 
 Arab 
 Indonesian 
 Aromanian 
 Assyrian 
 Balochi 
 Berber 
 Cajun 
 Chinese 
 American 
 Canadian 
 Chifa 
 Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Crimean Tatar 
 Greek American 
 Hazaragi 
 Indian 
 Anglo-Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Indigenous American 
 Inuit 
 Italian American 
 Kurdish 
 Livonian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Malay 
 Ossetian 
 Parsi 
 Pashtun 
 Peranakan 
 Romani 
 Sámi 
 Soul food 
 Sylheti 
 Transylvanian Saxon 
 Yup'ik 
 Religious 
 Buddhist 
 Christian 
 Goan Catholic 
 Mangalorean Catholic 
 Mennonite 
 Hindu 
 Islamic 
 Chinese 
 Ital 
 Jain 
 Jewish 
 American 
 Ashkenazi 
 Bukharan 
 Ethiopian 
 Mizrahi 
 Sephardic 
 Syrian 
 Ritual slaughter 
 Sikh 
 Historical 
 Ancient Egyptian 
 Ancient Greek 
 Ancient Israelite 
 Ancient Roman 
 Antebellum America 
 Aztec 
 Byzantine 
 Early modern European 
 Historical Chinese 
 Historical Indian subcontinent 
 Historical North Indian and Pakistani 
 History of agriculture 
 History of alcoholic drinks 
 History of bread 
 History of seafood 
 History of vegetarianism 
 Historical Argentine 
 Historical Japanese 
 Inca 
 Mayan 
 Muisca 
 Mughal 
 Medieval 
 Ottoman 
 Peasant 
 Soviet 
 Thirteen Colonies 
 Styles 
 Classique 
 Fast food 
 Fusion 
 New American 
 Eurasian 
 Haute 
 Molecular gastronomy 
 Note by Note 
 Nouvelle 
 Lists 
 List of cuisines 
 List of historical cuisines 
 Lists of prepared foods 
 Related 
 Cookbook 
 Cooking 
 Culinary arts 
 Drink 
 Food 
 history 
 Diet 
 Meal preparation 
 
   Food portal 
   Drink portal 
   Category 
   Commons 
   Cookbook 
   WikiProject 
   Outline 
 
 Authority control : National libraries  
 France 
 BnF data 
 Israel 
 United States 
 Japan 
 
  
NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw2385
Cached time: 20230311165324
Cache expiry: 1814400
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc, no‐toc‐conversion]
CPU time usage: 1.849 seconds
Real time usage: 2.287 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 25554/1000000
Post‐expand include size: 428887/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 23858/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 99/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 249068/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.804/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 22834035/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/400
 
 
Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1498.936      1 -total
 27.69%  415.072      2 Template:Reflist
 17.05%  255.634      2 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 15.94%  238.889     36 Template:Cite_web
 14.56%  218.258      1 Template:Cuisine_of_Indonesia
 14.17%  212.453      7 Template:Navbox
  9.42%  141.226      1 Template:Asian_topic
  7.07%  105.928      1 Template:Lang
  6.69%  100.337      1 Template:Indonesia_topics
  6.57%   98.553      1 Template:Country_topics
 
  Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:idhash:406363-0!canonical and timestamp 20230311165322 and revision id 1142278689. Rendering was triggered because: page-view
  
 esi <esi:include src="/esitest-fa8a495983347898/content" />  
 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Indonesian_cuisine&oldid=1142278689 " 
 Categories :  Indonesian cuisine Southeast Asian cuisine Indonesian culture Hidden categories:  Webarchive template wayback links CS1 Indonesian-language sources (id) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata EngvarB from September 2015 Use dmy dates from September 2015 Articles containing Indonesian-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2023 Pages using multiple image with auto scaled images Articles containing Thai-language text Articles with unsourced statements from December 2019 Commons category link is on Wikidata Region topic template using suffix Articles with BNF identifiers Articles with J9U identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers Articles with NDL identifiers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  This page was last edited on 1 March 2023, at 14:39  (UTC) . 
 Text is available under the  Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0 ;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the  Terms of Use  and  Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the  Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. 
 
 
 Privacy policy 
 About Wikipedia 
 Disclaimers 
 Contact Wikipedia 
 Mobile view 
 Developers 
 Statistics 
 Cookie statement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
