
 
 
 Jump to content 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle sidebar 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Create account Log in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Personal tools 
 
 
 
 
   Create account   Log in 
 
 
 
 
		Pages for logged out editors  learn more 
 
 
 Contributions Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Navigation 
 
 
 Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate 
 
 
 
 
 Contribute 
 
 
 Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file 
 
 
 
 
 Tools 
 
 
 What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item 
 
 
 
 
 Print/export 
 
 
 Download as PDF Printable version 
 
 
 
 
 In other projects 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons 
 
 
 
 
 Languages 
 
 On this Wikipedia the language links are at the top of the page across from the article title.  Go to top . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CentralNotice  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Contents 
 move to sidebar 
 hide 
 
 
 
 
 (Top) 
 
 
 
 
 
 1 History 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 Iraqi cuisine/Mesopotamian cuisine 
 
 
				Toggle Iraqi cuisine/Mesopotamian cuisine subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 2.1 Ingredients 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.2 Mêzzä 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.3 Dips 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.4 Soups and stews 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.5 Dumplings and meatballs 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.6 Processed meat 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.7 Rice dishes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.8 Sandwiches and wraps 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.9 Dairy 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.10 Breads and pastries 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.11 Condiments, sauces and spices 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.12 Sweets 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 Beverages 
 
 
				Toggle Beverages subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 3.1 Alcoholic beverages 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.2 Non-alcoholic beverages 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.3 Related cuisines 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4 See also 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5 References 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6 Bibliography 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 7 External links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
						Toggle the table of contents
					 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle the table of contents 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Iraqi cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 23 languages 
 
 
 
 العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Čeština Deutsch Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Jawa ქართული 日本語 پنجابی Português Русский Suomi Türkçe Українська اردو 
 Edit links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Article Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 English 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 More 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
 
 
 Part of  a series  on the Culture of Iraq 
 History 
 People 
 Languages 
 Cuisine 
 Religion 
 Art 
 Literature 
 Music 
 Media 
 Television 
 Cinema 
 
 Sport 
 Monuments 
 World Heritage Sites 
 
 Symbols 
 Flag 
 Coat of arms 
 National anthem 
 
   Iraq portal v t e 
 Culinary traditions of Iraq 
 Iraqi cuisine  ( Arabic : المطبخ العراقي) or  Mesopotamian cuisine [1] [2]  is a  Middle Eastern cuisine  that has its origins from  Sumerians ,  Akkadians ,  Babylonians ,  Assyrians  and the other groups of the region. [3] 
 Tablets  found in ancient ruins in Iraq show recipes prepared in the temples during religious festivals—the first  cookbooks  in the world. [3] [4]   Ancient   Mesopotamia  was home to a sophisticated and highly advanced civilization, in all fields of knowledge, including the  culinary arts . [3] 
 However, it was in the  Islamic Golden Age  when  Baghdad  was the capital of the  Abbasid Caliphate  (750–1258 AD) that the Iraqi kitchen reached its zenith. [3]  Throughout history, the cuisine of Iraq has made extensive contact with the cuisines of its neighbouring regions including  Caucasian cuisine ,  Greek cuisine ,  Kurdish cuisine ,  Persian cuisine ,  Turkish cuisine  along with traditional  Arabic cuisines  among others. Today, the cuisine of Iraq reflects this rich inheritance as well as strong influences from the culinary traditions of neighbouring  Iran ,  Turkey , and the Caucasus region. [3] 
 Mesopotamian cuisine varies across the country. The cooking of Northern Iraq is known for adding  pomegranate  to the  dolma  juice prominently to give it a unique taste. In Southern Iraq, fish is used extensively. While in the middle region, in  Baghdad  and the surrounding cities is known for its variety of rice dishes and sweets.
 Contemporary  Iraq  reflects the same natural division as ancient  Mesopotamia , [5] [6] [7] [8]  which consisted of  Assyria  in the arid northern uplands and  Babylonia  in the  alluvial plain . [8]   Upper Mesopotamia  grows  wheat  and crops requiring winter chill such as  apples  and  stone fruits . [8]   Lower Mesopotamia  grows  rice  and  barley ,  citrus fruits , and is responsible for Iraq's position as one of the world's largest producer of  dates .
 
   Dates ,  apricots ,  figs , and  prunes  are processed to make  dried fruits 
 
 History [ edit ] 
 See also:  History of Mesopotamia  and  History of Iraq 
 Archaeologists have found evidence from excavations at  Jarmo , in northeastern  Iraq , that  pistachio nuts  were a common food as early as 6750 BC. [9]  Among the ancient texts discovered in  Mesopotamia  is a  Sumerian - Akkadian   bilingual dictionary , [10]  recorded in  cuneiform script  on 24 stone tablets about 1900 BC. [10]  It lists terms in the two ancient Iraqi languages for over 800 different items of food and drink. [10]  Included are 20 different kinds of  cheese , over 100 varieties of  soup  and 300 types of  bread , each with different ingredients, filling, shape or size. [10] 
 The world's oldest recipes are found in  Mesopotamia  of modern-day ancient Iraq, written in cuneiform tablets. [11] [4]  One of three excavated  cuneiform   clay tablets  written in 1700 BC in  Babylon , [12] [11]  50 miles south of present-day  Baghdad , contains 24 recipes for stew cooked with meat and vegetables, [12]  enhanced and seasoned with  leeks ,  onion ,  garlic , and spices and herbs like  cassia ,  cumin ,  coriander ,  mint , and  dill . [12]  Stew has remained a mainstay in the cuisine. [12]  Extant  medieval Iraqi recipes  and modern Iraqi cuisine attest to this. [12] 
 
 Iraqi cuisine/Mesopotamian cuisine [ edit ] 
 Ingredients [ edit ] 
   Kleicha  is sometimes considered the national  cookie  of Iraq and is served during religious holidays. 
 Some characteristic ingredients of Iraqi cuisine include:
 
 Vegetables  such as  eggplant ,  tomato ,  turnips ,  beans ,  shallots ,  okra ,  onion ,  lentils ,  cress ,  potato ,  cabbage ,  courgette (zucchini) ,  spinach ,  lettuce ,  leeks ,  artichokes ,  garlic ,  peppers  and  chilli peppers . 
 Cereals  including  rice ,  bulghur wheat  and  barley . 
 Pulses and legumes  such as lentils,  chickpeas ,  green beans ,  green grams , and  cannellini beans . 
 Fruits  including  olives ,  dates ,  raisins ,  apricots ,  plums ,  figs ,  grapes ,  melons ,  pomegranates ,  apples ,  cherries ,  quinces , and  citrus fruits — oranges ,  lemons  and  limes . 
 Cheeses  such as  baladi ,  feta  and  halloumi . 
 Herbs  and  spices  including  cinnamon ,  cardamom ,  coriander ,  fenugreek ,  cumin ,  oregano ,  mint ,  tarragon ,  thyme ,  saffron ,  dried lime ,  cassia ,  dill ,  turmeric ,  baharat ,  advieh ,  sumac  and  za'atar . 
 Nuts  and  seeds  such as  sesame ,  pistachios ,  almonds ,  walnuts ,  hazelnuts  and  pine nuts . 
 Other Iraqi culinary essentials include  olive oil ,  sesame oil ,  tamarind ,  vermicelli ,  tahini ,  honey ,  date syrup ,  yogurt  and  rose water .
 Lamb  is the favorite meat, but  chicken ,  beef ,  goat  and  fish  are also eaten. Most dishes are served with rice—usually  timman anbar , a yellowish, very aromatic, long-grain rice grown in the Middle Euphrates region. [13] 
 Bulghur wheat is used in many dishes, having been a staple in the country since the days of the  ancient Assyrians . [3]   Flatbread  is a staple that is served with a variety of  dips , cheeses, olives, and  jams , at every meal.
 
 Mêzzä [ edit ] 
 Meals begin with appetizers and salads, known as  mezza .   Mezza  is a selection of appetizers or small dishes often served with a beverage, like anise-flavored liqueurs such as  arak ,  ouzo ,  rakı ,  sambuca ,  pastis , or various wines, similar to the  tapas  of Spain, or  finger food .
 Mezza may include:
 
   Samoon , type of Iraqi bread. 
 Iraqi sumac salad, is a typical raqi salad with the addition of sumac berries. [14] 
 Baytinijan maqli , a dish often served cold, consisting of fried aubergine (eggplant) with  tahini , lettuce, parsley and tomatoes, garnished with sumac and served on pita bread or sliced bread, often grilled or toasted. Variations include bell peppers, or a garlic-lemon  vinaigrette . 
 Fattoush , a salad made from several garden vegetables and toasted or fried pieces of pita bread. 
 Tabbouleh , a salad dish, often used as part of a  mezze . Its primary ingredients are finely chopped parsley, bulgur, mint, tomato, scallion, and other herbs with lemon juice, olive oil and various seasonings, generally including black pepper and sometimes cinnamon and allspice. 
 Turshi , pickled vegetables in the cuisine of many Balkan and Middle East countries. It is a traditional appetizer,  mezze  for  rakı ,  ouzo ,  tsipouro  and  rakia . 
 Dips [ edit ] 
 Baba ghanoush , a dish of baked  aubergine  (eggplant) mashed and mixed with various seasonings. 
 Hummus , a dip or spread made from cooked, mashed  chickpeas , blended with  tahini ,  olive oil ,  lemon juice , salt and garlic. 
 Tzatziki , an appetizer, also used as a sauce for  souvlaki  and  gyros . 
   
 Tzatziki  is made of  strained yogurt  (usually  sheep's milk  or  goat's milk  in Greece and Turkey) with cucumbers, garlic, salt, usually olive oil, pepper, dill, sometimes lemon juice and parsley, or mint added. The cucumbers are either puréed and strained, or seeded and finely diced. Olive oil, olives, and herbs are often used as garnishes. 
 Soups and stews [ edit ] 
 Various stews served over rice form a major part of Iraqi cuisine.
 
 Fasolia yabsa  (Iraqi white bean stew), made up of tender lamb or veal, white kidney beans (also called cannellini beans), tomato sauce and served over rice. [15] 
 Fasoulia , a soup of dry white beans, olive oil, and vegetables. 
 Fesenjān , a thick, tart stew made from pomegranate syrup and ground walnuts (see  bazha [16] ), traditionally made with poultry (duck or chicken). 
 Harissa , similar to  keşkek , a porridge made of stewed and boned chicken and coarsely ground soaked wheat. 
 Kebabs , a dish consisting of grilled or broiled meats on a skewer or stick. [17]  The most common  kebabs  include lamb and beef, although others use chicken or fish. 
 Lentil soup , may be vegetarian or include meat, and may use brown, red, yellow or black lentils, with or without the husk. 
 Maqluba , an upside-down rice and aubergine (eggplant) casserole, hence the name which means "upside-down". It is sometimes made with fried cauliflower instead of aubergine and usually includes meat—often braised lamb. [18] 
 Margat bamia  or simply  bamia , a stew made with  okra  and  lamb  or beef cubes in a tomato sauce. [19] 
 Margat baytinijan , an aubergine-based dish of the Balkans and the Middle East. All versions are based primarily on sautéed aubergine (eggplant) and tomato, usually with minced meat. 
   A prepared  masgouf 
   Iraqi  kebab , usually served with  khubz  or  samoon 
 Masgouf , a traditional Mesopotamian dish made with fish from the  Tigris . [17] [20]  It is an open-cut freshwater fish roasted for hours after being marinated with olive oil, salt,  curcuma  and tamarind while keeping the skin on. Traditional garnishes for the  masgouf  include lemon, chopped onions and tomatoes, as well as the clay-oven  flatbreads  common to Iraq and much of the Middle East. 
 Pomegranate soup , called  shorbat rumman  in Iraq. It is made from pomegranate juice and seeds, yellow split peas, ground beef, mint leaves, spices, and other ingredients. [21] 
 Qeema , a minced meat, tomato and chickpea stew, served with rice. Traditionally prepared at the annual  Ashura  commemorations in southern Iraq. The name  qeema  is an ancient  Akkadian  word meaning "finely chopped". [22] 
   Quzi 
 Quzi , stuffed roasted lamb. [17] [20] 
 hikakeh  is a thin crust of slightly browned rice at the bottom of the cooking pot. 
   A plate of  Parda blaw 
 Tashrib , a soup made with either lamb or chicken with or without tomatoes eaten with Iraqi  nan ; the bread is broken into pieces and the soup is poured over in a big bowl. 
   Iraqi dolma 
   Tepsi baytinijan 
 Tepsi baytinijan , an Iraqi casserole. The main ingredient of the dish is aubergine (eggplant), which is sliced and fried before placing in a baking dish, accompanied with chunks of lamb/beef/veal and/or meatballs, plus tomatoes, onions and garlic.    
 Potato slices are placed on top of the mixture, and the dish is baked. Like many other Iraqi dishes it is usually served with rice, along with salad and pickles. 
 Dumplings and meatballs [ edit ] 
 Dolma  ( sarma ), a family of stuffed vegetable dishes. The grape-leaf  dolma  is common. Courgette (zucchini), aubergine (eggplant), tomato and pepper are commonly used as fillings. The stuffing may or may not include meat. [23] 
 Falafel , a fried ball or patty made from spiced chickpeas or fava beans. Originally from Egypt,  falafel  is a form of fast food in the Middle East, where it is also served as a  mezze . 
 Kofta , a family of meatball or meatloaf dishes in Middle Eastern, Indian, and Balkan cuisines. In the simplest form,  koftas  consist of balls of minced or ground meat—usually beef or lamb—mixed with spices or onions.   
 Vegetarian varieties include  lauki kofta , [24]   shahi aloo kofta , [25]  and  malai kofta . [26]   
 Kubba , a dish made of  burghul , chopped meat, and spices. There are many varierities. The best-known variety is a  torpedo -shaped  burghul  shell stuffed with chopped meat and fried. Other varieties are baked, poached, or even served raw. They may be shaped into balls, patties, or flat. [21] 
 
 Samosa , a small fried or baked pasty, which may be either half-moon shaped or triangular. 
 Processed meat [ edit ] 
 Pastırma , a highly seasoned, air-dried cured beef in the cuisines of the former Ottoman countries. 
 Sujuk , a dry, spicy sausage eaten from the Balkans to the Middle East and Central Asia. 
 Rice dishes [ edit ] 
 Long-grain  rice  is a staple in Iraqi cuisine. [17] [20] 
 Iraqi rice cooking is a multistep process intended to produce just-tender, fluffy grains. [13]  A prominent aspect of Iraqi rice cooking is the  hikakeh , a crisp bottom crust. [13]  Before serving, the  hikakeh  is broken into pieces so that everyone is provided with some along with the fluffy rice. [13] 
 
 Dolma  ( sarma ), vine leaves stuffed with a mixture of ground lamb or beef with rice cooked with many fillings in the same pot, with  pomegranate  juice prominently added by North Iraqis to give it a unique taste.   
 The  Assyrians  of Iraq may either call it  dolma  or  yaprekh  which is the  Syriac  term for stuffed grape leaves.    
 Iraqis  usually serve  dolma  without yoghurt. Often chicken or beef ribs are added to the cooking pot, and sometimes served with the  dolma  instead of  masta  or  khalwah . Iraqi  dolma  is usually cooked and served in a tomato-based sauce.  
 Dolma  is very popular in  Iraq . In  Mosul  they include courgettes (zucchini), tomatoes, onions, peppers and grape leaves. They are occasionally smoked. 
 Biryani , several rice-based foods made with spices, rice (usually  basmati ), and meat/vegetable, collectively popular in  Iraq ,  Iran ,  Afghanistan ,  Pakistan ,  Bangladesh ,  India  and among Muslims in  Sri Lanka . 
 Mutabbaq samak  ( Arabic : مطبق سمك), fried fish served over  stocked  rice. [27] [28] 
 Pilaf , similar to that of Iran. 
 Quzi , a rice-based dish served with very slow-cooked lamb and roasted nuts and raisins. 
 Tibeat, a Jewish-Iraqi dish made for  Shabbat , slow-cooked chicken stuffed with rice, tomatoes, dried apricots and raisins, with a strong cardamom flavor. [29] 
 Sandwiches and wraps [ edit ] 
 Shawarma , a Middle-Eastern Arabic-style sandwich-like wrap [17]  usually composed of shaved lamb, goat, chicken, turkey, beef, or a mixture of meats.  Shawarma  is a popular dish and fast-food staple across the Middle East and North Africa. 
 Dairy [ edit ] 
 Baladi  cheese , a soft, white cheese originating from the Middle East, with a mild yet rich flavor. 
 Geimar , a creamy dairy product, similar to clotted cream, made in the Balkans, Turkey, Iran and Central Asia. It is made from  water buffalo's milk  in the East, or  cow's milk  in the West. 
 Jameed , hard dry  labneh  (strained yogurt) made from  sheep's milk . 
 Jibneh Arabieh , a simple cheese found all over the Middle East, particularly popular in the Persian Gulf area, with an open texture and a mild taste similar to  feta , but less salty. 
 Labneh , yogurt which has been strained in a cloth or paper bag or filter, traditionally made of muslin, to remove the whey, giving a consistency between that of yogurt and cheese, while preserving yogurt's distinctive sour taste. [21] 
 Breads and pastries [ edit ] 
   Lahm b'ajeen , garnished with  parsley ,  tomato ,  red onion , and a wedge of  lemon 
 Burek , a type of baked or fried filled  pastry . It is made of a thin flaky dough known as  phyllo  dough (or  yufka  dough), and are filled with salty cheese (often  feta ), minced meat, potatoes or other vegetables. 
 Ka'ak , refer to several different types of baked goods produced throughout the Arab world and the Near East. 
 Kadaif , a very fine vermicelli-like pastry used to make sweet pastries and desserts. 
 Kahy , layers of thin dough  phyllo  usually consumed warm for breakfast by adding creamy  kaymak  and light sugar syrup. This pastry is mostly spread in the Southern region of Iraq. 
 Khubz  Iraqi,  an Arabic flatbread that is part of the local diet in many countries of  Western Asia . 
 Laffa  (an Iraqi  pita  or  naan  bread). 
 Lahmacun , a thin pizza topped with minced meat and herbs. 
 Lavash , a soft, thin  flatbread . 
 Manakish , a  pizza  consisting of dough topped with thyme, cheese, or ground meat. 
 Markook , a type of flatbread common in the countries of the Levant. It is baked on a domed or convex metal griddle, known as  saj . It is usually sizable, about 2 feet, thin, almost transparent. 
 Pita , a family of yeast-leavened round flatbreads baked from wheat flour. 
 Samoon , a flat and round bread. [20] 
 Sfiha , a pizza-like dish traditionally made with ground mutton rather than the more modern addition of lamb or beef in  Brazil . They are open-faced meat pies with no top dough.   
 Sfiha  are much like  dolma , ground lamb, lightly spiced, wrapped in brined grape leaves. 
 Condiments, sauces and spices [ edit ] 
 Amba , a tangy  mango   pickle  condiment from  Pakistan  and  India . Commonly eaten as a side dish and sometimes as a sandwich topping. 
 Baharat , a  spice mixture . Typical ingredients include  allspice ,  black pepper  corns,  cardamom  seeds,  cassia  bark,  cloves ,  coriander  seeds,  cumin  seeds,  nutmeg , dried red  chili peppers  or  paprika . 
 Dibis , a thick, very sweet date syrup. Often mixed with  tahini  to create a dip. 
 Jallab , a type of syrup popular in the Middle East made from dates, grape molasses and rose water. 
 Mahleb , an aromatic spice made from the seeds of the St Lucie Cherry ( Prunus mahaleb ). 
 Rose water  ( Mayy wared ), used in various Middle-Eastern dishes, especially in sweets. 
 Tahini  ( t'heena ), a paste of ground sesame seeds used in cooking. Middle-Eastern  tahini  is made of hulled, lightly roasted seeds. 
 Za'atar , a mixture of herbs and spices used as a condiment. 
 Sweets [ edit ] 
 The earliest known recipe for cake comes from ancient Mesopotamia. Believed to be primarily for consumption at the palace or temple, the cake was made from fat, white cheese, dates and raisins. Another recipe dating to the reign of  Hammurabi  (1792 BCE–1750 BCE) includes similar basic ingredients with the addition of grape syrup,  figs  and apples. [30] 
 The traditional Iraqi  kleicha  cookies are believed to have their roots in Mesopotamian  qullupu —date filled pastries baked in a wood-fired oven called  tannour . In modern times, other types of cookies ( biskit ) and cakes ( ka'ak ) are made at home, usually flavored with  cardamom  or rose water. Some variations include the disc-shaped  khfefiyyat , half-moon shaped  kleichat joz  made with nuts, and date-filled  kleichat tamur . [30] 
 
   "White baklava",  osh el bulbul  (bird's nests) and other traditional sweets in Iraq 
 Cookbooks dating to the  Abbasid Caliphate  between the 10th and 13th centuries include recipes for hundreds of desserts. The tradition continues into the modern day, but the rich, syrupy desserts like  baklava  are usually prepared for special occasions or religious celebrations, as most daily meals are usually followed by a simple course of seasonal fruit, especially dates, figs, cantaloupes, nectarines, apricots, pomegranates, peaches, mulberries, grapes or watermelons. [30] 
 Though not as recognizable as  baklava , the fried pastry called  lauzeenaj , flavored with  mastic  and  rose water , was a specialty in imperial Baghdad.
 Rosette-shaped  fritters  called  zalabia  are a local specialty, believed to take their name from  Ziryab , a well-known Iraqi musician in the  Caliphate of Cordoba .
 Baklava  and  zalabia  are typical offerings during the  Eid al-Fitr  celebrations that follow  Ramadan .  Halqoum  (commonly known as  Turkish delight ) are traditionally given as gifts during the holiday. [30] 
 Others include:
 
 Halva , popular in the Balkans, Poland, Middle East, and other areas surrounding the Mediterranean Sea. The primary ingredients in this confection are sesame butter or paste ( tahini ), and sugar, glucose or honey. 
 Kanafeh , a pastry made with layers of semolina, white cheese and a sugary syrup sprinkled with rose water. 
 Luzina , a candy similar to Turkish  lukum , made from ground fruits. 
 Mann al-sama , an Iranian nougat that originated in  Isfahan . 
 Qatayef , an Arab dessert reserved for the Muslim holiday of Ramadan, a sort of sweet  crêpe  filled with cheese or nuts. It was traditionally prepared by street vendors as well as households in the Levant and more recently has spread to Egypt. 
 Beverages [ edit ] 
   Iraqi tea served at Al-Shabandar Cafe, Baghdad 
 Alcoholic beverages [ edit ] 
 Alcoholic beverages in Iraq are widely available everywhere with certain exceptions in  Karbala  and  Najaf  for religious reasons. [ citation needed ]  Iraqis are great consumers of all kinds of alcohol except for those who follow the religious code. [ citation needed ] 
 
 Arak , a clear, colourless, unsweetened  anise -flavoured  distilled   alcoholic drink .  Arak  is usually not consumed straight, but is mixed in approximately ⅓︎  arak  to ⅔︎ water, and ice is then added. [31] [32] 
 Beer , a drink that originated in ancient Assyria and Babylon over 6,000 years ago. 
 Cusa Masqool, an alcoholic drink which is made from fermented goats milk. It's mostly only found in the Kurdistan region and dates back to antiquity. 
 Non-alcoholic beverages [ edit ] 
 Coffee , a drink that has a strong and bitter taste, a popular beverage in Iraq. 
 Sharbat , a chilled, sweet drink prepared from fruit juice or flower petals. 
 Shinēna , a cold beverage of  yogurt  mixed with cold water, sometimes with a pinch of salt or dried mint added. 
 Tea , also known as  chai , is widely consumed throughout the day, especially in the mornings, after meals, and during social settings. It is prepared in a special way involving boiling tea in hot water, then placing it over a second tea pot with boiling water to let the tea infuse.   
 
 
 Related cuisines [ edit ] 
 
 Kurdish cuisine 
 Armenian cuisine 
 Assyrian cuisine 
 Azerbaijani cuisine 
 Caucasian cuisine 
 Central Asian cuisine 
 Iranian cuisine 
 Levantine cuisine 
 Mediterranean cuisine 
 Middle Eastern cuisine 
 Turkish cuisine 
 
 
 
 See also [ edit ] 
 
 Culture of Iraq 
 Mesopotamia 
 Masgouf 
 Chelfray 
 Kleicha 
 Lokma 
 Samoon 
 Quzi 
 Tandoor bread 
 Ibn Sayyar al-Warraq 
 
 References [ edit ] 
 
 
 ^   "Tasty Ancient Recipes from Mesopotamia – History et cetera" . Retrieved  2021-12-27 . 
 
 ^   "Iraqi Cuisine" .  worldfood.guide . Retrieved  2021-12-27 . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   e   f   http://www.thingsasian.com/stories-photos/3592  Foods of Iraq: Enshrined With A Long History. Habeeb Salloum. 
 
 ^  a   b   "Inspired by the oldest clay tablet 'cookbook' in the world (1700 BC) | Foodpairing / blog" .  Foodpairing . 2015-09-15 . Retrieved  2020-05-29 . 
 
 ^   "Tasty Ancient Recipes from Mesopotamia – History et cetera" . 
 
 ^   "The Ancient Mesopotamian Tablet as Cookbook | Roundtable" .  Lapham’s Quarterly . 
 
 ^   "Iraqi Cuisine" .  worldfood.guide . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   Davidson, Alan ;  Jaine, Tom  (2006).  The Oxford Companion to Food .  Oxford University Press . p. 405.  ISBN   978-0-19-280681-9 . 
 
 ^   "History and Agriculture of the Pistachio Nut" . IRECO. Archived from  the original  on 13 July 2006 . Retrieved  27 February  2012 . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   Lawton, John.  "Mesopotamian Menus" .  Saudi Aramco World , March/April 1988 .  Saudi Aramco . Retrieved  30 March  2012 . 
 
 ^  a   b   Winchester, Ashley.  "The world's oldest-known recipes decoded" .  www.bbc.com . Retrieved  2020-05-29 . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   e   Albala, Ken (2011).  Food Cultures of the World Encyclopedia .  ABC-CLIO . pp. 251–252.  ISBN   978-0-313-37627-6 . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   Marks, Gil  (2010).  Encyclopedia of Jewish Food .  John Wiley & Sons . p. 585.  ISBN   978-0-470-39130-3 . 
 
 ^   "Iraqi Sumac Salad (Summaq salad)" .  International Cuisine . 14 January 2016. 
 
 ^   "Fasolia Yabsa (Iraqi White Bean Stew)" . 22 September 2020. 
 
 ^   Wikipedia  https://www.kosher.com/recipe/bazha-georgian-walnut-sauce-2695 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   e   ʻAlī Akbar Mahdī, (2003) p.40 -41 
 
 ^   Jacob (2007) p.4 
 
 ^   Fair, (2008) p.72 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   Taus-Bolstad, Stacy (2003)  Iraq in Pictures , Twenty-First Century Books, p.55,
 ISBN   0-8225-0934-2 
 
 ^  a   b   c   Jacob (2007) p.2 
 
 ^   Nasrallah, Nawal (2003).  Delights from the Garden of Eden: A Cookbook and a History of the Iraqi Cuisine .  1stBooks . p. 221.  ISBN   978-1-4033-4793-0 . 
 
 ^   Fair, (2008), p.71 
 
 ^   "Lauki Kofta Curry Recipe / Dudhi Kofta Curry / Bottle Gourd Kofta" . 27 February 2019. 
 
 ^   "Shahi Aloo kofta curry Recipe" . 6 March 2020. 
 
 ^   "Malai kofta recipe | How to make malai kofta curry | Paneer kofta" . 27 August 2017. 
 
 ^   Albala, Ken (2011-05-25).  Food Cultures of the World Encyclopedia [4 volumes]: [Four Volumes] . ABC-CLIO.  ISBN   978-0-313-37627-6 . 
 
 ^   Nasrallah, Nawal (2013).  Delights from the Garden of Eden: A Cookbook and History of the Iraqi Cuisine . Equinox Pub.  ISBN   978-1-84553-457-8 . 
 
 ^   "Chicken and rice (Tibeat)" . 15 November 2011. 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   Roufs, Timothy G.; Roufs, Kathleen Smyth.  Sweet Treats Around the World . pp. 179–183. 
 
 ^   "IRAQ: Happy hour" . January 30, 2008. 
 
 ^   Zeed, Adnan Abu (October 12, 2018).  "Arak distillery promotes ambitious new brand in defiance of alcohol ban" .  Al-Monitor . 
 
 
 Bibliography [ edit ] 
 ʻAlī Akbar Mahdī, (2003)  Teen life in the Middle East , Greenwood Publishing Group, p. 40 -41  ISBN   0-313-31893-X 
 Jacob, Jeanne; Ashkenazi, Michael. (2007)  The World Cookbook for Students , Greenwood Publishing Group p. 1 - 5  ISBN   0-313-33455-2 
 Nasrallah, Nawal (2003)  Delights from the Garden of Eden: A Cookbook and a History of the Iraqi Cuisine , 1stBooks,  ISBN   1-4033-4793-X 
 External links [ edit ] 
 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons has media related to  Cuisine of Iraq . 
 
 
 
 
 Wikibooks  Cookbook  has a recipe/module on
 
  Iraqi cuisine 
 
 
 Iraqi Food and Cuisine   Archived  2016-03-08 at the  Wayback Machine 
 Delights from the Garden of Eden - A Cookbook and History of Iraqi Cuisine 
 Ancient Mesopotamian cuisine 
 v t e   Iraq  topics History Chronology 
 Ubaid period 
 Hassuna culture 
 Halaf culture 
 Halaf-Ubaid Transitional period 
 Samarra culture 
 Uruk period 
 Jemdet Nasr period 
 Sumer 
 Subartu 
 Akkadian Empire 
 Gutian dynasty 
 Neo-Sumerian Empire 
 Isin-Larsa period 
 First Babylonian Empire 
 Old Assyrian Period 
 Middle Assyrian Empire 
 Kassite dynasty of the Babylonian Empire 
 Simurrum culture 
 Babylonia 
 Assyria 
 Neo-Assyrian Empire 
 Neo-Babylonian Empire 
 Fall of Babylon 
 Achaemenid Assyria 
 Seleucid Babylonia 
 Parthian Babylonia 
 Sassanid Asorestan 
 638–1958 
 Muslim conquest of Mesopotamia 
 Umayyad Caliphate 
 Abbasid Caliphate 
 Buyid dynasty 
 Qara Qoyunlu 
 Aq Qoyunlu 
 Safavids 
 Ottoman Iraq  (incl.  Mamluk dynasty ) 
 Mandate for Mesopotamia 
 Mandatory Iraq 
 Kingdom of Iraq 
 Kings 
 Arab Federation 
 Republic 
 1958–1968 
 1968–2003 
 2003–2011 
 2011– present 
 Arab Socialist Ba'ath Party – Iraq Region  ( National Command ) 
 Saddam Hussein 
 Iraqi–Kurdish conflict 
 1974–1975 Shatt al-Arab clashes 
 1977 Shia uprising in Iraq 
 1979–1980 Shia uprising in Iraq 
 Weapons of mass destruction 
 Iran–Iraq War 
 Operation Opera 
 Invasion of Kuwait 
 Gulf War 
 1991 uprisings 
 Sanctions 
 Iraq War 
 U.S. invasion 
 Iraqi insurgency 
 U.S. troop withdrawal 
 Insurgency (2011–2013) 
 War (2014–2017) 
 Mosul liberation 
 Insurgency 
 2019–2021 protests 
 2021–2022 Iraqi political crisis 
 Geography 
 Faw peninsula 
 Upper Mesopotamia 
 Lower Mesopotamia 
 Borders 
 Euphrates river 
 Hamrin Mountains 
 Lakes 
 Islands 
 Mesopotamia 
 Mesopotamian Marshes 
 Persian Gulf 
 Places 
 Shatt al-Arab 
 Syrian Desert 
 Tigris river 
 Umm Qasr 
 Zagros Mountains 
 Wildlife 
 Sinjar Mountains 
 Politics 
 Administrative divisions 
 Constitution 
 Council of Representatives  (legislative) 
 Democracy 
 Elections 
 Foreign aid 
 Foreign relations 
 Government 
 Council of Ministers 
 Presidency Council 
 President 
 List 
 Prime Minister 
 List 
 Human rights 
 in pre-Saddam Iraq 
 in Saddam Hussein's Iraq 
 in post-invasion Iraq 
 in ISIL-controlled territory 
 LGBT 
 Freedom of religion 
 Women 
 Law 
 Military 
 Police 
 Political parties 
 Judiciary 
 Wars and conflicts 
 Economy 
 Banks 
 Central Bank 
 Companies 
 Corruption 
 Dinar  (currency) 
 Infrastructure 
 Foregin Investment 
 Oil Industry 
 Oil reserves 
 Reconstruction 
 Stock Exchange 
 Telecommunications 
 Transportation 
 Airlines 
 Railways 
 Tourism 
 Society Demographics 
 Iraqis 
 Languages 
 Mesopotamian Arabic 
 Aramaic 
 Kurdish 
 Iraqi Turkmen/Turkoman dialects 
 Persian 
 Minorities 
 Armenians 
 Assyrians 
 Circassians 
 Kurds 
 Mandaeans 
 Marsh Arabs 
 Persians 
 Solluba 
 Iraqi Turkmen /Turkoman 
 Jews 
 Religion 
 Islam 
 Christianity 
 Mandaeism 
 Yazidis 
 Irreligion 
 General 
 Art 
 Cinema 
 Cuisine 
 Culture 
 Literature 
 Education 
 Health 
 Media 
 Television 
 Music 
 Smoking 
 Sports 
 Squatting 
 Public holidays 
 Mesopotamian spring festival (Akitu) 
 Mandaean New Year 
 
   Category 
   Portal 
   WikiProject 
   Commons 
 
 v t e Asian cuisine Sovereign states 
 Afghanistan 
 Armenia 
 Azerbaijan 
 Bahrain 
 Bangladesh 
 Bhutan 
 Brunei 
 Burma (Myanmar) 
 Cambodia 
 China 
 Cyprus 
 East Timor (Timor-Leste) 
 Egypt 
 Georgia 
 India 
 Indonesia 
 Iran 
 Iraq 
 Israel 
 Japan 
 Jordan 
 Kazakhstan 
 North Korea 
 South Korea 
 Kuwait 
 Kyrgyzstan 
 Laos 
 Lebanon 
 Malaysia 
 Maldives 
 Mongolia 
 Nepal 
 Oman 
 Pakistan 
 Philippines 
 Qatar 
 Russia 
 Saudi Arabia 
 Singapore 
 Sri Lanka 
 Syria 
 Tajikistan 
 Thailand 
 Turkey 
 Turkmenistan 
 United Arab Emirates 
 Uzbekistan 
 Vietnam 
 Yemen 
 States with limited recognition 
 Abkhazia 
 Artsakh 
 Northern Cyprus 
 Palestine 
 South Ossetia 
 Taiwan 
 Dependencies and other territories 
 British Indian Ocean Territory 
 Christmas Island 
 Cocos (Keeling) Islands 
 Hong Kong 
 Macau 
 
 v t e Middle Eastern cuisine Arab 
 Bahraini 
 Egyptian 
 Iraqi 
 Jordanian 
 Kuwaiti 
 Lebanese 
 Omani 
 Palestinian 
 Qatar 
 Saudi Arabian 
 Syrian 
 United Arab Emirates 
 Yemeni 
 Non-Arab 
 Cypriot 
 Iranian 
 Israeli 
 Turkish 
 Ethnic and religious 
 Assyrian 
 Azerbaijani 
 Baloch 
 Caspian cuisine 
 Jewish 
 Kurdish 
 Levantine 
 Related cuisines 
 Afghanistan 
 Armenian 
 Balkan 
 Caucasian 
 Circassian 
 Georgian 
 Greek 
 Indian 
 Pakistani 
 Pashtun 
 
 v t e Cuisines Continental 
 African 
 North 
 West 
 list 
 Americas 
 Caribbean 
 North 
 South 
 list 
 Asian 
 Caucasian 
 Central 
 Indian subcontinent 
 Levantine 
 list 
 European 
 Balkan 
 Central 
 Eastern 
 list 
 Oceanic 
 Intercontinental
 Global 
 Latin American 
 Mediterranean 
 Middle Eastern 
 National  and regional 
 Afghan 
 Albanian 
 Algerian 
 American 
 Californian 
 Floribbean 
 Hawaiian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Lowcountry (South Carolina) 
 New England 
 New Mexico 
 Pacific Northwest 
 Pennsylvania Dutch 
 Puerto Rican 
 Southern US 
 Southwest US 
 Texas 
 Angolan 
 Argentine 
 Armenian 
 Australian 
 Austrian 
 Azerbaijani 
 Bahraini 
 Bangladeshi 
 Barbadian 
 Belarusian 
 Belgian 
 Belizean 
 Beninese 
 Bhutanese 
 Bolivian 
 Bosnian-Herzegovinian 
 Botswana 
 Brazilian 
 British 
 Channel Islands 
 English 
 Gibraltarian 
 Northern Irish 
 Saint Helena 
 Scottish 
 Welsh 
 Bruneian 
 Bulgarian 
 Burkinabé 
 Burmese 
 Burundian 
 Cambodian 
 Cameroonian 
 Canadian 
 Acadian 
 Québécois 
 Central African Republic 
 Chadian 
 Chilean 
 Chinese 
 Cantonese 
 Hong Kong 
 Macanese 
 Tibetan 
 Xinjiang 
 Colombian 
 Congolese 
 Corsican 
 Croatian 
 Cuban 
 Cypriot 
 Czech 
 Danish 
 Faroese 
 Greenlandic 
 Djiboutian 
 Dominican 
 Dominican Republic 
 Dutch 
 East Timorese 
 Ecuadorian 
 Egyptian 
 Emirati 
 Equatorial Guinean 
 Eritrean 
 Estonian 
 Ethiopian 
 Fijian 
 Filipino 
 Finnish 
 French 
 Occitan 
 French Guianan 
 Gabonese 
 Gambian 
 Georgian 
 German 
 Ghanaian 
 Greek 
 Cretan 
 Epirotic 
 Greek Macedonian 
 Heptanesean 
 Guatemalan 
 Guinea-Bissauan 
 Guinean 
 Haitian 
 Honduran 
 Hungarian 
 Icelandic 
 Indian 
 Arunachalese 
 Assamese 
 Bengali 
 Bihari 
 Goan 
 Gujarati 
 Himachal Pradesh 
 Kashmiri 
 Jharkhandi 
 Karnataka 
 Kerala 
 Maharashtrian 
 Manipuri 
 Meghalayan 
 Mizo 
 Naga 
 Odia 
 Punjabi 
 Rajasthani 
 Sikkimese 
 Sindhi 
 Tamil 
 Telangana 
 Telugu 
 Indonesian 
 Acehnese 
 Balinese 
 Banjar 
 Batak 
 Betawi 
 Indo 
 Javanese 
 Madurese 
 Makassar 
 Minahasan 
 Minangkabau 
 Palembangese 
 Sundanese 
 Iranian 
 Iraqi 
 Irish 
 Israeli 
 Italian 
 Abruzzese 
 Ligurian 
 Lombard 
 Lucanian 
 Neapolitan 
 Roman 
 Sardinian 
 Sicilian 
 Venetian 
 Ivorian 
 Jamaican 
 Japanese 
 Okinawan 
 Jordanian 
 Kazakh 
 Kenyan 
 Korean 
 North Korean 
 South Korean 
 Kosovan 
 Kuwaiti 
 Kyrgyz 
 Lao 
 Latvian 
 Lebanese 
 Lesotho 
 Liberian 
 Libyan 
 Liechtensteiner 
 Lithuanian 
 Luxembourg 
 Macedonian 
 Malagasy 
 Malawian 
 Malaysian 
 Sabahan 
 Sarawakian 
 Maldivian 
 Malian 
 Maltese 
 Mauritanian 
 Mauritian 
 Mexican 
 Moldovan 
 Monégasque 
 Mongolian 
 Montenegrin 
 Moroccan 
 Mozambican 
 Namibian 
 Nauruan 
 Nepalese 
 New Zealand 
 Nicaraguan 
 Niger 
 Nigerian 
 Niuean 
 Norwegian 
 Omani 
 Pakistani 
 Palestinian 
 Panamanian 
 Peruvian 
 Polish 
 Portuguese 
 Qatari 
 Romanian  (incl.  Transylvanian Saxon ) 
 Russian 
 Bashkir 
 Chechen 
 Circassian 
 Komi 
 Mordovian 
 Sakha 
 Tatar 
 Udmurt 
 Yamal 
 Rwandan 
 Saint Lucian 
 Salvadoran 
 Sammarinese 
 São Tomé and Príncipe 
 Saudi Arabian 
 Senegalese 
 Serbian 
 Seychellois 
 Sierra Leonean 
 Singaporean 
 Slovak 
 Slovenian 
 Somali 
 South African 
 Spanish 
 Andalusian 
 Asturian 
 Balearic 
 Basque 
 Canarian 
 Cantabrian 
 Catalan 
 Extremaduran 
 Galician 
 Manchegan 
 Valencian 
 Sri Lankan 
 Sudanese 
 Swazi 
 Swedish 
 Swiss 
 Syrian 
 Taiwanese 
 Tajik 
 Tanzanian 
 Zanzibari 
 Thai 
 Togolese 
 Tunisian 
 Turkish 
 Turkmen 
 Trinidadian and Tobagonian 
 Ugandan 
 Ukrainian 
 Uruguayan 
 Uzbek 
 Venezuelan 
 Vietnamese 
 Western Saharan 
 Yemeni 
 Zambian 
 Zimbabwean 
 Ethnic 
 Ainu 
 Arab 
 Indonesian 
 Aromanian 
 Assyrian 
 Balochi 
 Berber 
 Cajun 
 Chinese 
 American 
 Canadian 
 Chifa 
 Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Crimean Tatar 
 Greek American 
 Hazaragi 
 Indian 
 Anglo-Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Indigenous American 
 Inuit 
 Italian American 
 Kurdish 
 Livonian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Malay 
 Ossetian 
 Parsi 
 Pashtun 
 Peranakan 
 Romani 
 Sámi 
 Soul food 
 Sylheti 
 Transylvanian Saxon 
 Yup'ik 
 Religious 
 Buddhist 
 Christian 
 Goan Catholic 
 Mangalorean Catholic 
 Mennonite 
 Hindu 
 Islamic 
 Chinese 
 Ital 
 Jain 
 Jewish 
 American 
 Ashkenazi 
 Bukharan 
 Ethiopian 
 Mizrahi 
 Sephardic 
 Syrian 
 Ritual slaughter 
 Sikh 
 Historical 
 Ancient Egyptian 
 Ancient Greek 
 Ancient Israelite 
 Ancient Roman 
 Antebellum America 
 Aztec 
 Byzantine 
 Early modern European 
 Historical Chinese 
 Historical Indian subcontinent 
 Historical North Indian and Pakistani 
 History of agriculture 
 History of alcoholic drinks 
 History of bread 
 History of seafood 
 History of vegetarianism 
 Historical Argentine 
 Historical Japanese 
 Inca 
 Mayan 
 Muisca 
 Mughal 
 Medieval 
 Ottoman 
 Peasant 
 Soviet 
 Thirteen Colonies 
 Styles 
 Classique 
 Fast food 
 Fusion 
 New American 
 Eurasian 
 Haute 
 Molecular gastronomy 
 Note by Note 
 Nouvelle 
 Lists 
 List of cuisines 
 List of historical cuisines 
 Lists of prepared foods 
 Related 
 Cookbook 
 Cooking 
 Culinary arts 
 Drink 
 Food 
 history 
 Diet 
 Meal preparation 
 
   Food portal 
   Drink portal 
   Category 
   Commons 
   Cookbook 
   WikiProject 
   Outline 
 
 Portal :   Food 
 Authority control : National libraries  
 Israel 
 United States 
 
  
NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw2311
Cached time: 20230311165358
Cache expiry: 1814400
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc, no‐toc‐conversion]
CPU time usage: 1.116 seconds
Real time usage: 1.352 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 21169/1000000
Post‐expand include size: 202841/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 9551/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 16/100
Expensive parser function count: 35/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 127467/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.467/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 9235243/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/400
 
 
Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  955.618      1 -total
 24.54%  234.520      1 Template:Reflist
 21.06%  201.230      5 Template:Navbox
 18.07%  172.712      1 Template:Asian_topic
 17.07%  163.089      1 Template:Culture_of_Iraq
 16.87%  161.194      1 Template:Culture_of_region
 16.55%  158.143      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 14.45%  138.051     16 Template:Cite_web
 11.54%  110.305     52 Template:Iso2country
  7.51%   71.767      1 Template:Iraq_topics
 
  Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:idhash:2322115-0!canonical and timestamp 20230311165357 and revision id 1143143586. Rendering was triggered because: page-view
  
 esi <esi:include src="/esitest-fa8a495983347898/content" />  
 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Iraqi_cuisine&oldid=1143143586 " 
 Categories :  Iraqi cuisine Arab cuisine Levantine cuisine Middle Eastern cuisine Hidden categories:  Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2021 Commons category link is on Wikidata Webarchive template wayback links Region topic template using suffix Articles with J9U identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  This page was last edited on 6 March 2023, at 04:16  (UTC) . 
 Text is available under the  Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0 ;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the  Terms of Use  and  Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the  Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. 
 
 
 Privacy policy 
 About Wikipedia 
 Disclaimers 
 Contact Wikipedia 
 Mobile view 
 Developers 
 Statistics 
 Cookie statement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
