
 
 
 Jump to content 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle sidebar 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Create account Log in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Personal tools 
 
 
 
 
   Create account   Log in 
 
 
 
 
		Pages for logged out editors  learn more 
 
 
 Contributions Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Navigation 
 
 
 Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate 
 
 
 
 
 Contribute 
 
 
 Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file 
 
 
 
 
 Tools 
 
 
 What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item 
 
 
 
 
 Print/export 
 
 
 Download as PDF Printable version 
 
 
 
 
 In other projects 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons 
 
 
 
 
 Languages 
 
 On this Wikipedia the language links are at the top of the page across from the article title.  Go to top . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CentralNotice  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Contents 
 move to sidebar 
 hide 
 
 
 
 
 (Top) 
 
 
 
 
 
 1 History 
 
 
				Toggle History subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 1.1 Origins 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.2 Old Yishuv 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.3 Jewish immigration 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.4 Early years of the State 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.5 Impact of immigration 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.6 Modern trends 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 Characteristics 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 Foods 
 
 
				Toggle Foods subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 3.1 Salads and appetizers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.2 Soups and dumplings 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.3 Grains and pasta 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.4 Fish 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.5 Poultry and meat 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.6 Dairy products 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.7 Egg dishes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.8 Fruit 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.9 Baked dishes, cookies, pastries,  rugelach 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.10 Breads and sandwiches 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.11 Confections, sweets and snack foods 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.12 Sauces, spices and condiments 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.13 Drinks 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.14 Wine 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.15 Non-kosher foods 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4 Eating out 
 
 
				Toggle Eating out subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 4.1 Street foods 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.2 Places to eat 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5 Holiday cuisine 
 
 
				Toggle Holiday cuisine subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 5.1 Sabbath 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5.2 Rosh Hashanah 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5.3 Hanukkah 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5.4 Tu BiShvat 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5.5 Purim 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5.6 Passover 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5.7 Shavuot 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6 See also 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 7 References 
 
 
				Toggle References subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 7.1 Bibliography 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8 External links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
						Toggle the table of contents
					 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle the table of contents 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Israeli cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 27 languages 
 
 
 
 العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Català Čeština الدارجة Deutsch Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Jawa ქართული Lietuvių Polski Português Русский Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 
 Edit links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Article Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 English 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Read View source View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 More 
 
 
 
 Read View source View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
 
 
 Culinary traditions of Israel 
 
 
 This article  needs additional citations for  verification .  Please help  improve this article  by  adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources:   "Israeli cuisine"  –  news   ·   newspapers   ·   books   ·   scholar   ·   JSTOR   ( February 2023 )  ( Learn how and when to remove this template message ) 
   Israeli breakfast 
 Israeli cuisine  ( Hebrew :  המטבח הישראלי   ha-mitbaḥ ha-yisra’eli ) comprises both local dishes and dishes brought to  Israel  by Jews from the  Diaspora . Since before the establishment of the  State of Israel  in 1948, and particularly since the late 1970s, an Israeli  Jewish   fusion cuisine  has developed. [1] 
 Israeli cuisine has adopted, and continues to adapt, elements of various styles of  Arab cuisine [2]  and diaspora  Jewish cuisine , particularly the  Mizrahi ,  Sephardic  and  Ashkenazi  styles of cooking. [1]  It incorporates many foods traditionally included in other  Middle Eastern  and  Mediterranean cuisines , so that spices like  za'atar  and foods such as  falafel ,  hummus ,  msabbha ,  shakshouka  and  couscous  are now widely popular in Israel. [3] [4] 
 Other influences on the cuisine are the availability of foods common to the Mediterranean region, especially certain kinds of fruits and vegetables, dairy products and fish; the tradition of keeping  kosher ; and food  customs  and traditions specific to  Shabbat  and different  Jewish holidays , such as  challah ,  jachnun ,  malawach ,  gefilte fish ,  hamin ,  me'orav yerushalmi  and  sufganiyot .
 New dishes based on agricultural products such as  oranges ,  avocados , dairy products and fish, and others based on world trends have been introduced over the years, and chefs trained abroad have brought in elements of other  international cuisines . [5] 
 
 
 History 
 Origins 
 See also:  Ancient Israelite cuisine 
   Seven species 
 Israel's culinary traditions comprise foods and cooking methods that span 3000 years of history. Over that time, these traditions have been shaped by influences from Asia, Africa and Europe, and religious and ethnic influences have resulted in a culinary melting pot. Biblical and archaeological records provide insight into the culinary life of the region as far back as 1000 years BCE. [6] 
 Ancient Israelite cuisine  was based on several products that still play important roles in modern Israeli cuisine. These were known as the  seven species : olives, figs, dates, pomegranates, wheat, barley and grapes. [7]  The diet, based on locally grown produce, was enhanced by imported spices, readily available due to the country's position at the crossroads of east–west trade routes. [6] 
 During the  Second Temple period  (516 BCE–70 CE),  Hellenistic  and  Roman  culture heavily influenced cuisine, particularly of the  priests  and aristocracy of  Jerusalem . Elaborate meals were served that included piquant entrées and alcoholic drinks, fish, beef, meat, pickled and fresh vegetables, olives, and tart or sweet fruits. [6] 
 After the  destruction of the Second Temple  and the  exile  of the majority of Jews from the Land of Israel, Jewish cuisine continued to develop in the many countries where Jewish communities have existed since  Late Antiquity , influenced by the economics, agriculture, and culinary traditions of those countries. [ citation needed ] 
 
 Old Yishuv 
 Main article:  Old Yishuv § Food 
 The  Old Yishuv  was the Jewish community that lived in  Ottoman Syria  prior to the  Zionist   Aliyah  from the  diaspora  that began in 1881. The cooking style of the community was  Sephardi cuisine , which developed among the  Jews of Spain  before their  expulsion in 1492 , and in the areas to which they migrated thereafter, particularly the  Balkans  and  Ottoman Empire . Sephardim and Ashkenazim also established communities in the Old Yishuv. Particularly in Jerusalem, they continued to develop their culinary style, influenced by  Ottoman cuisine , creating a style that became known as Jerusalem Sephardi cuisine. [8]  This cuisine included pies like  sambousak ,  pastels  and  burekas , vegetable  gratins  and stuffed vegetables, and rice and  bulgur   pilafs , which are now considered to be Jerusalem classics. [5] 
 Groups of  Hasidic Jews  from  Eastern Europe  also began establishing communities in the late 18th century, and brought with them their traditional  Ashkenazi cuisine , developing, however, distinct local variations, notably a peppery, caramelized noodle pudding known as  kugel yerushalmi . [9] 
 
 Jewish immigration 
   Cooking class at a girls' school in  Jerusalem , c.1936 
 Beginning with the  First Aliyah  in 1881, Jews began immigrating to the area from  Yemen  and Eastern Europe in larger numbers, particularly from Poland and Russia. These  Zionist  pioneers were motivated both ideologically and by the Mediterranean climate to reject the Ashkenazi cooking styles they grew up with, and adapt by using local produce, especially vegetables such as  zucchini ,  peppers ,  eggplant ,  artichoke  and  chickpeas . [5]  The first  Hebrew cookbook , written by Erna Meyer, and published in the early 1930s by the Palestine Federation of the  Women's International Zionist Organization , exhorted cooks to use Mediterranean herbs and Middle-Eastern spices and local vegetables in their cooking. [8]  The bread, olives, cheese and raw vegetables they adopted became the basis for the  kibbutz  breakfast, which in more abundant forms is served in Israeli hotels, and in various forms in most Israeli homes today. [5] [8] 
 
 Early years of the State 
   Tel Aviv  residents standing in line to buy food rations, 1954 
 The State of Israel faced enormous military and economic challenges in its early years, and the period from 1948 to 1958 was a time of food rationing and  austerity , known as  tzena . In this decade, over one million Jewish immigrants, mainly from Arab countries, but also including European  Holocaust  survivors, inundated the new state. They arrived when only basic foods were available and ethnic dishes had to be modified with a range of mock or simulated foods, such as chopped "liver" from eggplant, and turkey as a substitute for veal  schnitzel  for Ashkenazim,  kubbeh  made from frozen fish instead of  ground meat  for  Iraqi Jews , and turkey in place of the lamb  kebabs  of the  Mizrahi Jews . These adaptations remain a legacy of that time. [5] [8] 
 Substitutes, such as the wheat-based rice substitute,  ptitim , were introduced, and versatile vegetables such as eggplant were used as alternatives to meat. Additional flavor and nutrition were provided from inexpensive canned tomato paste and puree,  hummus ,  tahina , and mayonnaise in tubes. Meat was scarce, and it was not until the late 1950s that herds of beef cattle were introduced into the agricultural economy. [10] 
 Khubeza , a local variety of the  mallow  plant, became an important food source during the War of Independence. During the  siege of Jerusalem , when convoys of food could not reach the city, Jerusalemites went out to the fields to pick  khubeza  leaves, which are high in iron and vitamins. [11]  Instructions for cooking it broadcast by Jerusalem-based radio station Kol Hamagen, were picked up in Jordan, which convinced the Arabs that the Jews were dying of starvation and victory was at hand. [12]  In the past decade, food writers in Israel have encouraged the population to prepare  khubeza  on  Israel Independence Day . [13]  Local chefs have begun to serve  khubeza  and other wild plants gathered from the fields in upscale restaurants. [14]  The dish from the Independence war is called  ktzitzot khubeza  and is still eaten by Israelis today. [ citation needed ] 
 
 Impact of immigration 
   Halva  stand,  Mahane Yehuda market 
 Immigrants to Israel have introduced elements of the cuisines of the cultures and countries from whence they came. [1]  In the nearly 50 years before 1948, there were successive waves of  Jewish immigration , which brought a whole range of foods and cooking styles. Immigrants arriving from central Europe brought foods such as  schnitzel  and  strudels , while Russian Jews brought  borscht  and herring dishes, such as  schmaltz herring  and  vorschmack  ( gehakte herring ). [5] 
 Ashkenazi dishes include  chicken soup ,  schnitzel ,  lox ,  chopped liver ,  gefilte fish ,  knishes ,  kishka  and  kugel . The first Israeli  patisseries  were opened by  Ashkenazi Jews , who popularized cakes and pastries from central and Eastern Europe, such as yeast cakes ( babka ), nut spirals ( schnecken ), chocolate rolls and layered pastries. After 1948, the greatest impact came from the large migration of Jews from Turkey, Iraq, Kurdistan and Yemen, and  Mizrahi Jews  from North Africa, particularly Morocco. Typically, the staff of army kitchens, schools, hospitals, hotels and restaurant kitchens has consisted of Mizrahi,  Kurdish  and  Yemenite Jews , and this has had an influence on the cooking fashions and ingredients of the country. [5] 
 Mizrahi cuisine, the cuisine of Jews from North Africa, features grilled meats, sweet and savory puff pastries, rice dishes, stuffed vegetables, pita breads and salads, and shares many similarities with  Arab cuisine . Other North African dishes popular in Israel include  couscous ,  shakshouka ,  matbucha , carrot salad and  chraime  (slices of fish cooked in a spicy tomato sauce).
 Sephardic dishes , with  Balkan  and Turkish influences incorporated in Israeli cuisine include  burekas ,  yogurt  and  taramosalata . Yemenite Jewish foods include  jachnun ,  malawach ,  skhug  and  kubane . Iraqi dishes popular in Israel include  amba , various types of  kubba , stuffed vegetables ( mhasha ),  kebab ,  sambusac ,  sabich  and  pickled vegetables  ( hamutzim ).
 
 Modern trends 
   Assortment of pickled vegetables in Beersheba 
 As Israeli agriculture developed and new kinds of fruits and vegetables appeared on the market, cooks and chefs began to experiment and devise new dishes with them. [10]  They also began using "biblical" ingredients such as honey, figs, and pomegranates, and indigenous foods such as  prickly pears  ( tzabar ) and  chickpeas . Since the late 1970s, there has been an increased interest in international cuisine, cooking with wine and herbs, and  vegetarianism . [5] 
 A more sophisticated food culture in Israel began to develop when cookbooks, such as  From the Kitchen with Love  by Ruth Sirkis, published in 1974, introduced international cooking trends, and together with the opening of restaurants serving cuisines such as Chinese, Italian and French, encouraged more dining out. [8] [15] 
 The 1980s were a formative decade: the increased optimism after the signing of the  peace treaty with Egypt  in 1979, the economic recovery of the mid-1980s and the increasing travel abroad by average citizens were factors contributing to a greater interest in food and wine. In addition, high-quality, locally produced ingredients became increasingly available. For example, privately owned dairies began to produce handmade cheeses from goat, sheep and cow's milk, which quickly became very popular both among chefs and the general public. In 1983, the  Golan Heights Winery  was the first of many new Israeli winemakers to help transform tastes with their production of world-class, semi-dry and dry wines. New attention was paid to the making of handmade breads and the production of high quality olive oil. The successful development of  aquaculture  ensured a steady supply of fresh fish, and the agricultural revolution in Israel led to an overwhelming choice and quality of fresh fruit, vegetables and herbs. [8] 
 Ethnic heritage cooking, both  Sephardic  and  Ashkenazi , has made a comeback with the growing acceptance of the heterogeneous society. Apart from home cooking, many ethnic foods are now available in street markets, supermarkets and restaurants, or are served at  weddings  and  bar mitzvahs , and people increasingly eat foods from ethnic backgrounds other than their own. Overlap and combinations of foods from different ethnic groups is becoming standard as a multi-ethnic food culture develops. [5] [8] 
 The 1990s saw an increasing interest in international cuisines.  Sushi , in particular, has taken hold as a popular style for eating out and as an entrée for events. In restaurants,  fusion cuisine , with the melding of classic cuisines such as French and Japanese with local ingredients has become widespread. [ citation needed ] 
 In the 2000s, the trend of "eating healthy" with an emphasis on  organic  and  whole-grain  foods has become prominent, and medical research has led many Israelis to re-embrace the  Mediterranean diet , with its touted health benefits. [16] 
 
 Characteristics 
 Geography has a large influence on Israeli cuisine, and foods common in the  Mediterranean region , such as olives, wheat, chickpeas, dairy products, fish, and vegetables such as tomatoes, eggplants, and zucchini are prominent in Israeli cuisine. Fresh fruits and vegetables are plentiful in Israel and are cooked and served in many ways. [17] 
 
   A typical Israeli  mezze  spread, with  hummus ,  pita ,  Israeli salad , olives and pickles 
 There are various climatic  areas in Israel  and areas it has settled that allow a variety of products to be grown. Citrus trees such as orange, lemon and grapefruit thrive on the coastal plain. Figs, pomegranates and olives also grow in the cooler hill areas. [6] 
 The subtropical climate near the Sea of Galilee and in the Jordan River Valley is suitable for mangoes, kiwis and bananas, while the temperate climate of the mountains of the Galilee and the Golan is suitable for grapes, apples and cherries. [18] 
 
   Cucumber and tomato salad with labane cheese and za'atar 
 Israeli eating customs also conform to the wider Mediterranean region, with lunch, rather than dinner, being the focal meal of a regular workday.
 " Kibbutz  foods" have been adopted by many Israelis for their light evening meals as well as breakfasts, and may consist of various types of cheeses, both soft and hard, yogurt,  labne  and sour cream, vegetables and salads, olives, hard-boiled eggs or omelets, pickled and smoked herring, a variety of breads, and fresh orange juice and coffee. [5] 
 In addition,  Jewish holidays  influence the cuisine, with the preparation of traditional foods at holiday times, such as various types of  challah  (braided bread) for  Shabbat  and festivals, jelly doughnuts ( sufganiyot ) for  Hanukah , the  hamantaschen  pastry ( oznei haman ) for Purim,  charoset , a type of fruit paste, for Passover, and dairy foods for  Shavuot .
 The Shabbat dinner, eaten on Friday, and to a lesser extent the Shabbat lunch, is a significant meal in Israeli homes, together with holiday meals. [17] 
 Although many, if not most, Jews in Israel do not keep  kosher , the tradition of  kashrut  strongly influences the availability of certain foods and their preparation in homes, public institutions and many restaurants, including the separation of milk and meat and avoiding the use of non-kosher foods, especially pork and shellfish.
 During  Passover , bread and other leavened foods are prohibited to  observant Jews  and  matza  and leaven-free foods are substituted. [19] 
 
 Foods 
 Israel does not have a universally recognized national dish; in previous years this was considered to be  falafel , deep-fried balls of seasoned, ground chickpeas. [20] [21]  Street vendors throughout Israel used to sell  falafel , it was a favorite "street food" for decades and is still popular as a  mezze  dish or as a top-up for  hummus -in-pita, though less nowadays as a sole filling in pita due to the frying in deep oil and higher health awareness. [10] 
 The Israeli breakfast has always been largely healthy, by today's standards, and one book called the  Israeli breakfast  "the Jewish state's contribution to world cuisine". [22] 
 
 Salads and appetizers 
   Potato burekas in  Mahane Yehuda Market , Jerusalem 
   Ptitim , a type of pasta also known as "Israeli  couscous " 
 Vegetable salads are eaten with most meals, including the traditional Israeli breakfast, which will usually include eggs, bread, and dairy products such as yogurt or  cottage cheese . For lunch and dinner, salad may be served as a side dish. A light meal of salad ( salat ),  hummus  and  French fries  (chips) served in a  pita  is referred to as  hummuschipsalat . [23] 
 Israeli salad  is typically made with finely chopped tomatoes and cucumbers dressed in olive oil, lemon juice, salt and pepper. Variations include the addition of diced red or green bell peppers, grated carrot, finely shredded cabbage or lettuce, sliced radish, fennel, spring onions and chives, chopped parsley, or other herbs and spices such as  mint ,  za'atar  and  sumac . [23] 
 Although popularized by the  kibbutzim , versions of this mixed salad were brought to Israel from various places. For example,  Jews from India  prepare it with finely chopped  ginger  and green  chili peppers , North African Jews may add preserved lemon peel and  cayenne pepper , and  Bukharan Jews  chop the vegetables extremely finely and use vinegar, without oil, in the dressing. [24] 
 Tabbouleh  is a Levantine vegan dish (sometimes considered a salad) traditionally made of tomatoes, finely chopped parsley, mint, bulgur and onion, and seasoned with olive oil, lemon juice, and salt. Some Israeli variations of the salad use pomegranate seeds instead of tomatoes.
 Sabich salad  is a variation of the well known Israeli dish  sabich , the ingredients of the salad are  eggplant , boiled eggs/hard-boiled eggs,  tahini ,  Israeli salad , potato, parsley and  amba .
 Kubba  is a dish made of rice/semolina/burghul (cracked wheat), minced onions and finely ground lean beef, lamb or chicken. The best-known variety is a torpedo-shaped fried  croquette  stuffed with minced beef, chicken or lamb. It was brought to Israel by Jews of Iraqi, Kurdish and Syrian origin.
 Sambusak  is a semi-circular pocket of dough filled with mashed chickpeas, fried onions and spices. There is another variety filled with meat, fried onions, parsley, spices and pine nuts, which is sometimes mixed with mashed chickpeas and breakfast version with  feta  or  tzfat  cheese  and  za'atar . It can be fried or otherwise cooked.
 Roasted vegetables includes bell peppers, chili peppers, tomatoes, onions, eggplants and also sometimes potatoes and zucchini. Usually served with grilled meat.
 Khamutzim  are pickled vegetables made by soaking in water and salt (and sometimes olive oil) in a pot and withdrawing them from air. Ingredients can include cucumber, cabbage, eggplant, carrot, turnip, radish, onion, caper, lemon, olives, cauliflower, tomatoes, chili pepper, bell pepper, garlic and beans.
 A large variety of  eggplant salads and dips  are made with roasted eggplants. [25]   Baba ghanoush , called  salat ḥatzilim  in Israel, is made with  tahina  and other seasonings such as garlic, lemon juice, onions, herbs and spices. Food writer and historian  Gil Marks  writes in his book that: "Israelis learned to make baba ghanouj from the Arabs". [26]  The eggplant is sometimes grilled over an open flame so that the pulp has a smoky taste. A particularly Israeli variation of the salad is made with  mayonnaise  called  salat ḥatzilim b'mayonnaise . [27] 
 Eggplant salads are also made with yogurt, or with  feta  cheese, chopped onion and tomato, or in the style of  Romanian Jews , with roasted red pepper. [28] 
 Tahina  is often used as a dressing for  falafel , [29]  serves as a cooking sauce for meat and fish, and forms the basis of sweets such as  halva . [30] 
 Hummus  is a cornerstone of Israeli cuisine, and consumption in Israel has been compared by food critic Elena Ferretti to "peanut butter in America, Nutella in Europe or Vegemite in Australia". [31]   Hummus  in pita is a common lunch for schoolchildren, and is a popular addition to many meals.
 Supermarkets offer a variety of commercially prepared  hummus , and some Israelis will go out of their way for fresh  hummus  prepared at a  hummusia , an establishment devoted exclusively to selling hummus. [32] 
 Salat avocado  is an Israeli-style  avocado  salad, with lemon juice and chopped  scallions  (spring onions), was introduced by farmers who planted avocado trees on the coastal plain in the 1920s. Avocados have since become a winter delicacy and are cut into salads as well as being spread on bread. [33] 
 A  meze  of fresh and cooked vegetable salads, pickled cucumbers and other vegetables,  hummus ,  ful ,  tahini  and  amba  dips,  labneh  cheese with olive oil, and  ikra  is served at festive meals and in restaurants.
 Salads include Turkish salad (a piquant salad of finely chopped onions, tomatoes, herbs and spices),  tabbouleh ,  carrot salad , marinated roasted red and green peppers, deep fried cauliflower florets,  matbucha ,  torshi  (pickled vegetables) and various eggplant salads. [34] [35] 
 Modern Israeli interpretations of the  meze  blend traditional and modern, pairing ordinary appetizers with unique combinations such as fennel and pistachio salad, beetroot and pomegranate salad, and celery and  kashkaval cheese  salad. [36] 
 Stuffed vegetables, called  memula’im , were originally designed to extend cheap ingredients into a meal. They are prepared by cooks in Israel from all  ethnic backgrounds  and are made with many varying flavors, such as spicy or sweet-and-sour, with ingredients such as  bell peppers , chili peppers, figs, onion, artichoke bottoms, Swiss chard, beet, dried fruits, tomato, vine leaves, potatoes, mallow, eggplants and zucchini squash, and stuffing such as meat and rice in Balkan style,  bulgur  in Middle-Eastern fashion, or with  ptitim , a type of Israeli pasta. [37] 
 The  Ottoman Turks  introduced  stuffed vine leaves  in the 16th century and vine leaves are commonly stuffed with a combination of meat and rice, although other fillings, such as  lentils , have evolved among the various communities. [38] 
 Artichoke bottoms stuffed with meat are famous as one of the grand dishes of the Sephardi Jerusalem cuisine of the  Old Yishuv . [39]   Stuffed dates  and dried fruits are served with rice and bulgur dishes. Stuffed half-zucchini has a Ladino name,  medias .
 
 Soups and dumplings 
   Shkedei marak  (croutons) 
 A variety of soups are enjoyed, particularly in the winter.  Chicken soup  has been a mainstay of  Jewish cuisine  since medieval times and is popular in Israel. [40] 
 Classic chicken soup is prepared as a simple broth with a few vegetables, such as onion, carrot and celery, and herbs such as dill and parsley.
 More elaborate versions are prepared by  Sephardim  with  orzo  or rice, or the addition of lemon juice or herbs such as mint or  coriander , while  Ashkenazim  may add noodles. [41]  An Israeli adaption of the traditional Ashkenazi soup pasta known as  mandlen , called  shkedei marak  ("soup almonds") in Israel, are commonly served with chicken soup.
 Particularly on holidays, dumplings are served with the soup, such as the  kneidlach  (matzah balls) of the Ashkenazim or the  gondi  (chickpea dumplings) of Iranian Jews, or  kubba , a family of dumplings brought to Israel by Middle Eastern Jews. Especially popular are  kubba  prepared from  bulgur  and stuffed with ground lamb and pine nuts, and the soft  semolina  or rice  kubba  cooked in soup, [41]  which  Jews of Kurdish  or  Iraqi heritage  habitually enjoy as a Friday lunchtime meal. [42] 
 Lentil soup  is prepared in many ways, with additions such as cilantro or meat. [43]  Other soups include the  harira  of the Moroccan Jews, a spicy soup of lamb (or chicken), chickpeas, lentils and rice, and a Yemenite bone-marrow soup known as  ftut , served on special occasions such as weddings, seasoned with the traditional  hawaij  spice mix. [44] [45] 
 White bean soup in tomato sauce is common in Jerusalem because Sephardic Jews settled in the city after being expelled from Andalusia.
 
 Grains and pasta 
 Rice  is prepared in numerous ways in Israel, from simple steamed  white rice  to festive casseroles. It is also cooked with spices and served with almonds and pine nuts.
 "Green" rice, prepared with a variety of fresh chopped herbs, is favored by  Persian Jews . Another rice dish is prepared with thin noodles that are first fried and then boiled with the rice.
 Mujadara  is a popular rice and  lentil  dish, adopted from Arab cuisine.  Orez Shu'it  is a dish invented in  Jerusalem  by Sephardic Jews, made of white beans cooked in a tomato stew and served on plain boiled rice; it is eaten widely in the Jerusalem region.
 Couscous  was brought to Israel by  Jews from North Africa . It is still prepared in some restaurants or by traditional cooks by passing  semolina  through a sieve several times and then cooking it over an aromatic broth in a special steamer pot called a  couscoussière . Generally, "instant"  couscous  is used for home cooking.
 Couscous  is used in salads, main courses and even some desserts. As a main course, chicken or lamb, or vegetables cooked in a soup flavored with  saffron  or  turmeric  are served on steamed  couscous . [46] [47] 
 Ptitim  is an Israeli  pasta  which now comes in many shapes, including pearls, loops, stars and hearts, but was originally shaped like grains of rice. It originated in the early days of the State of Israel as a wheat-based substitute for rice, when rice, a staple of the  Mizrahi Jews , was scarce.
 Israel's first prime minister,  David Ben-Gurion , is reputed to have asked the  Osem company  to devise this substitute, and so it was nicknamed "Ben-Gurion rice".
 Ptitim  can be boiled like pasta, prepared  pilaf -style by sautéing and then boiling in water or stock, or baked in a casserole. Like other pasta, it can be flavored in many ways with spices, herbs and sauces. Once considered primarily a food for children,  ptitim  is now prepared in restaurants both in Israel and internationally. [48] 
 Bulgur  is a kind of dried cracked wheat, served sometimes instead of rice.
 
 Fish 
   St. Peter's fish  (tilapia) in a restaurant in  Tiberias, Israel 
 Fresh fish is readily available, caught off Israel's coastal areas of the  Mediterranean  and the  Red Sea , or in the  Sea of Galilee , or raised in ponds in the wake of advances in  fish farming in Israel .
 Fresh fish is served whole, in the Mediterranean style, grilled, or fried, dressed only with freshly squeezed lemon juice.  Trout  ( forel ),  gilthead seabream  ( denisse ),  St. Peter's fish  ( musht ) and other fresh fish are prepared this way. [49] 
 Fish are also eaten baked, with or without vegetables, or fried whole or in slices, or grilled over coals, and served with different sauces. [50] 
 Fish are also  braised , as in a dish called  hraime , in which fish such as  grouper  (better known in Israel by its Arabic name  lokus ) or  halibut  is prepared in a sauce with hot pepper and other spices for  Rosh Hashanah ,  Passover  and  Shabbat  by North-African Jews.
 Everyday versions are prepared with cheaper kinds of fish and are served in market eateries, public kitchens and at home for weekday meals. [49] [50] 
 Fish, traditionally  carp , but now other firm  whitefish  too, are minced and shaped into loaves or balls and cooked in fish  broth , such as the  gefilte fish  of the Ashkenazi Jews, who also brought  pickled herring  from Eastern Europe.
 Herring is often served at the  kiddush  that follows synagogue services on  Shabbat , especially in Ashkenazi communities. In the Russian immigrant community it may be served as a light meal with boiled potatoes, sour cream,  dark breads  and  schnapps  or  vodka . [50] [51] 
 Fish kufta  is usually fried with spices, herbs and onions (sometimes also pine nuts) and served with  tahini  or yogurt sauce. Boiled fish kufta is cooked in a tomato,  tahini  or yogurt sauce.
 Tilapia baked with  tahini  sauce and topped with olive oil, coriander, mint, basil and pine nuts (and sometimes also with fried onions) is a specialty of Tiberias.
 
 Poultry and meat 
   Israeli-style  mangal 
   Breaded  schnitzel  with pasta 
 Chicken  is the most widely eaten meat in Israel, followed by  turkey . [52]  Chicken is prepared in a multitude of ways, from simple oven-roasted chicken to elaborate casseroles with rich sauces such as date syrup, tomato sauce, etc.
 Examples include chicken casserole with  couscous , inspired by Moroccan Jewish cooking, chicken with olives, a Mediterranean classic, and chicken  albondigas  (meat balls) in tomato sauce, from Jerusalem  Sephardi  cuisine. [52] 
 Albondigas  are prepared from ground meat. [53]  Similar to them is the more popular  kufta  which is made of minced meat, herbs and spices and cooked with tomato sauce, date syrup, pomegranate syrup or tamarind syrup with vegetables or beans.
 Grilled  and  barbecued meat  are common in Israeli cuisine. The country has many small eateries specializing in beef and lamb  kebab ,  shish taouk ,  merguez  and  shashlik . Outdoor barbecuing, known as  mangal  or  al ha-esh  (on the fire) is a beloved Israeli pastime.
 In modern times,  Israel Independence Day  is frequently celebrated with a picnic or barbecue in parks and forests around the country. [54] 
 Skewered goose liver  is a dish from southern Tel Aviv. It is grilled with salt and black pepper and sometimes with spices like cumin or  Baharat spice mix .
 Chicken or lamb baked in the oven is very common with potatoes, and sometimes fried onions as well.
 Turkey  schnitzel  is an Israeli adaptation of veal  schnitzel , and is an example of the transformations common in Israeli cooking. [55] 
 The  schnitzel  was brought to Israel by Jews from Central Europe, but before and during the early years of the State of Israel veal was unobtainable and chicken or turkey was an inexpensive and tasty substitute. Furthermore, a  Wiener schnitzel  is cooked in both butter and oil, but in Israel only oil is used, because of  kashrut .
 Today, most cooks buy  schnitzel  already breaded and serve it with  hummus ,  tahina , and other salads for a quick main meal. Other immigrant groups have added variations from their own backgrounds—Yemenite Jews, for example, flavor it with  hawaij . [10]  In addition, vegetarian versions have become popular and the Israeli food company, Tiv′ol, was the first to produce a vegetarian  schnitzel  from a soya meat-substitute.
 Various types of  sausage  are part of  Sephardi  and  Mizrahi  cuisine in Israel.  Jews from Tunisia  make a sausage, called  osban , with a filling of ground meat or liver, rice, chopped spinach, and a blend of herbs and spices.  Jews from Syria  make smaller sausages, called  gheh , with a different spice blend while Jews from Iraq make the sausages, called  mumbar , with chopped meat and liver, rice, and their traditional mix of spices. [56] 
 Moussaka  is an oven-baked layer dish ground meat and eggplant casserole that, unlike its Levantine rivals, is served hot.
 Meat stews (chicken, lamb and beef) are cooked with spices, pine nuts, herbs like parsley, mint and oregano, onion, tomato sauce or  tahini  or juices such as pomegranate molasses, pomegranate juice, pomegranate wine, grape  wine , arak, date molasses and tamarind. Peas, chickpeas, white beans, cowpeas or green beans are sometimes also added.
 Stuffed chicken in Israel is usually stuffed with rice, meat (lamb or beef), parsley, dried fruits like dates, apricots or raisins, spices like cinnamon, nutmeg or allspice; sometimes herbs like thyme and oregano (not the dried ones) are added on the top of the chicken to give it a flavor and then it is baked in the oven.
 
 Dairy products 
   Tzfat  cheese 
 Many fresh, high quality dairy products are available, such as  cottage cheese , white cheeses, yogurts including  leben  and  eshel , yellow  cheeses , and  salt-brined  cheeses typical of the Mediterranean region. [57] 
 Dairy farming has been a major sector of  Israeli agriculture  since the founding of the state, and the yield of local milk cows is amongst the highest in the world. Initially, the  moshavim  (farming cooperatives) and  kibbutzim  produced mainly soft white cheese as it was inexpensive and nutritious. It became an important staple in the years of austerity and gained a popularity that it enjoys until today. [57] 
 Soft white cheese,  gvina levana , is often referred to by its fat content, such as 5% or 9%. It is eaten plain, or mixed with fruit or vegetables, spread on bread or crackers and used in a variety of pies and pastries. [57] 
 Labneh  is a yogurt-based white cheese common throughout the Balkans and the Middle East. It is sold plain, with  za'atar , or in olive oil. It is often eaten for breakfast with other cheeses and bread. [58]  In the north of the country,  labneh  balls preserved in olive oil are more common than in the central and the southern parts.
 Adding spices like  za'atar , dried oregano or sumac and herbs like thyme, mint or scallions is common when preserving the  labneh  balls. It is especially common to eat them during breakfast because meat is usually not eaten in the morning.
 Tzfat  cheese , a white cheese in brine, similar to  feta , was first produced by the Meiri  dairy  in  Safed  in 1837 and is still produced there by descendants of the original cheese makers. The Meiri dairy also became famous for its production of the Balkan-style  brinza  cheese , which became known as Bulgarian cheese due to its popularity in the early 1950s among Jewish immigrants from Bulgaria.
 Other dairies now also produce many varieties of these cheeses. [57]  Bulgarian yogurt, introduced to Israel by  Bulgarian Jewish  survivors of  the Holocaust , is used to make a traditional  yogurt and cucumber soup . [59] 
 In the early 1980s, small privately owned dairies began to produce handmade cheeses from goat and sheep's milk as well as cow's milk, resembling traditional cheeses like those made in rural France, Spain and Italy. Many are made with  organic  milk. These are now also produced by  kibbutzim  and the national  Tnuva dairy . [57] 
 
 Egg dishes 
 Shakshuka , a  North-African  dish of eggs poached in a spicy tomato sauce, is a national favorite, especially in the winter. It is traditionally served up in a cast-iron pan with bread to mop up the sauce. [60]  Some variations of the dish are cooked with liberal use of ingredients such as eggplant, chili peppers, hot paprika, spinach, feta cheese or safed cheese.
 Omelettes  are seasoned with onions, herbs such as dill seeds ( shamir ), spinach, parsley, mint, coriander and mallow with spices such as turmeric, cumin, sumac, cinnamon and cloves and with cheese such as  safed  and  feta .
 Haminados  are eggs that are baked after being boiled, served alongside stew or meals; in  hamin  they are used in the morning for breakfast, also sometimes replacing the usual egg in  sabich . They are also eaten as a breakfast alongside  jachnun , grated tomatoes and  skhug .
 
 Fruit 
 Israel is one of the world's leading fresh citrus producers and exporters, [61]  and more than forty types of fruit are grown in Israel, including citrus fruits such as  oranges ,  grapefruit ,  tangerines  and the  pomelit , a hybrid of a grapefruit and a  pomelo , developed in Israel. [62]   Fruits grown in Israel  include avocados,  bananas ,  apples ,  cherries ,  plums ,  lychees ,  nectarines ,  grapes ,  dates ,  strawberries ,  prickly pear ( tzabbar ) ,  persimmon ,  loquat  ( shesek ) and  pomegranates , and are eaten on a regular basis. Israelis consume an average of nearly 160 kg (350 lb) of fruit per person a year. [63] 
 Many unique varieties of  mango  are native to the country, most having been developed during the second half of the 20th century. New and improved mango varieties are still introduced to markets every few years.
 Arguably the most popular variety is the Maya type, which is small to medium in size, fragrant, colourful (featuring 3-4 colours) and usually fiberless. The Israeli mango season begins in May, and the last of the fruit ripen as October draws near. Different varieties are present on markets at different months, with the Maya type seen between July and September. Mangos are frequently used in fusion dishes and for making  sorbet .
 A lot of Israelis keep fruit trees in their yards, citrus (especially orange and lemon) being the most common. Mangos are also now popular as household trees.  Mulberry  trees are frequently seen in public gardens, and their fruit is popularly served alongside various desserts and as a juice.
 Fruit is served as a snack or dessert alongside other items or by themselves. Fresh-squeezed fruit juices are prepared at street kiosks, and sold bottled in supermarkets. [63]  Various fruits are added to chicken or meat dishes and fresh fruit salad and  compote  are often served at the end of the meal. [64] 
 
 Baked dishes, cookies, pastries,  rugelach 
   Typical Israeli pastries, and  rugelach 
   Knafeh  served in a Jaffa cafe 
 There is a strong tradition of home  baking  in Israel arising from the years when there were very few bakeries to meet demand. Many professional bakers came to Israel from Central Europe and founded local  pastry  shops and bakeries, often called  konditoria , thus shaping local tastes and preferences.
 There is now a local style with a wide selection of cakes and pastries that includes influences from other cuisines and combines traditional European ingredients with Mediterranean and Middle-Eastern ingredients, such as  halva ,  phyllo dough , dates, and  rose water . [65] 
 Examples include citrus-flavored  semolina cakes , moistened with syrup and called  basbousa ,  tishpishti  or  revani  in  Sephardic  bakeries. The  Ashkenazi   babka  has been adapted to include  halva  or chocolate spread, in addition to the old-fashioned cinnamon. There are also many varieties of  apple cake . Cookies made with crushed dates ( ma'amoul ) are served with coffee or tea, as throughout the Middle East. [65] 
 Jerusalem  kugel  ( kugel yerushalmi ) is an Israeli version of the traditional noodle pudding,  kugel , made with caramelized sugar and spiced with black pepper. [66]  It was originally a specialty of the Ashkenazi Jews of the  Old Yishuv . [9]  It is typically baked in a very low oven overnight and eaten after synagogue services on  Shabbat  morning. [67] 
 Bourekas  are savory pastries brought to Israel by Jews from  Turkey , the Balkans and  Salonika . They are made of a flaky dough in a variety of shapes, frequently topped with sesame seeds, and are filled with meat, chickpeas, cheese, spinach, potatoes or mushrooms.  Bourekas  are sold at kiosks, supermarkets and cafes, and are served at functions and celebrations, as well as being prepared by home cooks. [68]  They are often served as a light meal with hardboiled eggs and  chopped vegetable salad . [69] 
 Ashkenazi Jews from Vienna and Budapest brought sophisticated pastry making traditions to Israel.  Sacher torte  and  Linzer torte  are sold at professional bakeries, but  cheesecake  and  strudel  are also baked at home. [70] 
 Jelly donuts ( sufganiyot ), traditionally filled with  red jelly  (jam), but also  custard  or  dulce de leche , are eaten as  Hanukkah  treats. [71] 
 Tahini  cookies  are an Israeli origin cookies made of  tahini , flour, butter and sugar and usually topped with pine nuts.
 Rugelach  is very popular in Israel, commonly found in most cafes and bakeries. It is also a popular treat among American Jews.
 
 Breads and sandwiches 
   Pita in the marketplace 
 In the Jewish communities of the  Old Yishuv ,  bread  was baked at home. Small commercial bakeries were set up in the mid-19th century. One of the earliest,  Berman's Bakery , was established in 1875, and evolved from a  cottage industry  making home-baked bread and cakes for  Christian pilgrims . [72] 
 Expert bakers who arrived among the immigrants from Eastern and Central Europe in the 1920s–30s introduced handmade  sourdough breads .
 From the 1950s, mass-produced bread replaced these loaves and standard, government subsidized loaves known as  leḥem aḥid  became mostly available until the 1980s, when specialized bakeries again began producing rich sourdough breads in the European tradition, and breads in a Mediterranean style with accents such as olives, cheese, herbs or  sun-dried tomatoes . A large variety of breads is now available from bakeries and cafes. [72] 
 Challah  bread is widely purchased or prepared for  Shabbat .  Challah  is typically an egg-enriched bread, often braided in the Ashkenazi tradition, or round for  Rosh Hashana , the Jewish New Year. [73] 
 
   Braided  challah  Shabbat bread 
 Shabbat and festival breads of the Yemenite Jews have become popular in Israel and can be bought frozen in supermarkets.
 Jachnun  is very thinly rolled dough, brushed with oil or fat and baked overnight at a very low heat, traditionally served with a crushed or grated tomato dip, hard-boiled eggs and  skhug .  Malawach  is a thin circle of dough toasted in a frying pan.  Kubaneh  is a yeast dough baked overnight and traditionally served on  Shabbat  morning.  Lahoh  is a spongy, pancake-like bread made of fermented flour and water, and fried in a pan.  Jews from Ethiopia  make a similar bread called  injera  from  millet  flour. [74] 
 Pita  bread is a double-layered  flat or pocket bread  traditional in many Middle Eastern and Mediterranean cuisines. It is baked plain, or with a topping of  sesame  or  nigella seeds  or  za'atar .
 Pita is used in multiple ways, such as stuffed with  falafel , salads or various meats as a snack or fast food meal; packed with  schnitzel , salad and French fries for lunch; filled with  chocolate spread  as a snack for schoolchildren; or broken into pieces for scooping up  hummus , eggplant and other dips.
 A  lafa  is larger, soft flatbread that is rolled up with a  falafel  or  shawarma  filling. [75]  Various ethnic groups continue to bake traditional flat breads.  Jews from the former Soviet republic of Georgia  make the flatbread,  lavash . [72] 
 
 Confections, sweets and snack foods 
   Bamba 
   Milky pudding topped with whipped cream 
 Baklava  is a nut-filled  phyllo pastry  sweetened with syrup served at celebrations in Jewish communities who originated in the Middle East. [76]  It is also often served in restaurants as dessert, along with small cups of  Turkish coffee .
 Kadaif  is a pastry made from long thin noodle threads filled with walnuts or pistachios and sweetened with syrup; it is served alongside  baklava .
 Halva  is a sweet, made from  tehina  and sugar, and is popular in Israel. It is used to make original desserts like  halva   parfait . [77] 
 Ma'amoul  are small shortbread pastries filled with dates, pistachios or walnuts (or occasionally almonds, figs, or other fillings).
 Ozne Haman  is a sweet yeast dough filled with crushed nuts, raisins, dried apricots, dates,  halva  or strawberry jam then oven baked, a specialty of  Purim .
The triangular shape may have been influenced by old illustrations of  Haman , in which he wore a three-cornered hat
 Sunflower seeds , called  garinim  (literally, seeds), are eaten everywhere, on outings, at stadiums and at home, usually purchased unshelled and are cracked open with the teeth. They can be bought freshly roasted from shops and market stalls that specialize in nuts and seeds as well as packaged in supermarkets, along with the also well-liked  pumpkin  and watermelon seeds,  pistachios , and sugar-coated  peanuts . [78] 
 Bamba  is a soft, peanut-flavored snack food that is a favorite of children, and  Bissli  is a crunchy snack made of deep-fried dry pasta, sold in various flavors, including BBQ, pizza,  falafel  and onion.
 Malabi  is a creamy pudding originating from Turkey prepared with milk or  almond milk  (for a  kosher  version) and cornstarch.
 It is sold as a street food from carts or stalls, in  disposable cups  with thick sweet syrup and various crunchy toppings such as chopped pistachios or coconut. Its popularity has resulted in supermarkets selling it in plastic packages and restaurants serving richer and more sophisticated versions using various toppings and garnishes such as berries and fruit. [79] [80]   Sahlab  is a similar dessert made from the powdered tubers of orchids and milk. [79] 
 Watermelon  with  feta cheese  salad is a popular dessert, sometimes mint is added to the salad.
 Krembo  is a  chocolate-coated marshmallow treat  sold only in the winter, and is a very popular alternative to ice cream. It comes wrapped in colorful aluminum foil, and consists of a round  biscuit  base covered with a dollop of  marshmallow  cream coated in  chocolate . [81] 
 Milky  is a popular dairy pudding that comes in chocolate, vanilla and  mocha  flavors with a layer of whipped cream on top. [82] 
 
 Sauces, spices and condiments 
   Malawach 
 Chili-based  hot sauces  are prominent in Israeli food, and are based on green or red  chili peppers . They are served with appetizers,  felafel , casseroles and grilled meats, and are blended with  hummus  and  tahina . Although originating primarily from North African and Yemenite immigrants, these hot sauces are now widely consumed. [83] 
 Skhug  is a spicy chili pepper sauce brought to Israel by  Yemenite Jews , and has become one of Israel's most popular condiments. It is added to  falafel  and  hummus  and is also spread over fish, and to white cheese, eggs, salami or avocado sandwiches for extra heat and spice. [84] 
 Other hot sauces made from chili peppers and garlic are the  Tunisian   harissa , and the  filfel chuma  of the  Libyan Jewish community  in Israel. [85] 
 Amba  is a pickled mango sauce, introduced by Iraqi Jews, and commonly used a condiment with  shawarma ,  kebabs ,  meorav yerushalmi  and  falafel  and vegetable salads. [85] 
 Concentrated juices made of grape, carob, pomegranate and date are common in different regions, they are used at stews, soups or as a topping for desserts such as  malabi  and  rice pudding .
 Almond syrup  flavored with  rose water  or orange blossom water is a common flavor for desserts and sometimes added to cocktails such as  arak .
 Sumac ,  a dark red spice is made by grinding the dried berries of the sumac bush, which is native to the Middle East, into a coarse powder. T [86] 
 
 Drinks 
   Israeli beer 
   Turkish style coffee  in Jerusalem 
 There is a strong  coffee-drinking culture  in Israel. [87]   Coffee  is prepared as  instant  ( nes ),  iced ,  latte  ( hafuḥ ), Italian-style  espresso , or  Turkish coffee , which is sometimes flavored with  cardamom  ( hel ). [47]  Jewish writers, artists, and musicians from Germany and Austria who immigrated to Israel before the  Second World War  introduced the model of the  Viennese coffee house  with its traditional décor, relaxed atmosphere, coffee and pastries. [88] 
 Cafés  are found everywhere in urban areas and function as meeting places for socializing and conducting business. Almost all serve baked goods and sandwiches and many also serve light meals. There are both chains and locally owned neighborhood cafés. Most have outdoor seating to take advantage of Israel's  Mediterranean climate .  Tel Aviv  is particularly well known for its café culture. [89] 
 Tea  is also a widely consumed beverage and is served at cafés and drunk at home. Tea is prepared in many ways, from plain brewed Russian and Turkish-style black tea with sugar, to tea with lemon or milk, and, available as a common option in most establishments, Middle Eastern-style with  mint  ( nana ). [90] 
Tea with  rose water  is also common.
 Limonana , a type of lemonade made from freshly-squeezed lemons and mint, was invented in Israel in the early 1990s and has become a summer staple throughout the  Middle East . [91] [92] 
 Rimonana  is similar to  limonana , made of  pomegranate juice  and  mint .
 Sahlab  is a drinkable pudding once made of the powdered bulb of the  orchid plant  but today usually made with cornstarch. It is usually sold in markets or by street vendors, especially in the winter. It is topped with  cinnamon  and chopped  pistachios . [93] 
 Malt beer , known as black beer (בִירָה שְחוֹרָה,  bira shḥora ), is a non-alcoholic beverage produced in Israel since pre-state times.  Goldstar  and  Maccabi  are  Israeli beers . Recently, some small boutique breweries began brewing new brands of beer, such as Dancing Camel, [94]  Negev, [95]  and Can'an.
 Arak  is a Levantine alcoholic spirit (~40–63% Alc. Vol./~80–126 proof) from the anis drinks family, common in Israel and throughout the Middle East. It is a clear, colorless, unsweetened anise-flavored distilled alcoholic drink (also labeled as an  apéritif ).
 It is often served neat or mixed with ice and water, which creates a reaction turning the liquor a milky-white colour. It is sometimes also mixed with grapefruit juice to create a cocktail known as  arak eshkoliyyot .
 Other spirits, brandies, liquors can be found across the country in many villages and towns.
 
 Wine 
 Main article:  Israeli wine 
   Israeli wines by  Carmel ,  Tishbi Winery  and  Golan Heights Winery 
 The vast majority of Israelis drink wine in moderation, and almost always at meals or social occasions. Israelis drink about 6.5 liters of wine per person per year, which is low compared to other wine-drinking Mediterranean countries, but the per capita amount has been increasing since the 1980s as Israeli production of high-quality wine grows to meet demand, especially of  semi-dry and dry wines . In addition to Israeli wines, an increasing number of wines are imported from France, Italy, Australia, the United States, Chile and Argentina. [96] 
 Most of the wine produced and consumed from the 1880s was sweet,  kosher wine  when the  Carmel Winery  was established, [97]  until the 1980s, when more dry or semi-dry wines began to be produced and consumed after the introduction of the  Golan Heights Winery ’s first vintage. [98]  The winery was the first to focus on planting and making wines from  Cabernet Sauvignon ,  Merlot ,  Sauvignon blanc ,  Chardonnay ,  Pinot noir , white  Riesling  and  Gewürztraminer . These wines are kosher and have won silver and gold medals in international competitions. [99] 
 Israeli wine  is now produced by hundreds of wineries, ranging in size from small boutique wineries in the villages to large companies producing over 10 million bottles per year, which are also exported worldwide.
 Wine made of fruits other than grapes such as fig, cherry, pomegranate, carob and date are also common in the country.
 
 Non-kosher foods 
 Foods variously prohibited in Jewish dietary laws ( kashrut ) and in Muslim dietary laws ( halal ) may also be included in pluralistic Israel's diverse cuisine. Although partly legally restricted, [100] [101]   pork  and  shellfish  are available at many non-kosher restaurants (only around a third of Israeli restaurants have a kosher license [102] ) and some stores all over the country which are widely spread, including by the  Maadaney Mizra ,  Tiv Ta'am  and Maadanei Mania [103]  supermarket chains. [104] 
 A  modern Hebrew  euphemism for pork is "white meat". [104]  Despite Jewish and Muslim  religious restrictions on the consumption of pork , pigmeat consumption per capita was 2.7 kg (6.0 lb) in 2009. [105] 
 A 2008 survey reported that about half of Israeli Jews do not always observe  kashrut . [106]  Israel's anomalous equanimity toward its religious dietary restrictions may be reflected by the fact that some of the Hebrew cookbooks of  Yisrael Aharoni  are published in two versions: kosher and non-kosher editions.
 
 Eating out 
 Street foods 
 In Israel, as in many other Middle Eastern countries, " street food " is a kind of fast food that is sometimes literally eaten while standing in the street, while in some cases there are places to sit down. The following are some foods that are usually eaten in this way:
 
   Falafel  in a pita with various vegetables and condiments 
   Sabich 
 Falafel  are fried balls or patties of spiced, mashed  chickpeas  or  fava beans  and are a common Middle-Eastern street food that have become identified with Israeli cuisine.  Falafel  is most often served in a pita, with pickles,  tahina ,  hummus , cut vegetable salad and often,  harif , a hot sauce, the type used depending on the origin of the  falafel  maker. [10] 
 Variations include green  falafel , which include parsley and coriander, red  falafel  made with  filfel chuma , yellow  falafel  made with  turmeric , and  falafel  coated with  sesame seeds . [107] 
 Shawarma , (from  çevirme , meaning "rotating" in Turkish) is usually made in Israel with turkey, with lamb fat added. The  shawarma  meat is sliced and marinated and then roasted on a huge rotating skewer.
 The cooked meat is shaved off and stuffed into a  pita , with  hummus  and  tahina , or with additional trimmings such as fresh or fried  onion rings ,  French fries , salads and pickles. More upscale restaurant versions are served on an open flat bread, a  lafa , with steak strips, flame roasted eggplant and salads. [108] 
 Shakshouka , originally a workman's breakfast popularized by North-African Jews in Israel, is made simply of fried eggs in spicy tomato sauce, with other vegetable ingredients or sausage optional.
 Shakshouka  is typically served in the same frying pan in which it is cooked, with thick slices of white bread to mop up the sauce, and a side of salad. Modern variations include a milder version made with spinach and feta without tomato sauce, and hot-chili  shakshouka , a version that includes both sweet and hot peppers and coriander. [109]   Shakshouka  in pita is called  shakshouka be-pita . [110] 
 Jerusalem mixed grill , or  me'urav Yerushalmi , consists of  mixed grill  of chicken  giblets  and lamb with onion, garlic and spices. It is one of Jerusalem's most popular and profitable street foods. [111] 
Although the origin of the dish is in Jerusalem, it is today common in all of the cities and towns in  Israel .
 Jerusalem bagels , unlike the round, boiled and baked bagels popularized by Ashkenazi Jews, are long and oblong-shaped, made from bread dough, covered in  za’atar  or  sesame seeds , and are soft, chewy and sweet. They have become a favorite snack for  football  match crowds, and are also served in hotels as well as at home. [112] 
 Malabi  is a creamy pudding originating from Turkey prepared with milk or cream and cornstarch. It is sold as a street food from carts or stalls, in disposable cups with thick sweet syrup and various crunchy toppings such as chopped pistachios or coconut. Its popularity has resulted in supermarkets selling it in plastic packages and restaurants serving richer and more sophisticated versions using various toppings and garnishes such as berries and fruit. [79] [80]   Sahlab  is a similar dessert made from the powdered tubers of orchids and milk. [79] 
 Sabikh  is a traditional  sandwich  that  Mizrahi Jews  introduced to Israel and is sold at kiosks throughout the country, but especially in  Ramat Gan , where it was first introduced.  Sabiḥ  is a pita filled with fried eggplant, hardboiled egg, salad,  tehina  and pickles. [113] 
 Tunisian sandwich is usually made from a  baguette  with various fillings that may include tuna, egg, pickled lemon, salad, and fried hot green pepper. [113] 
 
 Places to eat 
   Beet  kubba  stew 
 There are thousands of restaurants, casual eateries, cafés and bars in Israel, offering a wide array of choices in food and culinary styles. [114] [115]  Places to eat out that are distinctly Israeli include the following:
 Falafel  stands or kiosks are common in every neighborhood.  Falafel  vendors compete to stand apart from their competitors and this leads to the offering of additional special extras like chips, deep-fried eggplant, salads and pickles for the price of a single portion of  falafel . [107] 
 A  hummusia  is an establishment that offers mainly  hummus  with a limited selection of extras such as  tahina , hardboiled egg,  falafel , onion, pickles, lemon and garlic sauce and pita or  taboon  bread . [116] 
 Misada Mizrahit  (literally "Eastern restaurant") refers to  Mizrahi Jewish , Middle-Eastern or Arabic restaurants. These popular and relatively inexpensive establishments often offer a selection of  meze  salads followed by grilled meat with a side of  french fries  and a simple dessert such as chocolate  mousse  for dessert. [117] 
 Steakiyot  are meat grills selling sit down and take-away chicken, turkey or lamb as steak,  shishlik ,  kebab  and even  Jerusalem mixed grill , all in pita or in  taboon  bread. [118] 
 
 Holiday cuisine 
 Sabbath 
   Cholent  ( hamin ), a traditional slow-cooked Shabbat stew 
 Friday night (eve of  Shabbat ) dinners are usually family and socially oriented meals. Along with family favorites, and varying to some extent according to ethnic background, traditional dishes are served, such as  challah  bread, chicken soup, salads, chicken or meat dishes, and cakes or fruits for dessert.
 Shabbat lunch is also an important social meal. Since antiquity, Jewish communities all over the world devised meat casseroles that begin cooking before  lighting of candles  that marks the commencement of Shabbat on Friday night, so as to comply with religious regulations for observing Shabbat.
 In modern Israel, this filling meal, in many variations, is still eaten on the Sabbath day, not only in religiously observant households, and is also served in some restaurants during the week. [119] 
 The basic ingredients are meat and beans or rice simmered overnight on a  hotplate  or  blech , or placed in a slow oven. Ashkenazi  cholent  usually contains meat, potatoes, barley and beans, and sometimes  kishke , and seasonings such as pepper and paprika.
 Sephardi   hamin  contains chicken or meat, rice, beans, garlic, sweet or regular potatoes, seasonings such as turmeric and cinnamon, and whole eggs in the shell known as  haminados . [120] [121] 
 Moroccan Jews  prepare variations known as  dafina  or  skhina  (or  s′hina ) with meat, onion, marrow bones, potatoes, chickpeas, wheat berries, eggs and spices such as turmeric, cumin, paprika and pepper. Iraqi Jews prepare  tebit , using chicken and rice. [119] [122] 
 For desserts or informal gatherings on Shabbat, home bakers still bake a wide variety of cakes on Fridays to be enjoyed on the Sabbath, or purchased from bakeries or stores, cakes such as sponge cake, citrus semolina cake, cinnamon or chocolate  babkas , and fruit and nut cakes. [65] 
 
 Rosh Hashanah 
   Lekach  traditionally eaten on Rosh Hashana 
 Rosh Hashana , the Jewish New Year, is widely celebrated with festive family meals and  symbolic foods . Sweetness is the main theme and the Rosh Hashana dinners typically begin with apples dipped in honey, and end with honey cake.
 The  challah  is usually round, often studded with raisins and drizzled with honey, and other symbolic fruits and vegetables are eaten as an entree, such as pomegranates, carrots, leeks and beets. [123] 
 Fish dishes, symbolizing abundance, are served; for example,  gefilte fish  is traditional for  Ashkenazim , while Moroccan Jews prepare the spicy fish dish,  chraime . 
 Honey cake ( lekach ) is often served as dessert, accompanied by tea or coffee. [123]  Dishes cooked with pomegranate juice are common during this period.
 
 Hanukkah 
   Sufganiyot  doughnuts served during Hanukkah (shown here filled with strawberry jelly) 
 The holiday of  Hanukkah  is marked by the consumption of traditional  Hanukkah foods  fried in oil in commemoration of the miracle in which a small quantity of oil sufficient for one day lasted eight days.
 The two most popular Hannukah foods are potato pancakes,  levivot , also known by the Yiddish  latkes ; and jelly doughnuts, known as  sufganiyot  in Hebrew,  pontshkes  (in  Yiddish ) or  bimuelos  (in  Ladino ), as these are  deep-fried  in oil. [124] 
 Hannukah pancakes are made from a variety of ingredients, from the traditional potato or cheese, to more modern innovations, among them corn, spinach, zucchini and sweet potato. [123] 
 Bakeries in Israel have popularized many new types of fillings for  sufganiyot  besides the standard strawberry jelly filling, and these include chocolate, vanilla or cappuccino cream, and others. In recent years downsized, "mini"  sufganiyot  have also appeared due to concerns about calories. [125] 
 
 Tu BiShvat 
   Dried fruits and almonds eaten on Tu BiShvat 
 Tu BiShvat  is a minor  Jewish holiday , usually sometime in late January or early February, that marks the "New Year of the Trees". Customs include planting trees and eating dried fruits and nuts, especially  figs ,  dates ,  raisins ,  carob , and  almonds . [126] 
 Many Israelis, both religious and secular, celebrate with a  kabbalistic -inspired  Tu BiShvat seder  that includes a feast of fruits and four cups of wine according to the ceremony presented in special  haggadot  modeled on the  Haggadah of Passover  for this purpose. [127] 
 
 Purim 
   Oznei Haman 
 The festival of  Purim  celebrates the deliverance of the Jewish people from the plot of  Haman  to annihilate them in the ancient Persian  Achaemenid Empire , as described in the  Book of Esther .
 It is a day of rejoicing and merriment, on which children, and many adults, wear costumes. [128]  It is customary to eat a festive meal,  seudat Purim , [129]  in the late afternoon, often with wine as the prominent beverage, in keeping with the atmosphere of merry-making. [128] 
 Many people prepare packages of food that they give to neighbors, friends, family, and colleagues on Purim. These are called  mishloach manot  ("sending of portions"), and often include wine and baked goods, fruit and nuts, and sweets. [128] 
 The food most associated with Purim is called  oznei haman  ("Haman's ears"). These are three-cornered pastries filled most often with poppy seeds, but also other fillings. The triangular shape may have been influenced by old illustrations of Haman, in which he wore a three-cornered hat. [130] 
 
 Passover 
 The week-long holiday of  Passover  in the spring commemorates the  Exodus from Egypt , and in Israel is usually a time for visiting friends and relatives, travelling, and on the first night of Passover, the traditional ritual dinner, known as the  Seder .
 Foods containing  ḥametz— leavening or yeast—may not be eaten during Passover. This means bread, pastries and certain  fermented beverages , such as beer, cannot be consumed.  Ashkenazim  also do not eat  legumes , known as  kitniyot .
 Over the centuries, Jewish cooks have developed dishes using alternative ingredients and this characterizes Passover food in Israel today. [131] 
 Chicken soup with matzah dumplings  ( kneidlach )  is often a starter for the Seder meal among Israelis of all ethnic backgrounds. [131]  Spring vegetables, such as  asparagus  and  artichokes  often accompany the meal. [131] 
 Restaurants in Israel have come up with creative alternatives to  ḥametz  ingredients to create pasta, hamburger buns, pizza, and other fast foods in  kosher-for-Passover  versions by using  potato starch  and other non-standard ingredients.
 After Passover, the celebration of  Mimouna  takes place, a tradition brought to Israel by the Jewish communities of North Africa. In the evening, a feast of fruit, confectionery and pastries is set out for neighbors and visitors to enjoy. Most notably, the first leaven after Passover, a thin crepe called a  mofletta , eaten with honey, syrup or jam, is served. [132]  The occasion is celebrated the following day by outdoor picnics at which salads and barbecued meat feature prominently.
 
 Shavuot 
 In the early summer, the Jewish harvest festival of  Shavuot  is celebrated. Shavuot marks the peak of the new grain harvest and the ripening of the first fruits, and is a time when milk was historically most abundant.
 To celebrate this holiday, many types of dairy foods ( milchig ) are eaten. These include cheeses and yogurts, cheese-based pies and quiches called  pashtidot , cheese  blintzes , and cheesecake prepared with soft white cheese ( gvina levana ) or cream cheese. [133] 
 
 See also 
 
 
 
 Wikibooks  Cookbook  has a recipe/module on
 
  Cuisine of Israel 
 
 
 
 Food portal Israel portal Judaism portal 
 Cuisine of the Mizrahi Jews 
 Cuisine of the Sephardic Jews 
 Jewish cuisine 
 Ancient Israelite cuisine 
 Kosher restaurant 
 List of Israeli dishes 
 List of restaurants in Israel 
 Mediterranean diet 
 Mediterranean cuisine 
 Middle Eastern cuisine 
 Levantine cuisine 
 Mesopotamian cuisine 
 Assyrian cuisine 
 Cypriot cuisine 
 Yemeni cuisine 
 Egyptian cuisine 
 Turkish cuisine 
 North African cuisine 
 References 
 
 
 ^  a   b   c   Gold, Rozanne  A Region's Tastes Commingle in Israel   Archived  2011-09-17 at the  Wayback Machine  (July 20, 1994) in  The New York Times  Retrieved 2010–02–14 
 
 ^   Michael Ashkenazi (10 November 2020).  Food Cultures of Israel: Recipes, Customs, and Issues . ABC-CLIO. p. 2.  ISBN   978-1-4408-6686-9 . 
 
 ^   Sardas-Trotino, Sarit  NY Times presents: Israeli cuisine course   Archived  2016-03-03 at the  Wayback Machine  (February 19, 2010) in  Ynet – LifeStyle  Retrieved 2010–02–19 
 
 ^   Gur,  The Book of New Israeli Food , pg. 11 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   e   f   g   h   i   j   Roden,  The Book of Jewish Food , pp 202-207 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   Ansky,  The Food of Israel , pp. 6-9 
 
 ^   Zisling, Yael,  The Biblical Seven Species   Archived  2016-03-03 at the  Wayback Machine  in  Gems in Israel , Retrieved 2010-02-14 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   e   f   g   Gur, pg. 10-16 
 
 ^  a   b   Marks,  The World of Jewish Cooking  pg. 203 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   e   Nathan,  The Foods of Israel Today 
 
 ^   Superfoods to the rescue   Archived  2012-10-18 at the  Wayback Machine ,  Jerusalem Post 
 
 ^   Doram Gaunt (2008-05-07).  "Don't Leave These Alone" .  en:haaretz . Archived from  the original  on 2019-07-20 . Retrieved  2021-09-30 . 
 
 ^   "Independence Day: The feast that moved away from home" . Archived from  the original  on 7 June 2008 . Retrieved  8 November  2021 . 
 
 ^   Our man cooks slowly: Eucalyptus restaurant ,  Jerusalem Post   Archived  June 30, 2009, at the  Wayback Machine 
 
 ^   Ansky, pp. 24-26 
 
 ^   Celebrating sixty years of Israeli cuisine  (May 2008),  Derech HaOchel , No. 82, pp. 36-38 ( Hebrew ) 
 
 ^  a   b   Overview: Israeli Food   Archived  2014-05-17 at the  Wayback Machine  Retrieved 2009-09-10 
 
 ^   Homsky, Shaul, author of  Fruits Grown in Israel  quoted in Nathan,  The Foods of Israel Today 
 
 ^   Ansky, pp 15-20 
 
 ^   Nathan, Joan,  Falafel: About Israel's signature food   Archived  October 24, 2008, at the  Wayback Machine  in  My Jewish Learning , Retrieved 2010–02–14 
 
 ^   Roden pg. 273 
 
 ^   Dubois, Jill; Rosh, Mair (2004).  Cultures of the World: Israel .  Singapore :  Marshall Cavendish . p. 122.  ISBN   9780761416692 . 
 
 ^  a   b   Gur, pg. 20-25 
 
 ^   Roden, pg. 248 
 
 ^   Ansky, pg. 39-40 
 
 ^   Gil Marks (2010).  "Baba Ghanouj" .  Encyclopedia of Jewish Food . Houghton Mifflin Harcourt.  ISBN   9780544186316 . 
 
 ^   Levy, F., pg. 41  Feast from the Mideast , Harper Collins (2003)  ISBN   0-06-009361-7 
 
 ^   Gur, pg. 32-36 
 
 ^   Roden, pg. 274 
 
 ^   Gur, pg. 38-42 
 
 ^   Hummus Among Us   Archived  2013-05-24 at the  Wayback Machine , By Elena Ferretti, Fox News 
 
 ^   Gur, pg. 44-48 
 
 ^   Ansky, pg. 50 
 
 ^   Gur, pp. 50-55 
 
 ^   Ansky pg. 37-38 
 
 ^   Gur, pp. 56-61 
 
 ^   Gur, pp. 149-157 
 
 ^   Ansky, pg. 76 
 
 ^   Roden, pg. 544 
 
 ^   Marks, pg. 54 
 
 ^  a   b   Gur, pp. 194-195 
 
 ^   Ansky, pg. 60 
 
 ^   Ansky, pg. 58 
 
 ^   Gur, pp. 109-115 
 
 ^   Roden, pg. 324 
 
 ^   Gur, pp. 116-119 
 
 ^  a   b   Ansky, pg. 30 
 
 ^   Gur, pp. 127-128 
 
 ^  a   b   Gur pp. 130-136 
 
 ^  a   b   c   Ganor, pg. 68 
 
 ^   Ansky, pg, 98 
 
 ^  a   b   Gur, pp. 142-146 
 
 ^   Ansky, pg. 88 
 
 ^   Gur, pp. 165-175 
 
 ^   Roden, pg. 125 
 
 ^   Roden, pg. 426 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   e   Gur, pp. 218-223 
 
 ^   Ansky pg. 37 
 
 ^   Roden pg. 313 
 
 ^   "Shakshuka: Israel's hottest breakfast dish" .  Thejc.com . Retrieved  2021-11-08 . 
 
 ^   Ladaniya, Milind,  Citrus fruit: biology, technology and evaluation , Elsevier Inc., (2008) pp. 3-4,  ISBN   978-0-12-374130-1 
 
 ^   Israeli fruit hybrid lowers cholesterol   Archived  2010-12-16 at the  Wayback Machine  in  Israel 21c Innovation News Service   Archived  2012-02-29 at the  Wayback Machine , Retrieved 2010-02-11 
 
 ^  a   b   Gur, pp. 176-179 
 
 ^   Fruit Salad   Archived  October 14, 2012, at the  Wayback Machine  in  Israeli Foods  on  Jewish Virtual Library   Archived  2011-02-21 at the  Wayback Machine , Retrieved 2010–02–14 
 
 ^  a   b   c   Gur, pg. 206-215 
 
 ^   Roden, pg. 154 
 
 ^   Ansky, pg. 66 
 
 ^   Gur, pg. 92 
 
 ^   Ansky, pg. 70 
 
 ^   Roden, pg. 170 
 
 ^   Roden, pg. 197 
 
 ^  a   b   c   Gur, pp. 158-160 
 
 ^   Gur, pg. 188 
 
 ^   Roden, pg. 549 
 
 ^   Gur, pp. 84–86, 90 
 
 ^   Roden, pg. 581 
 
 ^   Rogov, Daniel,  Halvah Parfait   Archived  October 14, 2012, at the  Wayback Machine  in  Jewish Virtual Library   Archived  2011-02-21 at the  Wayback Machine , Retrieved 2010–02–14 
 
 ^   Ganor pp. 144-145 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   Gur pg. 98-99 
 
 ^  a   b   Ansky, pg. 126 
 
 ^   Chestnuts roasting in my gelato   Archived  2007-11-09 at the  Wayback Machine , (8 November 2007),  Haaretz , Retrieved 2010-01-09 
 
 ^   Milky That Everyone Grew Up With   Archived  2022-11-01 at the  Wayback Machine  Retrieved 2009-10-22 
 
 ^   Ganor, pg. 21-26 
 
 ^   Ansky, pg. 36 
 
 ^  a   b   pp. 298-299 
 
 ^   "Sumac is the Middle Eastern Spice You Need to Try Right Now | The Nosher" . 
 
 ^   Bellehsen, Nitsana (January 20, 2010),  Israeli coffee culture goes global   Archived  2010-02-13 at the  Wayback Machine  in  Israel 21c Innovation News Service   Archived  2012-02-29 at the  Wayback Machine  Retrieved 2010–01–20 
 
 ^   Roden, pg. 202 
 
 ^   Gur, pg. 217 
 
 ^   Campbell, Dawn,  The Tea Book , Pelican Publishing Company, Inc., (1995) pg. 142,  ISBN   1-56554-074-3 
 
 ^   Martinelli, Katherine (11 July 2011).  "Limonana: Sparkling Summer" .  The Jewish Daily Forward . Retrieved  28 May  2012 . 
 
 ^   Siegal, Lilach (29 May 2001).  לימונענע וירטואלית  [Virtual Limonana].  The Marker  (in Hebrew) . Retrieved  28 May  2012 . 
 
 ^   Roden, pg. 629 
 
 ^   "Pub | Dancing Camel | Israel" .  Dancingcamel.com . Retrieved  8 November  2021 . 
 
 ^   "Negev Brewery" .  Negevbrewery.co.il . Retrieved  2021-04-06 . 
 
 ^   Rogov, Daniel,  Wine Consumption in Israel   Archived  2015-11-19 at the  Wayback Machine  in  Jewish Virtual Library   Archived  2011-02-21 at the  Wayback Machine , Retrieved 2009-12-15 
 
 ^   Levine, Jonathan (December 30, 2000).  "Carmel Winery: A Microcosm Of The Middle East" . Wine Business Monthly . Retrieved  2009-09-25 . 
 
 ^   Roden pg. 633 
 
 ^   Golan Wines, Awards   Archived  2012-11-23 at the  Wayback Machine  Retrieved 2009-09-10 
 
 ^   Segev, Tom (Jan 27, 2012).  "The Makings of History / Pork and the people" .  HaAretz . Retrieved  Apr 6,  2013 . 
 
 ^   Barak-Erez, Daphne (2007).  Outlawed Pigs: Law, Religion, and Culture in Israel . Univ of Wisconsin Press.  ISBN   9780299221607 . Archived from  the original  on 9 July 2013 . Retrieved  6 April  2013 . 
 
 ^   Petersburg, Ofer (29 January 2007).  "Only third of Israel's restaurants kosher" .  Ynetnews . Retrieved  8 November  2021 . 
 
 ^   "Mania Group - Home Page | Mania Group" . Retrieved  2021-04-06 . 
 
 ^  a   b   Yoskowitz, Jeffrey (April 24, 2008).  "On Israel's Only Jewish-Run Pig Farm, It's The Swine That Bring Home the Bacon - Letter From Kibbutz Lahav By April 24, 2008" .  Forward . Retrieved  6 April  2013 . 
 
 ^   Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.  "FAOSTAT" . Archived from  the original  on 1 April 2013 . Retrieved  6 April  2013 . 
 
 ^   ynet (May 26, 2008).  "Poll: 40% of secular Jews keep kosher" .  Ynetnews . Retrieved  April 14,  2013 . 
 
 ^  a   b   Gur, pg. 68 
 
 ^   Gur, pgs 74-76 
 
 ^   Gur, pg. 78-82 
 
 ^   Ronald Ranta; Yonatan Mendel (2014). "Consuming Palestine: Palestine and Palestinians in Israeli food culture".  Ethnicities .  14  (3): 412–435.  doi : 10.1177/1468796813519428 .  JSTOR   24735540 .  S2CID   144928551 . 
 
 ^   Roden, pg. 128 
 
 ^   Gur, pg. 90 
 
 ^  a   b   Israeli Street Foods   Archived  2014-03-06 at the  Wayback Machine  Retrieved 2010-01-24 
 
 ^   Israel’s Restaurants website   Archived  2010-01-24 at the  Wayback Machine  Retrieved 2010 – 01–24 
 
 ^   Restaurants in Israel: The Israeli Restaurant Guide   Archived  2012-02-27 at the  Wayback Machine  Retrieved 2010 – 01–24 
 
 ^   Gur, pg. 44 
 
 ^   Gur, pg. 12 
 
 ^   Gur, pg. 164 
 
 ^  a   b   Gur, pp. 198-205 
 
 ^   Cooper,  Eat and Be Satisfied , pg. 131 
 
 ^   Ansky, pp. 29-30 
 
 ^   Roden, pp. 428-443 
 
 ^  a   b   c   Gur, pp. 228-236 
 
 ^   Roden, p. 168. 
 
 ^   Yefet, Orna (4 December 2006)  Hanukkah: Doughnuts go healthy   Archived  2010-01-14 at the  Wayback Machine  in  ynetnews.com , Retrieved 2009-12-17 
 
 ^   Gur, pg. 245 
 
 ^   Tu BiShvat Customs   Archived  2022-11-01 at the  Wayback Machine   in Virtual Jerusalem, Retrieved 2009-12-17 
 
 ^  a   b   c   Overview: Purim At Home   Archived  2011-05-12 at the  Wayback Machine  in  My Jewish Learning   Archived  February 9, 2010, at the  Wayback Machine  Retrieved 2010-01-10 
 
 ^   "Seudat Purim - Halachipedia" .  halachipedia.com . Retrieved  2021-04-06 . 
 
 ^   Roden, pg. 192 
 
 ^  a   b   c   Gur, pp. 250-263 
 
 ^   Roden, pg. 554 
 
 ^   Gur, pp 264-272 
 
 
 Bibliography 
 Ansky, Sherry, and Sheffer, Nelli,  The Food of Israel: Authentic Recipes from the Land of Milk and Honey , Hong Kong, Periplus Editions (2000)  ISBN   962-593-268-2 
 Cooper, John,  Eat and Be Satisfied: A Social History of Jewish Food , New Jersey, Jason Aronson Inc. (1993)  ISBN   0-87668-316-2 
 Ganor, Avi, and Maiberg, Ron,  Taste of Israel: A Mediterranean Feast , BBS Publishing Corporation (1994)  ISBN   0-88365-844-5 
 Gur, Janna ,  The Book of New Israeli Food: A Culinary Journey , Schocken (2008)  ISBN   0-8052-1224-8 
 Marks, Gil ,  The World of Jewish Cooking: More than 500 Traditional Recipes from Alsace to Yemen , New York, Simon & Schuster (1996)  ISBN   0-684-83559-2 
 Nathan, Joan ,  The Foods of Israel Today , Knopf (2001)  ISBN   0-679-45107-2 
 Roden, Claudia ,  The Book of Jewish Food: An Odyssey from Samarkand to New York , New York, Knopf (1997)  ISBN   0-394-53258-9 
 External links 
 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons has media related to  Cuisine of Israel . 
 
 Asif: Culinary Institute of Israel  – non-profit organization and culinary center dedicated to exploring Israel's food culture 
 Israel Food Guide  – information and recipes 
 Overview: Israeli Food  – articles and recipes 
 Israeli Foods  – articles and recipes 
 Israeli Kitchen – food, wine and bread from the heart of Israel 
 The Treasure Box Project  – preserving Jewish ethnic cuisines in Israel 
 v t e Israeli cuisine List of dishes History 
 Ancient Israelite cuisine 
 Jewish cuisine 
 Ashkenazi 
 Bukharan 
 Ethiopian 
 Sephardi 
 Mizrahi 
 Fruits and vegetables 
 Apple 
 Artichoke 
 Beet 
 Cherry tomato 
 Cabbage 
 Cucumber 
 Eggplant 
 Garlic 
 Horseradish 
 Mango 
 Onion 
 Pomegranate 
 Potato 
 Radish 
 Red cabbage 
 Red onion 
 Sabra 
 Spinach 
 Squash blossom 
 Tomato 
 Other ingredients 
 Aleppo pepper 
 Parsley 
 Dill 
 Honey 
 Tahini 
 Silan 
 Dates 
 Garbanzo beans 
 Cowpea 
 Common bean 
 Za'atar 
 Sumac 
 Hawaij 
 Olive oil 
 Olives 
 Oregano 
 Baharat 
 Raisin 
 Sachlav 
 Semolina 
 Thyme 
 Cilantro 
 Sesame 
 Poppy seed 
 Saffron 
 Cardamom 
 Cheeses 
 Cottage cheese 
 Cream cheese 
 Tzfat cheese 
 Halloumi 
 Israeli Feta 
 Labneh 
 Quark 
 Breads 
 Babka 
 Challah 
 Jachnun 
 Krantz cake 
 Kubaneh 
 Lachooh 
 Laffa 
 Malawach 
 Rye bread 
 Bagel 
 Pain petri 
 Pita 
 Pumpernickel bread 
 Salads 
 Israeli salad 
 Moroccan carrots 
 Red cabbage salad 
 Turkish salad 
 Watermelon and feta salad 
 Pasta 
 Hilopites 
 Lokshen 
 Lokshen kugel 
 Kugel 
 Kugel Yerushalmi 
 Pastitsio 
 Ptitim 
 Trahanas 
 Fish 
 Tuna salad 
 Tuna salad sandwich 
 Tilapia 
 Chraime 
 Gavroi 
 Sardines 
 Tunafish 
 Barbuniya 
 Soups 
 Avgolemono 
 Chicken soup 
 Cholent 
 Chamin 
 Kubbe 
 Yemenite chicken soup 
 Yemenite beef soup 
 Yemenite bean soup 
 Maraq Shu'it lebana 
 Maraq Shu'it yerooqa 
 Meat 
 Shawarma 
 Chicken or Turkey schnitzel 
 Kofta 
 Shish kebab 
 Shish taouk 
 Jerusalem mixed grill 
 Sofrito 
 Skewered goose liver 
 Stuffed peppers 
 Sandwiches 
 Falafel 
 Sabich 
 Shawarma  sandwich 
 Tehina and silan sandwich 
 Boureka  sandwich 
 Dips and mezze 
 Fried Kubbeh 
 Amba 
 Baba ghanoush 
 Bourekas 
 Dolma 
 Fried cauliflower 
 Ful medames 
 Harissa 
 Hummus 
 Ikra 
 Kibbeh nayyeh 
 Matboucha 
 Muhammara 
 Yogurt 
 Zhoug 
 Grains and side dishes 
 Bulgur 
 Couscous 
 Farro 
 Freekeh 
 Latke 
 Rice 
 Rice pilaf 
 Scorched rice 
 Mujadara 
 Fried foods 
 Atayef 
 Cigarim 
 Corn schnitzel 
 Falafel 
 Fried chicken 
 Fried eggplant 
 Israeli schnitzel 
 Keftes de prasa 
 Kibbeh 
 Latkes 
 Zalabia 
 Desserts 
 Halva 
 Baklava 
 Basbousa 
 Halva ice cream 
 Duvshaniot 
 Sufganiyot 
 Rugelach 
 Hamantashen 
 Malabi 
 Ma'amoul 
 Tahini cookie 
 Alcohol 
 Israeli beer 
 Israeli wine 
 Kosher wine 
 Arak 
 Tubi 60 
 Other drinks 
 Mint lemonade 
 Rimonana 
 Sahlab 
 Mint tea 
 Kafe shahor 
 Ayran 
 Israeli restaurants domestically and abroad 
 List of restaurants in Israel 
 Bavel 
 Taïm 
 Zahav 
 
 v t e Asian cuisine Sovereign states 
 Afghanistan 
 Armenia 
 Azerbaijan 
 Bahrain 
 Bangladesh 
 Bhutan 
 Brunei 
 Burma (Myanmar) 
 Cambodia 
 China 
 Cyprus 
 East Timor (Timor-Leste) 
 Egypt 
 Georgia 
 India 
 Indonesia 
 Iran 
 Iraq 
 Israel 
 Japan 
 Jordan 
 Kazakhstan 
 North Korea 
 South Korea 
 Kuwait 
 Kyrgyzstan 
 Laos 
 Lebanon 
 Malaysia 
 Maldives 
 Mongolia 
 Nepal 
 Oman 
 Pakistan 
 Philippines 
 Qatar 
 Russia 
 Saudi Arabia 
 Singapore 
 Sri Lanka 
 Syria 
 Tajikistan 
 Thailand 
 Turkey 
 Turkmenistan 
 United Arab Emirates 
 Uzbekistan 
 Vietnam 
 Yemen 
 States with limited recognition 
 Abkhazia 
 Artsakh 
 Northern Cyprus 
 Palestine 
 South Ossetia 
 Taiwan 
 Dependencies and other territories 
 British Indian Ocean Territory 
 Christmas Island 
 Cocos (Keeling) Islands 
 Hong Kong 
 Macau 
 
 v t e Mediterranean cuisine Regions Southern Maghrebi 
 Algerian 
 Chakhchoukha 
 Berber 
 Libyan 
 Bazin 
 Moroccan 
 Méchoui 
 Tajine 
 Tunisian 
 Shakshouka 
 Regional
 Couscous 
 Egyptian 
 Duqqa 
 Ful medames 
 Kushari 
 Mulukhiyah 
 Levant 
 Israeli 
 Hamin 
 Lebanese 
 Kibbeh 
 Palestinian 
 Musakhan 
 Syrian 
 Regional 
 Baba ghanoush 
 Hummus 
 Northern Turkish 
 Cheeses 
 Desserts 
 Kebabs 
 Rakı 
 Turkish tea 
 Greek 
 Gyros 
 Greek salad 
 Stifado 
 Feta 
 Skordalia 
 Loukaniko 
 Melomakarono 
 Ionian Islands 
 Bourdeto 
 Pastitsada 
 Crete 
 Dakos 
 Paximadi 
 Other Balkan 
 Albanian 
 Aromanian 
 Bosnia and Herzegovina 
 Croatian 
 Montenegrin 
 Slovenian 
 Regional
 Pita 
 Shish kebab 
 Yogurt 
 Baklava 
 Moussaka 
 Italian 
 Regional
 Pasta 
 Pizza 
 Abruzzese 
 Arrosticini 
 Mortadella di Campotosto 
 Maccheroni alla chitarra 
 Pizzelle 
 Timballo 
 Bocconotto 
 Parrozzo 
 Apulian 
 Arbëreshë 
 Ligurian 
 Ciuppin 
 Focaccia 
 Pesto 
 Ravioli 
 Lombard 
 Mantuan 
 Lucanian 
 Neapolitan 
 Neapolitan ragù 
 Pasta e fagioli 
 Roman 
 Carbonara 
 Sardinian 
 Pane carasau 
 Malloreddus 
 Mirto (liqueur) 
 Abbamele 
 Pecorino sardo 
 Culurgiònes 
 Bottarga 
 Seada 
 Sicilian 
 Cannoli 
 Caponata 
 Pasta alla Norma 
 Scaccia 
 Tuscan 
 Ribollita 
 Venetian 
 Carpaccio 
 Polenta 
 Risotto 
 French 
 Corsican 
 Brocciu 
 Occitan 
 Cassoulet 
 Brandade 
 Provencal 
 Bouillabaisse 
 Ratatouille 
 Salade niçoise 
 Spanish 
 Andalusian 
 Gazpacho 
 Sherry 
 Balearic 
 Caldereta 
 Tombet 
 Catalan 
 Escalivada 
 Escudella 
 Ollada 
 Valencian 
 Paella 
 Other 
 Gibraltarian 
 Monégasque 
 Islands 
 Cypriot 
 Afelia 
 Halloumi 
 Maltese 
 Staples 
 Wheat 
 Bread 
 Couscous 
 Pasta 
 Pizza 
 Semolina 
 Olive 
 Olive oil 
 Grape 
 Wine 
 Shared 
 Anise spirits 
 Bottarga 
 Lamb 
 Exemplars 
 Elizabeth David 
 A Book of Mediterranean Food 
 
 Category 
 
 v t e Middle Eastern cuisine Arab 
 Bahraini 
 Egyptian 
 Iraqi 
 Jordanian 
 Kuwaiti 
 Lebanese 
 Omani 
 Palestinian 
 Qatar 
 Saudi Arabian 
 Syrian 
 United Arab Emirates 
 Yemeni 
 Non-Arab 
 Cypriot 
 Iranian 
 Israeli 
 Turkish 
 Ethnic and religious 
 Assyrian 
 Azerbaijani 
 Baloch 
 Caspian cuisine 
 Jewish 
 Kurdish 
 Levantine 
 Related cuisines 
 Afghanistan 
 Armenian 
 Balkan 
 Caucasian 
 Circassian 
 Georgian 
 Greek 
 Indian 
 Pakistani 
 Pashtun 
 
 v t e Cuisines Continental 
 African 
 North 
 West 
 list 
 Americas 
 Caribbean 
 North 
 South 
 list 
 Asian 
 Caucasian 
 Central 
 Indian subcontinent 
 Levantine 
 list 
 European 
 Balkan 
 Central 
 Eastern 
 list 
 Oceanic 
 Intercontinental
 Global 
 Latin American 
 Mediterranean 
 Middle Eastern 
 National  and regional 
 Afghan 
 Albanian 
 Algerian 
 American 
 Californian 
 Floribbean 
 Hawaiian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Lowcountry (South Carolina) 
 New England 
 New Mexico 
 Pacific Northwest 
 Pennsylvania Dutch 
 Puerto Rican 
 Southern US 
 Southwest US 
 Texas 
 Angolan 
 Argentine 
 Armenian 
 Australian 
 Austrian 
 Azerbaijani 
 Bahraini 
 Bangladeshi 
 Barbadian 
 Belarusian 
 Belgian 
 Belizean 
 Beninese 
 Bhutanese 
 Bolivian 
 Bosnian-Herzegovinian 
 Botswana 
 Brazilian 
 British 
 Channel Islands 
 English 
 Gibraltarian 
 Northern Irish 
 Saint Helena 
 Scottish 
 Welsh 
 Bruneian 
 Bulgarian 
 Burkinabé 
 Burmese 
 Burundian 
 Cambodian 
 Cameroonian 
 Canadian 
 Acadian 
 Québécois 
 Central African Republic 
 Chadian 
 Chilean 
 Chinese 
 Cantonese 
 Hong Kong 
 Macanese 
 Tibetan 
 Xinjiang 
 Colombian 
 Congolese 
 Corsican 
 Croatian 
 Cuban 
 Cypriot 
 Czech 
 Danish 
 Faroese 
 Greenlandic 
 Djiboutian 
 Dominican 
 Dominican Republic 
 Dutch 
 East Timorese 
 Ecuadorian 
 Egyptian 
 Emirati 
 Equatorial Guinean 
 Eritrean 
 Estonian 
 Ethiopian 
 Fijian 
 Filipino 
 Finnish 
 French 
 Occitan 
 French Guianan 
 Gabonese 
 Gambian 
 Georgian 
 German 
 Ghanaian 
 Greek 
 Cretan 
 Epirotic 
 Greek Macedonian 
 Heptanesean 
 Guatemalan 
 Guinea-Bissauan 
 Guinean 
 Haitian 
 Honduran 
 Hungarian 
 Icelandic 
 Indian 
 Arunachalese 
 Assamese 
 Bengali 
 Bihari 
 Goan 
 Gujarati 
 Himachal Pradesh 
 Kashmiri 
 Jharkhandi 
 Karnataka 
 Kerala 
 Maharashtrian 
 Manipuri 
 Meghalayan 
 Mizo 
 Naga 
 Odia 
 Punjabi 
 Rajasthani 
 Sikkimese 
 Sindhi 
 Tamil 
 Telangana 
 Telugu 
 Indonesian 
 Acehnese 
 Balinese 
 Banjar 
 Batak 
 Betawi 
 Indo 
 Javanese 
 Madurese 
 Makassar 
 Minahasan 
 Minangkabau 
 Palembangese 
 Sundanese 
 Iranian 
 Iraqi 
 Irish 
 Israeli 
 Italian 
 Abruzzese 
 Ligurian 
 Lombard 
 Lucanian 
 Neapolitan 
 Roman 
 Sardinian 
 Sicilian 
 Venetian 
 Ivorian 
 Jamaican 
 Japanese 
 Okinawan 
 Jordanian 
 Kazakh 
 Kenyan 
 Korean 
 North Korean 
 South Korean 
 Kosovan 
 Kuwaiti 
 Kyrgyz 
 Lao 
 Latvian 
 Lebanese 
 Lesotho 
 Liberian 
 Libyan 
 Liechtensteiner 
 Lithuanian 
 Luxembourg 
 Macedonian 
 Malagasy 
 Malawian 
 Malaysian 
 Sabahan 
 Sarawakian 
 Maldivian 
 Malian 
 Maltese 
 Mauritanian 
 Mauritian 
 Mexican 
 Moldovan 
 Monégasque 
 Mongolian 
 Montenegrin 
 Moroccan 
 Mozambican 
 Namibian 
 Nauruan 
 Nepalese 
 New Zealand 
 Nicaraguan 
 Niger 
 Nigerian 
 Niuean 
 Norwegian 
 Omani 
 Pakistani 
 Palestinian 
 Panamanian 
 Peruvian 
 Polish 
 Portuguese 
 Qatari 
 Romanian  (incl.  Transylvanian Saxon ) 
 Russian 
 Bashkir 
 Chechen 
 Circassian 
 Komi 
 Mordovian 
 Sakha 
 Tatar 
 Udmurt 
 Yamal 
 Rwandan 
 Saint Lucian 
 Salvadoran 
 Sammarinese 
 São Tomé and Príncipe 
 Saudi Arabian 
 Senegalese 
 Serbian 
 Seychellois 
 Sierra Leonean 
 Singaporean 
 Slovak 
 Slovenian 
 Somali 
 South African 
 Spanish 
 Andalusian 
 Asturian 
 Balearic 
 Basque 
 Canarian 
 Cantabrian 
 Catalan 
 Extremaduran 
 Galician 
 Manchegan 
 Valencian 
 Sri Lankan 
 Sudanese 
 Swazi 
 Swedish 
 Swiss 
 Syrian 
 Taiwanese 
 Tajik 
 Tanzanian 
 Zanzibari 
 Thai 
 Togolese 
 Tunisian 
 Turkish 
 Turkmen 
 Trinidadian and Tobagonian 
 Ugandan 
 Ukrainian 
 Uruguayan 
 Uzbek 
 Venezuelan 
 Vietnamese 
 Western Saharan 
 Yemeni 
 Zambian 
 Zimbabwean 
 Ethnic 
 Ainu 
 Arab 
 Indonesian 
 Aromanian 
 Assyrian 
 Balochi 
 Berber 
 Cajun 
 Chinese 
 American 
 Canadian 
 Chifa 
 Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Crimean Tatar 
 Greek American 
 Hazaragi 
 Indian 
 Anglo-Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Indigenous American 
 Inuit 
 Italian American 
 Kurdish 
 Livonian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Malay 
 Ossetian 
 Parsi 
 Pashtun 
 Peranakan 
 Romani 
 Sámi 
 Soul food 
 Sylheti 
 Transylvanian Saxon 
 Yup'ik 
 Religious 
 Buddhist 
 Christian 
 Goan Catholic 
 Mangalorean Catholic 
 Mennonite 
 Hindu 
 Islamic 
 Chinese 
 Ital 
 Jain 
 Jewish 
 American 
 Ashkenazi 
 Bukharan 
 Ethiopian 
 Mizrahi 
 Sephardic 
 Syrian 
 Ritual slaughter 
 Sikh 
 Historical 
 Ancient Egyptian 
 Ancient Greek 
 Ancient Israelite 
 Ancient Roman 
 Antebellum America 
 Aztec 
 Byzantine 
 Early modern European 
 Historical Chinese 
 Historical Indian subcontinent 
 Historical North Indian and Pakistani 
 History of agriculture 
 History of alcoholic drinks 
 History of bread 
 History of seafood 
 History of vegetarianism 
 Historical Argentine 
 Historical Japanese 
 Inca 
 Mayan 
 Muisca 
 Mughal 
 Medieval 
 Ottoman 
 Peasant 
 Soviet 
 Thirteen Colonies 
 Styles 
 Classique 
 Fast food 
 Fusion 
 New American 
 Eurasian 
 Haute 
 Molecular gastronomy 
 Note by Note 
 Nouvelle 
 Lists 
 List of cuisines 
 List of historical cuisines 
 Lists of prepared foods 
 Related 
 Cookbook 
 Cooking 
 Culinary arts 
 Drink 
 Food 
 history 
 Diet 
 Meal preparation 
 
   Food portal 
   Drink portal 
   Category 
   Commons 
   Cookbook 
   WikiProject 
   Outline 
 
 Authority control : National libraries  
 Israel 
 United States 
 
  
NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw2336
Cached time: 20230311165457
Cache expiry: 1814400
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [no‐toc‐conversion, vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.344 seconds
Real time usage: 1.620 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 23646/1000000
Post‐expand include size: 247925/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 9839/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 16/100
Expensive parser function count: 15/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 174373/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.590/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 21801912/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/400
 
 
Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1146.776      1 -total
 27.42%  314.407      1 Template:Reflist
 22.04%  252.771      8 Template:Navbox
 12.33%  141.384      1 Template:Asian_topic
  8.87%  101.666      3 Template:Cite_book
  8.39%   96.193      1 Template:Lang-he
  7.79%   89.280     52 Template:Iso2country
  6.47%   74.181      1 Template:More_citation_needed
  6.17%   70.727      1 Template:Cuisine_of_Israel
  5.88%   67.456      1 Template:Ambox
 
  Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:idhash:11447140-0!canonical and timestamp 20230311165456 and revision id 1142954994. Rendering was triggered because: page-view
  
 esi <esi:include src="/esitest-fa8a495983347898/content" />  
 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Israeli_cuisine&oldid=1142954994 " 
 Categories :  Israeli cuisine Jewish culture Jewish cuisine Middle Eastern cuisine Mediterranean cuisine Hidden categories:  Webarchive template wayback links CS1 uses Hebrew-language script (he) CS1 Hebrew-language sources (he) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Wikipedia extended-confirmed-protected pages Articles needing additional references from February 2023 All articles needing additional references Articles containing Hebrew-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2023 Articles with unsourced statements from November 2021 Commons category link is on Wikidata Region topic template using suffix Articles with J9U identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  This page was last edited on 5 March 2023, at 05:10  (UTC) . 
 Text is available under the  Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0 ;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the  Terms of Use  and  Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the  Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. 
 
 
 Privacy policy 
 About Wikipedia 
 Disclaimers 
 Contact Wikipedia 
 Mobile view 
 Developers 
 Statistics 
 Cookie statement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
