
 
 
 Jump to content 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle sidebar 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Create account Log in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Personal tools 
 
 
 
 
   Create account   Log in 
 
 
 
 
		Pages for logged out editors  learn more 
 
 
 Contributions Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Navigation 
 
 
 Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate 
 
 
 
 
 Contribute 
 
 
 Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file 
 
 
 
 
 Tools 
 
 
 What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item 
 
 
 
 
 Print/export 
 
 
 Download as PDF Printable version 
 
 
 
 
 In other projects 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons Wikibooks Wikivoyage 
 
 
 
 
 Languages 
 
 On this Wikipedia the language links are at the top of the page across from the article title.  Go to top . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CentralNotice  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Contents 
 move to sidebar 
 hide 
 
 
 
 
 (Top) 
 
 
 
 
 
 1 History 
 
 
				Toggle History subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 1.1 Antiquity 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.2 Middle Ages 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.3 Early modern era 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.4 Modern era 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.5 Contemporary era 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 Basic foods 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 Regional cuisines 
 
 
				Toggle Regional cuisines subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 3.1 Abruzzo and Molise 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.2 Apulia 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.3 Basilicata 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.4 Calabria 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.5 Campania 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.6 Emilia-Romagna 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.7 Friuli-Venezia Giulia 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.8 Liguria 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.9 Lazio 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.10 Lombardy 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.11 Marche 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.12 Piedmont 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.13 Sardinia 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.14 Sicily 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.15 Trentino-Alto Adige 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.16 Tuscany 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.17 Umbria 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.18 Valle d'Aosta 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.19 Veneto 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4 Meal structure 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5 Food establishments 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6 Drinks 
 
 
				Toggle Drinks subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 6.1 Coffee 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6.2 Alcoholic beverages 
 
 
 
 
 
 6.2.1 Wine 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6.2.2 Beer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6.2.3 Other 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 7 Desserts 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8 Holiday cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 9 International 
 
 
				Toggle International subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 9.1 Africa 
 
 
 
 
 
 9.1.1 Former Italian colonies 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 9.1.2 South Africa 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 9.2 Europe 
 
 
 
 
 
 9.2.1 Croatia 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 9.2.2 France 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 9.2.3 Malta 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 9.2.4 Monaco 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 9.2.5 San Marino 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 9.2.6 Slovenia 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 9.2.7 Switzerland 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 9.3 North and Central America 
 
 
 
 
 
 9.3.1 United States 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 9.3.2 Mexico 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 9.4 South America 
 
 
 
 
 
 9.4.1 Argentina 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 9.4.2 Brazil 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 9.4.3 Uruguay 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 9.4.4 Venezuela 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 9.5 Oceania 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 10 See also 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 11 Notes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 12 References 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 13 Further reading 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 14 External links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
						Toggle the table of contents
					 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle the table of contents 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Italian cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 62 languages 
 
 
 
 العربية Արեւմտահայերէն Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা Беларуская Български Brezhoneg Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Jawa ಕನ್ನಡ ქართული Kurdî Lietuvių Lingua Franca Nova Magyar Македонски Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Napulitano Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پنجابی Polski Português Русский Scots Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Tagalog ไทย Türkçe Türkmençe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 吴语 中文 
 Edit links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Article Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 English 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 More 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
 
 (Redirected from  Tuscan cuisine ) 
 "Italian restaurant" redirects here. For the television series, see  Italian Restaurant . 
 "Italian rice" redirects here. For the common Italian rice dish, see  risotto  and  arancini . 
 Cuisine originating from Italy 
 
 
   Clockwise from top left; some of the most popular Italian foods:  pizza  ( Margherita ),  pasta  ( carbonara ),  espresso , and  gelato 
 Italian cuisine  ( Italian :  cucina italiana ,  pronounced  [kuˈtʃiːna itaˈljaːna] ) is a  Mediterranean cuisine [1]  consisting of the  ingredients ,  recipes  and  cooking techniques  developed across the  Italian Peninsula  and later spread around the world together with waves of  Italian diaspora . [2] [3] [4]  Some of these foods were imported from other cultures.  Significant changes  occurred with the colonization of the Americas  and the introduction of  potatoes ,  tomatoes ,  capsicums ,  maize  and  sugar beet  — the latter introduced in quantity in the 18th century. [5] [6]  It is one of the best-known and most appreciated  gastronomies  worldwide. [7] 
 Italian cuisine includes deeply rooted traditions common to the whole country, as well as all the  regional gastronomies , different from each other, especially between  the north ,  the centre  and  the south  of Italy, which are in continuous exchange. [8] [9] [10]  Many dishes that were once regional have proliferated with variations throughout the country. [11] [12]  Italian cuisine offers an abundance of taste, and is one of the most popular and copied around the world. [13]  The cuisine has influenced several other cuisines around the world, chiefly that of the  United States . [14] 
 One of the main characteristics of Italian cuisine is its simplicity, with many dishes made up of few ingredients, and therefore Italian cooks often rely on the quality of the ingredients, rather than the complexity of preparation. [15] [16]  Italian cuisine is at the origin of a turnover of more than  € 200 billion worldwide. [17]  The most popular dishes and recipes, over the centuries, have often been created by ordinary people more so than by  chefs , which is why many Italian recipes are suitable for home and daily  cooking , respecting regional specificities, privileging only raw materials and ingredients from the region of origin of the dish and preserving its seasonality. [18] [19] [20] 
 The  Mediterranean diet  forms the basis of Italian cuisine, rich in  pasta , fish, fruits and vegetables. [21]   Cheese ,  cold cuts  and  wine  are central to Italian cuisine, and along with  pizza  and  coffee  (especially  espresso ) form part of Italian  gastronomic  culture. [22]  Desserts have a long tradition of merging local flavours such as  citrus fruits ,  pistachio  and  almonds  with sweet cheeses like  mascarpone  and  ricotta  or exotic tastes as cocoa, vanilla and cinnamon.  Gelato , [23]   tiramisù [24]  and  cassata  are among the most famous examples of Italian desserts, cakes and patisserie. Italian cuisine relies heavily on traditional products; the country has a large number of  traditional specialities  protected under  EU law . [25]  Italy is the world's  largest producer of wine , as well as the country with the widest variety of indigenous  grapevine  varieties in the world. [26] [27] 
 
 Part of  a series  on the Culture of Italy 
 History 
 People 
 Languages 
 Traditions 
 Mythology  and  Folklore 
 Cuisine 
 Festivals 
 Religion 
 Art 
 Literature 
 Music 
 Media 
 Television 
 Cinema 
 
 Sport 
 Monuments 
 World Heritage Sites 
 
 Symbols 
 Flag 
 Coat of arms 
 National anthem 
 
   Italy portal v t e 
 
 History [ edit ] 
   A  Roman  mosaic depicting a banquet during a hunting trip from the Late Roman  Villa Romana del Casale  in  Sicily 
 Italian cuisine has developed over the centuries. Although the country known as Italy  did not unite until the 19th century , the cuisine can claim traceable roots as far back as the 4th century BC. Food and culture were very important at that time evident from the cookbook ( Apicius ) which dates to the first century BC. [28]  Through the centuries, neighbouring regions, conquerors, high-profile chefs, political upheaval, and the discovery of the  New World  have influenced its development. Italian cuisine started to form after  the fall  of the  Roman Empire  when different cities  began to separate  and form their own traditions. Many different types of  bread  and  pasta  were made, and there was a variation in cooking techniques and preparation. 
 
 Italian cuisine 
 History 
 Ancient Roman cuisine 
 Medieval cuisine 
 Early modern cuisine 
 Contemporary cuisine 
 
 Regional cuisines 
 Abruzzese cuisine 
 Apulian cuisine 
 Arbëreshë cuisine 
 Corsican cuisine 
 Ligurian cuisine 
 Lombard cuisine 
 Mantuan cuisine 
 Lucanian cuisine 
 Neapolitan cuisine 
 Roman cuisine 
 Sardinian cuisine 
 Sicilian cuisine 
 Venetian cuisine 
 
 Lists 
 Chefs 
 Dishes 
 Pasta 
 Cheeses 
 PDO 
 Desserts and pastries 
 Restaurants 
 Wine 
 IGT 
 DOCG 
 DOC 
 Beer 
 
 See also 
 Italian-American cuisine 
 Sammarinese cuisine 
 Osteria 
 Trattoria 
 Enoteca 
 Sagra 
 List of Italian chefs 
 Meal structure 
 
   Italy portal     Food portal v t e 
 The country was then split for a long time and influenced by surrounding countries such as  Spain ,  France  and others in  Central Europe . Trade and the location on the  Silk Road  with its routes to Asia also influenced the local development of special dishes. Due to the climatic conditions and the different proximity to the sea, different basic foods and spices were available from  region  to region. Regional cuisine is represented by some of the major cities in Italy. For example,  Milan  (in the north of Italy) is known for  risottos ,  Trieste  (in the northeast of Italy) is known for multicultural food,  Bologna  (in the centre of Italy) is known for its  tortellini , and  Naples  (in the south of Italy) is famous for its  pizzas . [29]   Spaghetti  for example is believed to have spread across Africa to Sicily and then on to Naples. [30] [31] 
 
 Antiquity [ edit ] 
 See also:  Ancient Roman cuisine  and  Food and dining in the Roman Empire 
 The first known Italian  food writer  was a  Greek   Sicilian  named  Archestratus  from  Syracuse  in the 4th century BC. He wrote a poem that spoke of using "top quality and seasonal" ingredients. He said that flavours should not be masked by  spices ,  herbs  or other  seasonings . He placed importance on simple preparation of  fish . [32] 
 Simplicity was abandoned and  replaced by a culture of gastronomy as the Roman Empire developed . By the time  De re coquinaria  was published in the 1st century AD, it contained 470 recipes calling for heavy use of spices and herbs. The Romans employed Greek bakers to produce  breads  and imported cheeses from Sicily as the Sicilians had a reputation as the best  cheesemakers . The Romans reared  goats  for  butchering , and grew  artichokes  and  leeks . [32] 
 Some foods now considered traditional were imported to Italy from foreign countries during the Roman era.  This includes the  jujube  ( giuggiole ), which is now celebrated as a regional cuisine in  Arquà Petrarca . [33]  The Romans also imported cherries, apricots, and peaches. [33] 
 
 Middle Ages [ edit ] 
 See also:  Medieval cuisine 
   A restored medieval kitchen inside  Verrucole Castle , Tuscany. 
 Arabs invaded Sicily  in the 9th century, introducing  spinach ,  almonds , and  rice . [34]  They also brought with them foods from foreign lands that are now celebrated as traditional Italian foods:   citrus fruit ,  artichokes ,  chickpeas ,  pistachios ,  sugarcane ,  eggplants , and  durum wheat , which is used to make  pasta . [33]   During the 12th century, a  Norman  king surveyed Sicily and saw people making long strings made from  flour  and water called  atriya , which eventually became  trii , a term still used for spaghetti in southern Italy. [35]  Normans also introduced the  casserole ,  salt cod  (baccalà), and  stockfish , all of which remain popular. [36] 
 Food preservation  was either chemical or physical, as  refrigeration  did not exist. Meats and fish were  smoked , dried, or kept on ice.  Brine  and  salt  were used to  pickle  items such as  herring , and to cure  pork .  Root vegetables  were preserved in brine after they had been  parboiled . Other means of preservation included  oil ,  vinegar , or immersing meat in congealed, rendered fat. For preserving fruits,  liquor ,  honey , and sugar were used. [37] 
 The oldest Italian book on cuisine is the 13th century  Liber de coquina  (English:  Cookbook ) written in  Naples . Dishes include "Roman-style"  cabbage  ( ad usum romanorum ),  ad usum campanie  which were "small leaves" prepared in the "Campanian manner", a bean dish from the Marca di Trevisio, a  torta ,  compositum londardicum , dishes similar to dishes the modern day. Two other books from the 14th century include recipes for Roman  pastello , Lasagna pie, and call for the use of  salt  from  Sardinia  or  Chioggia . [38] 
 
   Saffron  has been used in Italy for centuries 
 In the 15th century,  Maestro Martino  was chef to the  Patriarch of Aquileia  at the  Vatican . His  Libro de arte coquinaria  (English:  Culinary art book ) describes a more refined and elegant cuisine. His book contains a recipe for  Maccaroni Siciliani , made by wrapping dough around a thin iron rod to dry in the sun. The macaroni was cooked in  capon  stock flavoured with  saffron , displaying  Persian  influences. Martino noted the avoidance of excessive spices in favour of fresh herbs. [36]  The Roman recipes include  coppiette  (air-dried  salami ) and cabbage dishes. His  Florentine  dishes include eggs with  Bolognese torta ,  Sienese torta  and  Genoese  recipes such as  piperata  (sweets), macaroni,  squash ,  mushrooms , and spinach pie with  onions . [39] 
 Martino's text was included in a 1475 book by  Bartolomeo Platina  printed in  Venice  entitled  De honesta voluptate et valetudine  (English:  On Honest Pleasure and Good Health ). Platina puts Martino's "Libro" in regional context, writing about  perch  from  Lake Maggiore ,  sardines  from  Lake Garda ,  grayling  from  Adda , hens from  Padua ,  olives  from  Bologna  and  Piceno ,  turbot  from  Ravenna ,  rudd  from  Lake Trasimeno ,  carrots  from  Viterbo ,  bass  from the  Tiber ,  roviglioni  and  shad  from  Lake Albano ,  snails  from  Rieti ,  figs  from Tuscolo,  grapes  from  Narni ,  oil  from  Cassino ,  oranges  from  Naples  and  eels  from  Campania . Grains from  Lombardy  and Campania are mentioned as is honey from Sicily and Taranto.  Wine  from the Ligurian coast,  Greco  from Tuscany and  San Severino , and  Trebbiano  from Tuscany and  Piceno  are also mentioned in the book. [40] 
 
 Early modern era [ edit ] 
 The courts of  Florence ,  Rome ,  Venice , and  Ferrara  were central to the cuisine.  Cristoforo di Messisbugo , steward to  Ippolito d'Este , published  Banchetti Composizioni di Vivande  (English:  Banquets Compositions of Food ) in 1549. Messisbugo gives recipes for pies and tarts (containing 124 recipes with various fillings). The work emphasizes the use of Eastern spices and sugar. [41] 
 
   Bartolomeo Scappi , personal chef to  Pope Pius V 
 In 1570,  Bartolomeo Scappi , personal chef to  Pope Pius V , wrote his  Opera  (English:  Work ) in five volumes, giving a comprehensive view of Italian cooking of that period. It contains over 1,000 recipes, with information on banquets including displays and menus as well as illustrations of kitchen and table utensils. This book differs from most books written for the royal courts in its preference for domestic animals and courtyard birds rather than game.
 Recipes include lesser cuts of meats such as tongue, head, and shoulder. The third volume has recipes for fish in  Lent . These fish recipes are simple, including  poaching ,  broiling ,  grilling , and frying after marination.
 
   Bucatini  with  Amatriciana sauce , which features the New World food of tomatoes 
 Particular attention is given to seasons and places where fish should be caught. The final volume includes pies, tarts, fritters, and a recipe for a sweet Neapolitan  pizza  (not the current savoury version, as  tomatoes  had not yet been introduced to Italy). However, such items from the New World as  corn  (maize) and  turkey  are included. [42]   Eventually, through the  Columbian exchange , Italian cuisine would also adopt not just tomatoes as a key flavor, but also  beans ,  pumpkins ,  zucchini , and  peppers , all of which came from the Americas during the last few hundred years. [33] 
 
In the first decade of the 17th century, Giacomo Castelvetro wrote  Breve Racconto di Tutte le Radici di Tutte l'Herbe et di Tutti i Frutti  (English:  A Brief Account of All Roots, Herbs, and Fruit ), translated into English by Gillian Riley. Originally from  Modena , Castelvetro moved to England because he was a  Protestant . The book lists Italian vegetables and fruits along with their preparation. He featured vegetables as a central part of the meal, not just as accompaniments. [42]  Castelvetro favoured simmering vegetables in salted water and serving them warm or cold with olive oil, salt, fresh ground pepper,  lemon  juice,  verjus , or  orange juice . He also suggested roasting vegetables wrapped in damp paper over charcoal or embers with a drizzle of olive oil. Castelvetro's book is separated into seasons with hop shoots in the spring and  truffles  in the winter, detailing the use of  pigs  in the search for truffles. [42]   L'arte di Ben Cucinare (English:  The Art of Well Cooking ) published by Bartolomeo Stefani in 1662 
 In 1662, Bartolomeo Stefani, chef to the  Duchy of Mantua , published  L'Arte di Ben Cucinare  (English:  The Art of Well Cooking ). He was the first to offer a section on  vitto ordinario  (English:  ordinary food ). The book described a banquet given by Duke  Charles  for Queen  Christina of Sweden , with details of the food and table settings for each guest, including a knife, fork, spoon, glass, a plate (instead of the bowls more often used), and a napkin. [43] 
 Other books from this time, such as  Galatheo  (English:  Etiquette ) by  Giovanni della Casa , tell how  scalci  (English:  waiters ) should manage themselves while serving their guests. Waiters should not scratch their heads or other parts of themselves, or spit, sniff, cough or sneeze while serving diners. The book also told diners not to use their fingers while eating and not to wipe sweat with their napkin. [43] 
 
 Modern era [ edit ] 
   Apicius ,  De re coquinaria  (English:  On the Subject of Cooking ), 1709 edition. 
 At the beginning of the 18th century, Italian culinary books began to emphasize the regionalism of Italian cuisine rather than  French cuisine . Books written then were no longer addressed to professional chefs but to  bourgeois  housewives. [44]  Periodicals in booklet form such as  La cuoca cremonese  (English:  The Cook of Cremona ) in 1794 give a sequence of ingredients according to season along with chapters on meat, fish, and vegetables. As the century progressed these books increased in size, popularity, and frequency. [45] 
 In the 18th century, medical texts warned peasants against eating refined foods as it was believed that these were poor for their digestion and their bodies required heavy meals. It was believed that peasants ate poorly because they preferred eating poorly. However, many peasants had to eat rotten food and mouldy bread because that was all they could afford. [46] 
 In 1779, Antonio Nebbia from  Macerata  in the  Marche  region, wrote  Il Cuoco Maceratese  (English:  The Cook of Macerata ). Nebbia addressed the importance of local vegetables and  pasta , rice, and  gnocchi . For stock, he preferred vegetables and chicken over other meats.
 In 1773, the Neapolitan Vincenzo Corrado's  Il Cuoco Galante  (English:  The Courteous Cook ) gave particular emphasis to  vitto pitagorico  (English:  vegetarian food ). "Pythagorean food consists of fresh herbs, roots, flowers, fruits, seeds and all that is produced in the earth for our nourishment. It is so-called because  Pythagoras , as is well known, only used such produce. There is no doubt that this kind of food appears to be more natural to man, and the use of meat is noxious." This book was the first to give the tomato a central role with 13 recipes.
 
   Tomatoes are a typical part of Italian cuisine, but only entered common usage in the late 18th century [47] 
 Zuppa alli pomidoro  (English:  Tomato soup ) in Corrado's book is a dish similar to today's Tuscan  pappa al pomodoro . Corrado's 1798 edition introduced a "Treatise on the Potato" after the French  Antoine-Augustin Parmentier 's successful promotion of the tuber. [48]  In 1790,  Francesco Leonardi  in his book  L'Apicio moderno  (English:  Modern  Apicius ) sketches a history of the Italian cuisine from the Roman Age and gives the first recipe of a tomato-based sauce. [49] 
 In the 19th century, Giovanni Vialardi, chef to King  Victor Emmanuel II of Italy , wrote  Trattato di cucina, Pasticceria moderna, Credenza e relativa Confettureria  (English:  A Treatise of Modern Cookery and Patisserie ) with recipes "suitable for a modest household". Many of his recipes are for regional dishes from  Turin  including 12 for potatoes such as  Genoese Cappon Magro . In 1829,  Il Nuovo Cuoco Milanese Economico  (English:  The New Economic Milanese Chef ) by Giovanni Felice Luraschi featured  Milanese  dishes such as kidney with  anchovies  and lemon and  gnocchi alla Romana . Gian Battista and Giovanni Ratto's  La Cucina Genovese  (English:  Genoese cuisine ) in 1871 addressed the cuisine of  Liguria . This book contained the first recipe for  pesto .  La Cucina Teorico-Pratica  (English:  The Theoretical-Practical Cuisine ) written by Ippolito Cavalcanti described the first recipe for pasta with tomatoes. [50] 
 La scienza in cucina e l'arte di mangiare bene  (English:  The Science of Cooking and the Art of Eating Well ), by  Pellegrino Artusi , first published in 1891, is widely regarded as the canon of classic modern Italian cuisine, and it is still in print. Its recipes predominantly originate from  Romagna  and  Tuscany , where he lived. Around 1880, two decades after the  Unification of Italy , was the beginning of  Italian diaspora , and with it started the spread of Italian cuisine in the world. [51] 
 
 Contemporary era [ edit ] 
   DOCG  and  DOC  labels on two bottles of  Italian wine 
 Italy has a large number of  traditional specialities  protected under  EU law . [52]  From the 1950s onwards, a great variety of typical products of Italian cuisine have been  recognized as PDO, PGI, TSG and GI  by the  Council of the European Union , to which they are added the  Indicazione geografica tipica  (IGT), the  regional   Prodotto agroalimentare tradizionale  (PAT) and the  municipal   Denominazione comunale d'origine  (De.C.O.). [53] [54]  In the  oenological  field, there are specific legal protections: the  Denominazione di origine controllata  (DOC) and the  Denominazione di origine controllata e garantita  (DOCG). [55]   Protected designation of origin  (PDO) and  Protected Geographical Indications  (PGI) have also been established in olive growing. [56]   Some of these are new introductions:  The  kiwi fruit  was introduced from  New Zealand  to Italy in the 1970s, and three decades later, the  Province of Latina  was designated the "Land of the Kiwi" and given protected status as a regional delicacy. [33] 
 
   Prosciutto di San Daniele   PDO , one of the most imitated Italian products in the world. [57]  The  marketing  phenomenon of imitation of Italian agri-food products that have nothing to do with Italian cuisine is known by the name of  Italian Sounding . [58] 
 Italian cuisine is one of the most popular and copied culture around the world. [13]  The lack or total unavailability of some of its most characteristic ingredients outside of Italy, leads to the complete de-naturalization of Italian ingredients, and above all else leads to falsifications (or food fraud). [59]  This phenomenon, widespread in all continents, is better known as  Italian Sounding , consisting in the use of Italian words as well as images, colour combinations (the  Italian tricolour ), geographical references, and brands evocative of Italy to promote and market agri-food products which in reality have nothing to do with Italian cuisine. [58]  Italian Sounding invests in almost every sector of Italian food, from the most famous Italian cheeses, to cured meats, a variety of pastas, regional breads, extra virgin olive oils, and wines. [59]  Counterfeit products violate registered  trademarks  or other distinctive signs protected by law such as the designations of origin (DOC, PDO, DOCG, PGI, TSG, IGT). Therefore the counterfeiting is legally punishable. [60]  However, Italian Sounding cannot be classified as  illegal  from a strictly legal standpoint, but they still represent "a huge damage to the  Italian economy  and to the potential resources of  Made in Italy ". [61]  Two out of three Italian agri-food products sold worldwide are not made in Italy. [62]  The Italian Sounding phenomenon is estimated to generate  € 55 billion worldwide annually. [63] 
 Following the spread of  fast food , also in Italy, imported from Anglo-Saxon countries and in particular from the United States in 1986, in  Bra, Piedmont , the  Slow Food  cultural and gastronomic movement was founded, then converted into an institution with the aim of protecting culinary specificities and to safeguard various regional products of Italian cuisine under the control of the  Slow Food Presidia . [64]   Slow Food  also focuses on food quality, rather than quantity. [65]  It speaks out against  overproduction  and  food waste , [66]  and sees  globalization  as a process in which small and local farmers and food producers should be simultaneously protected from and included in the global  food system . [67] [68] 
 The Italian chef  Gualtiero Marchesi  (1930–2017) is unanimously considered the founder of the new Italian cuisine [69]  and, in the opinion of many, the most famous Italian chef in the world. [70]  He contributed mostly to the development of Italian cuisine, placing the Italian culinary culture among the most important around the world, with the creation, thanks to the use of Italian ingredients, dishes and culinary traditions, of the Italian version of the French  nouvelle cuisine . [71]  Italian  nouvelle cuisine  is characterized by lighter, more delicate dishes and an increased emphasis on  presentation , and it designed for the most expensive restaurants. [72]  It is defined as a "cuisine of the head rather than the throat" and it is characterized by the separation of flavours, without ever upsetting the ancient Italian culinary tradition despite the use, in its recipes, of some culinary traditions of other countries. [72] [73]  He is known for using modern technology and classic cuisine.
 
 Basic foods [ edit ] 
   Pesto , a  Ligurian  sauce made out of basil, olive oil, hard cheese and pine nuts, and which can be eaten with pasta or other dishes such as soup 
 Italian cuisine has a great variety of different ingredients which are commonly used, ranging from fruits, vegetables, grains, cheeses, meats and fish. In northern Italy, fish (such as cod, or  baccalà ), potatoes, rice, corn (maize), sausages, pork, and different types of cheese are the most common ingredients.  Pasta  dishes with tomato are common throughout Italy. [74] [75]  Italians use ingredients that are fresh and subtly seasoned and spiced. [76] 
 In northern Italy there are many kinds of  stuffed pasta , although  polenta  and  risotto  are equally popular if not more so. [77]  Ligurian ingredients include several types of fish and seafood dishes. Basil (found in  pesto ), nuts, and olive oil are very common. In Emilia-Romagna, common ingredients include ham ( prosciutto ), sausage ( cotechino ), different sorts of  salami , truffles,  grana ,  Parmigiano-Reggiano ,  tomatoes  ( Bolognese sauce  or  ragù ) and  aceto balsamico .
 
   Parmigiano-Reggiano  cheese 
   Olive oil 
   Various types of  pasta 
   Traditional  pizza Margherita , whose ingredients,  tomato  (red),  mozzarella  (white) and  basil  (green), are inspired by the colours of the national  flag of Italy . [78] 
   Barrels of  aceto balsamico  aging 
 Traditional central Italian cuisine uses ingredients such as tomatoes, all kinds of meat, fish, and  pecorino . [79]  In  Tuscany , pasta (especially  pappardelle ) is traditionally served with meat sauce (including game meat). [80]  In southern Italy, tomatoes (fresh or cooked into tomato sauce),  peppers , olives and olive oil, garlic,  artichokes , oranges,  ricotta cheese ,  eggplants ,  zucchini , certain types of fish (anchovies, sardines and tuna), and capers are important components to the local cuisine. [81] 
 Many  cheeses  and  dairy products  are made in Italy. [82]  There are more than 600 distinct types throughout the country, [83] [84]  of which 490 are protected and marked as PDO ( Protected designation of origin ), PGI ( Protected Geographical Indication ) and PAT ( Prodotto agroalimentare tradizionale ). [85] 
 Olive oil  is the most commonly used vegetable fat in Italian cooking, and as the basis for sauces, replaced only in some recipes and in some geographical areas by  butter  or  lard . [86]  Italy is the largest consumer of olive oil, with 30% of the world total; [87]  it also has the largest range of  olive cultivars  in existence and is the second largest producer and exporter in the world. [88] [89]   Bread  has always been, as it has for other Mediterranean countries, a fundamental food in Italian cuisine. [90]  There are numerous  regional  types of bread. [90] 
 Italian cuisine has a great variety of  sausages  and  cured meats , many of which are protected and marked as PDO and PGI, [91]  and make up 34% of the total of sausages and cured meats consumed in Europe, [92]  while others are marked as PAT. [93] 
 Meat , especially  beef ,  pork  and  poultry , is very present in Italian cuisine, in a very wide range of preparations and recipes. [94]  It is also important as an ingredient in the preparation of sauces for pasta. In addition to the varieties mentioned, albeit less commonly,  sheep ,  goat ,  horse ,  rabbit  and, even less commonly, game meat are also consumed in Italy. [94] 
 Since Italy is largely surrounded by the sea, therefore having a great coastal development and being rich in lakes, fish (both marine and freshwater), as well as  crustaceans ,  molluscs  and other seafood, enjoy a prominent place in Italian cuisine, as in general in the Mediterranean cuisine. [95]  Fish is the second course in meals and is also an ingredient in the preparation of seasonings for types of pasta. [96]  It is also widely used in  appetizers . [97] 
 Italian cuisine is also well known (and well regarded) for its use of a diverse variety of pasta. Pasta include noodles in various lengths, widths, and shapes. [98]  Most pastas may be distinguished by the shapes for which they are named— penne ,  maccheroni ,  spaghetti ,  linguine ,  fusilli ,  lasagne , and many more varieties that are filled with other ingredients like  ravioli  and  tortellini . [98] 
 The word pasta is also used to refer to dishes in which pasta products are a primary ingredient. [99]  It is usually served with sauce. There are  hundreds of different shapes of pasta  with at least locally recognized names. Examples include  spaghetti  (thin rods),  rigatoni  (tubes or cylinders),  fusilli  (swirls), and  lasagne  (sheets). Dumplings, like  gnocchi  (made with potatoes or pumpkin) and noodles like  spätzle , are sometimes considered pasta. [100] 
 Pasta is divided into two broad categories: dry pasta (100%  durum wheat  flour mixed with water) and fresh pasta (also with soft wheat flour and almost always mixed with eggs). [101]  Pasta is generally cooked by boiling. Under Italian law, dry pasta (pasta secca) can only be made from  durum wheat  flour or durum wheat  semolina , and is more commonly used in Southern Italy compared to their Northern counterparts, who traditionally prefer the fresh egg variety. [102] 
 Durum flour and durum semolina have a yellow tinge in colour. [103]  Italian dried pasta is traditionally cooked  al dente  (English:  firm to the bite , meaning not too soft). [104]  There are many types of wheat flour with varying gluten and protein levels depending on the variety of grain used. [105] 
 Particular varieties of pasta may also use other grains and milling methods to make the flour, as specified by law. Some pasta varieties, such as  pizzoccheri , are made from  buckwheat  flour. [106]  Fresh pasta may include eggs ( pasta all'uovo , "egg pasta"). [107] 
 Both dry and fresh pasta are used to prepare the dish, in three different ways: [108] [109] [110] 
 
 pastasciutta : pasta is cooked and then served with a sauce or other condiment; 
 minestrone : pasta is cooked and served in meat or vegetable broth ( minestra ), even together with chopped vegetables ( minestrone ); 
 pasta al forno : the pasta is first cooked and seasoned, and then passed back to the oven. 
 Pizza , consisting of a usually round, flat base of  leavened  wheat-based  dough  topped with tomatoes, cheese, and often various other ingredients (such as anchovies, mushrooms, onions, olives, meats, and more), which is then baked at a high temperature, traditionally in a wood-fired oven, [111]  is the best known and most consumed Italian food in the world. [112] 
 In 2009, upon Italy's request,  Neapolitan pizza  was registered with the  European Union  as a  Traditional Speciality Guaranteed  dish, [113] [114]  and in 2017 the art of its making was included on  UNESCO 's list of  intangible cultural heritage . [115]   Up to 20% of the flour in the traditional pizza crust can be strong  Manitoba flour , which was introduced to Italy from Canada as part of the  Marshall Plan  after World War II. [33]   In Italy it is consumed as a single dish ( pizza al piatto ) or as a snack, even on the go ( pizza al taglio ). [116]  In the various regions, dishes similar to pizza are the various types of  focaccia , such as  piadina ,  crescia  or  sfincione . [117] 
 
 Regional cuisines [ edit ] 
 Each area  has its own specialties , primarily at a  regional level , but also at the provincial level. The differences can come from a bordering country (such as France, Austria or Slovenia), whether a region is close to the sea or the mountains, and economics. [118]  Italian cuisine is also seasonal with priority placed on the use of fresh produce. [119] [120] 
 
 Abruzzo and Molise [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Cuisine of Abruzzo 
   Arrosticini 
 Pasta, meat, and vegetables are central to the cuisine of  Abruzzo  and  Molise .  Chili peppers  ( peperoncini ) are typical of Abruzzo, where they are called  diavoletti  ("little devils") for their spicy heat. Due to the long history of  shepherding  in Abruzzo and Molise,  lamb  dishes are common. Lamb meat is often paired with pasta. [121]   Mushrooms  (usually wild mushrooms),  rosemary , and  garlic  are also extensively used in Abruzzese cuisine.
 Best-known is the extra virgin olive oil produced in the local farms on the hills of the region, marked by the quality level  DOP  and considered one of the best in the country. [122]  Renowned wines like  Montepulciano   DOCG  and  Trebbiano d'Abruzzo   DOC  are considered amongst the world's finest wines. [123]  In 2012, a bottle of  Trebbiano d'Abruzzo   Colline Teramane  ranked #1 in the top 50 Italian wine award. [124]   Centerbe  ("Hundred Herbs") is a strong (72% alcohol), spicy herbal liqueur drunk by the locals. Another liqueur is  genziana , a soft distillate of  gentian  roots.
 The best-known dish from Abruzzo is  arrosticini , little pieces of castrated lamb on a wooden stick and cooked on coals. The  chitarra  (literally "guitar") is a fine stringed tool that pasta dough is pressed through for cutting. In the  province of Teramo , famous local dishes include the  virtù  soup (made with legumes, vegetables, and pork meat), the  timballo  (pasta sheets filled with meat, vegetables or rice), and the  mazzarelle  (lamb intestines filled with garlic,  marjoram , lettuce, and various spices). The popularity of  saffron , grown in the province of  L'Aquila , has waned in recent years. [121] 
 Also seafood is part important of  cuisine of Abruzzo  with fish products are  Brodetti , [125]   Scapece alla vastese , [126]   Baccalà all'abruzzese , [127]   Mussels with saffron  classic cooked mussels prepared with parsley, onion, bay leaf, white wine, olive oil and seasoned with  Saffron of l'Aquila  sauce [128]  and  Coregone di Campotosto , [129] [130]  typical lake fish. 
 The most famous dish of  Molise  is  cavatelli , a long shaped, handmade  maccheroni -type pasta made of flour, semolina, and water, often served with meat sauce, broccoli, or mushrooms.  Pizzelle  cookies are a common dessert, especially around Christmas.
 
 Apulia [ edit ] 
   Orecchiette  with  cime di rapa  sauce 
 Main article:  Apulian cuisine 
 Apulia  is a massive food producer; major production includes wheat, tomatoes, zucchini, broccoli, bell peppers, potatoes, spinach, eggplants, cauliflower, fennel,  endive , chickpeas, lentils, beans, and cheese (like the traditional  caciocavallo  cheese). Apulia is also the largest producer of olive oil in Italy. The sea offers abundant fish and seafood that are extensively used in the regional cuisine, especially oysters, and mussels.
 Goat and lamb are occasionally used. [131]  The region is known for pasta made from durum wheat and traditional pasta dishes featuring  orecchiette -style pasta, often served with tomato sauce, potatoes, mussels, or  broccoli rabe . Pasta with  cherry tomatoes  and  arugula  is also popular. [132] 
 Regional desserts include  zeppole , doughnuts usually topped with powdered sugar and filled with custard, jelly, cannoli-style pastry cream, or a butter-and-honey mixture. For Christmas, Apulians make a very traditional rose-shaped pastry called  cartellate . These are fried or baked and dipped in  vin cotto , which is either a wine or fig juice reduction.
 
 Basilicata [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Cuisine of Basilicata 
   Pasta con i peperoni cruschi , a traditional dish from Basilicata 
 The cuisine of  Basilicata  is mostly based on inexpensive ingredients and deeply anchored in rural traditions.
 Pork is an integral part of the regional cuisine, often made into sausages or roasted on a spit. Famous dry sausages from the region are  lucanica  and  soppressata . Wild boar, mutton, and lamb are also popular. Pasta sauces are generally based on meats or vegetables.  Horseradish  is often used as a spice and condiment, known in the region as "poor man's truffle". [133]  The region produces cheeses like  Pecorino di Filiano ,  Canestrato di Moliterno ,  Pallone di Gravina , and  Paddraccio  and olive oils like the Vulture. [134]  The  peperone crusco , (or  crusco pepper ) is a staple of the local cuisine, defined as the "red gold of Basilicata". [135]  It is consumed as a  snack  or as a main ingredient for several regional recipes. [136] 
 Among the traditional dishes are  pasta con i peperoni cruschi , pasta served with dried crunchy pepper and  bread crumbs ; [137]   lagane e ceci , also known as  piatto del brigante  (brigand's dish), pasta prepared with  chick peas  and peeled  tomatoes ; [138]   tumact me tulez ,  tagliatelle -dish of  Arbëreshe  culture;  rafanata , a type of omelet with  horseradish ;  ciaudedda , a vegetable stew with  artichokes ,  potatoes ,  broad beans , and  pancetta ; [139]  and the  baccalà alla lucana , one of the few recipes made with fish. Desserts include  taralli  dolci , made with sugar glaze and scented with  anise  and  calzoncelli , fried pastries filled with a cream of  chestnuts  and  chocolate .
 The most famous wine of the region is the  Aglianico del Vulture ; others include Matera, Terre dell'Alta Val d'Agri, and Grottino di Roccanova. [140] 
 Basilicata is also known for its  mineral waters  which are sold widely in Italy. The springs are mostly located in the volcanic basin of the  Vulture  area. [141] 
 
 Calabria [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Calabria § Cuisine 
   'Nduja  with bread, with a piece of 'Nduja sausage in background. 
 In  Calabria , a history of French rule under the  House of Anjou  and  Napoleon , along with Spanish influences, affected the language and culinary skills as seen in the naming of foods such as cake,  gatò , from the French  gateau . Seafood includes  swordfish ,  shrimp ,  lobster ,  sea urchin , and  squid . Macaroni-type pasta is widely used in regional dishes, often served with goat, beef, or pork sauce and salty  ricotta . [142] 
 Main courses include  frìttuli  (prepared by boiling pork rind, meat, and trimmings in pork fat), different varieties of spicy sausages (like  'Nduja  and  Capicola ), goat, and land snails.  Melon  and  watermelon  are traditionally served in a chilled fruit salad or wrapped in ham. [143]   Calabrian wines  include Greco di Bianco, Bivongi, Cirò, Dominici, Lamezia, Melissa, Pollino, Sant'Anna di Isola Capo Rizzuto, San Vito di Luzzi, Savuto, Scavigna, and Verbicaro.
 Calabrese pizza has a Neapolitan-based structure with fresh tomato sauce and a cheese base, but is unique because of its spicy flavor. Some of the ingredients included in a Calabrese pizza are thinly sliced hot  soppressata , hot capicola, hot peppers, and fresh mozzarella.
 
 Campania [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Neapolitan cuisine 
   Parmigiana di melanzane 
   Mozzarella  di bufala  is a dairy product traditionally made from buffalo milk in southern Italy 
 Campania  extensively produces tomatoes, peppers,  spring onions , potatoes, artichokes, fennel, lemons, and oranges which all take on the flavor of volcanic soil. The  Gulf of Naples  offers fish and seafood. Campania is one of the largest producers and consumers of pasta in Italy, especially spaghetti. In the regional cuisine, pasta is prepared in various styles that can feature tomato sauce, cheese, clams, and shellfish. [144] 
 Spaghetti alla puttanesca  is a popular dish made with olives, tomatoes, anchovies, capers, chili peppers, and garlic. The region is well-known for its  mozzarella  production (especially from the milk of  water buffalo ) that is used in a variety of dishes, including  parmigiana  (shallow fried eggplant slices layered with cheese and tomato sauce, then baked). Desserts include  struffoli  (deep fried balls of dough),  ricotta -based  pastiera  and  sfogliatelle , and rum-dipped  babà . [144] 
 Originating in  Neapolitan cuisine ,  pizza  has become popular worldwide. [145]  Pizza is an oven-baked, flat, disc-shaped bread typically topped with a  tomato sauce ,  cheese  (usually  mozzarella ), and various toppings depending on the culture. Since the original pizza, several other types of pizzas have evolved.
 Since Naples was the capital of the  Kingdom of Two Sicilies , its cuisine took much from the culinary traditions of all the Campania region, reaching a balance between dishes based on rural ingredients (pasta, vegetables, cheese) and seafood dishes (fish, crustaceans, mollusks). A vast variety of recipes is influenced by the local aristocratic cuisine, like  timballo  and  Sartù di riso , pasta or rice dishes with very elaborate preparation, while the dishes coming from the popular traditions contain inexpensive but nutritionally healthy ingredients, like pasta with beans and other pasta dishes with vegetables.
 Famous regional wines are  Aglianico  ( Taurasi ),  Fiano ,  Falanghina , and  Greco di Tufo .
 
 Emilia-Romagna [ edit ] 
   Piadina 
 Emilia-Romagna  is especially known for its egg and filled pasta made with soft wheat flour. The  Romagna  subregion is renowned for pasta dishes like  cappelletti ,  garganelli ,  strozzapreti ,  sfoglia lorda , and  tortelli alla lastra  as well as cheeses such as  squacquerone ,  piadina  snacks are also a specialty of the subregion.
 Bologna  and  Modena  are notable for pasta dishes like  tortellini ,  tortelloni ,  lasagne , gramigna, and  tagliatelle  which are found also in many other parts of the region in different declinations, while  Ferrara  is known for  cappellacci di zucca , pumpkin-filled dumplings, and Piacenza for  Pisarei e faśö , wheat  gnocchi  with beans and lard. The celebrated  balsamic vinegar  is made only in the Emilian cities of  Modena  and  Reggio Emilia , following legally binding traditional procedures. [146] 
 
   Tagliatelle  with  ragù 
 In the  Emilia  subregion, except  Piacenza  which is heavily influenced by the cuisines of  Lombardy , rice is eaten to a lesser extent than the rest of northern Italy.  Polenta , a maize-based side dish, is common in both Emilia and Romagna.
 Parmigiano Reggiano  cheese is produced in Reggio Emilia (and it was invented in  Bibbiano , a little town near Reggio Emilia; this city is also known for  erbazzone , a kind of egg and vegetables  quiche ).  Grana Padano  cheese is produced in Piacenza.
 Although the Adriatic coast is a major fishing area (well known for its eels and clams harvested in the  Comacchio lagoon ), the region is more famous for its meat products, especially pork-based, that include cold cuts such as Parma's  prosciutto ,  culatello , and  Salame Felino ; Piacenza's  pancetta ,  coppa , and salami; Bologna's  mortadella  and  salame rosa ;  zampone ,  cotechino , and  cappello del prete ; and  Ferrara 's  salama da sugo . Piacenza is also known for some dishes prepared with horse and donkey meat. Regional desserts include  zuppa inglese  (custard-based dessert made with sponge cake and  Alchermes  liqueur),  panpepato  (Christmas cake made with pepper, chocolate, spices, and almonds),  tenerina  (butter and chocolate cake) and  torta degli addobbi  (rice and milk cake).
 
 Friuli-Venezia Giulia [ edit ] 
   Frico , a traditional dish in the  Friuli-Venezia Giulia  region 
 The cuisine of  Friuli-Venezia Giulia  can vary depending on the territory, as certain areas are home to  German  and  Slovene  minorities whose local cuisine conserves greater  Austro-Hungarian  influences and often differs from mainstream  Friulian  cuisine.  Udine  and  Pordenone , in the western part of the region, are known for their traditional  San Daniele del Friuli   ham ,  Montasio  cheese,  Cjarsons  stuffed pasta and  Frico  cheese dish. Other typical dishes are  pitina  (meatballs made of smoked meats), game, and various types of  gnocchi  and  polenta .
 Typical dishes in the eastern provinces of  Gorizia  and  Trieste  include brovada (fermented turnips),  Jota  (soup of beans, sauerkraut, potatoes, pancetta and onions), local variations of  goulash ,  apple strudel ,  pinza  and  presnitz . Pork can be spicy and is often prepared over an open hearth called a  fogolar .  Collio Goriziano ,  Friuli Isonzo ,  Colli Orientali del Friuli , and  Ramandolo  are well-known  denominazione di origine controllata  regional wines.
 Seafood from the Adriatic is also used in this area, mainly prepared according to  Istrian  and  Venetian  recipes. While the tuna fishing has declined, the pilchards from the Gulf of Trieste off  Barcola  (in the local dialect: " Sardoni barcolani ") are a special and sought-after delicacy. [147] [148] [149] 
 
 Liguria [ edit ] 
   Focaccia  with rosemary. Focaccia is widely associated with Ligurian cuisine 
 Main article:  Cuisine of Liguria 
 Liguria  is known for herbs and vegetables (as well as seafood) in its cuisine.  Savory  pies are popular, mixing greens and  artichokes  along with cheeses, milk curds, and eggs.  Onions  and  olive oil  are used. Due to a lack of land suitable for wheat, the Ligurians use  chickpeas  in  farinata  and polenta-like  panissa . The former is served plain or topped with onions,  artichokes , sausage, cheese or young anchovies. [150]  Farinata is typically cooked in a wood-fired oven, similar to southern pizzas. Furthermore, fresh fish features heavily in Ligurian cuisine.  Baccalà , or  salted cod , features prominently as a source of protein in coastal regions. It is traditionally prepared in a soup. 
 Hilly districts use  chestnuts  as a source of carbohydrates. Ligurian pastas include  corzetti , typically stamped with traditional designs, from the  Polcevera valley ;  pansoti , a triangular shaped ravioli filled with vegetables;  piccagge , pasta ribbons made with a small amount of egg and served with artichoke sauce or  pesto  sauce;  trenette , made from  whole wheat flour  cut into long strips and served with  pesto ; boiled beans and potatoes; and  trofie , a Ligurian  gnocchi  made from wheat flour and boiled potatoes, made into a spiral shape and often tossed in  pesto . [150]  Many Ligurians emigrated to  Argentina  in the late 19th and early 20th centuries, influencing the cuisine of the country (which was otherwise dominated by meat and dairy products that the narrow Ligurian hinterland would have not allowed).  Pesto , sauce made from basil and other herbs, is uniquely Ligurian, and features prominently among Ligurian pastas.
 
 Lazio [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Roman cuisine 
   Spaghetti   alla carbonara 
 It features fresh, seasonal and simply-prepared ingredients from  Roman Campagna . [151]  These include peas,  globe artichokes  and  fava beans , shellfish, milk-fed lamb and goat, and cheeses such as  Pecorino Romano  and  ricotta . [152]   Olive oil  is used mostly to dress raw vegetables, while  strutto  (pork  lard ) and fat from  prosciutto  are preferred for frying. [151]  The most popular sweets in Rome are small individual pastries called pasticcini, gelato (ice cream) and handmade chocolates and candies. [153]  Special dishes are often reserved for different days of the week; for example,  gnocchi  is eaten on Thursdays,  baccalà  (salted cod) on Fridays, and  trippa  on Saturdays.
 Pasta dishes based on the use of  guanciale  (unsmoked bacon prepared with pig's jowl or cheeks) are often found in  Lazio , such as pasta  alla carbonara  and pasta  all'amatriciana . Another pasta dish of the region is  arrabbiata , with spicy tomato sauce. The regional cuisine widely use offal, resulting in dishes like the entrail-based  rigatoni  with  pajata  sauce and  coda alla vaccinara . [154] 
 Iconic of Lazio is cheese made from ewes' milk ( Pecorino Romano ),  porchetta  (savory, fatty, and moist boneless pork roast) and  Frascati  white wine. The influence of the ancient  Jewish  community can be noticed in the Roman cuisine's traditional  carciofi alla giudia . [154] 
 
 Lombardy [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Lombard cuisine 
   Ossobuco  served with  risotto alla milanese 
 Due to the different historical events of its provinces and the variety of its territory,  Lombard cuisine  has a very varied culinary tradition. First courses in Lombard cuisine range from  risotto , to soups and stuffed pasta, in broth or not. Main courses offer a variegated choice of meat or fish dishes of the tradition of the many lakes and rivers of Lombardy. [155] 
 In general, the cuisine of the various provinces of Lombardy can be united by the prevalence of  rice  and stuffed pasta over dry pasta,  butter  instead of  olive oil  for cooking, prolonged cooking, the widespread use of  pork ,  milk  and derivatives,  egg -based preparations, and the consumption of  polenta  that is common to all of Northern Italy. [156] 
 Rice dishes are very popular in this region, often found in soups as well as  risotto . The best-known version is  risotto alla milanese , flavoured with saffron. Due to its characteristic yellow color, it is often called  risotto giallo . The dish is sometimes served with  ossobuco  (cross-cut veal shanks braised with vegetables, white wine and broth). [157] 
 
   A dish of  pizzoccheri 
   Cotoletta 
 Other regional specialties include  cotoletta alla milanese  (a fried  breaded cutlet  of veal similar to  Wiener schnitzel , but cooked "bone-in"),  cassoeula  (a typically winter dish prepared with cabbage and pork),  Mostarda  (rich condiment made with candied fruit and a mustard flavoured syrup),  Valtellina 's  bresaola  (air-dried salted beef),  pizzoccheri  (a flat ribbon pasta made with 80% buckwheat flour and 20% wheat flour cooked along with greens, cubed potatoes, and layered with pieces of  Valtellina Casera  cheese),  casoncelli  (a kind of stuffed pasta, usually garnished with melted butter and sage, typical of  Bergamo ) and  tortelli  di zucca  (a type of  ravioli  with pumpkin filling, usually garnished with melted butter and sage or tomato). [158] 
 Regional cheeses include  Grana Padano ,  Gorgonzola ,  Crescenza ,  Robiola , and  Taleggio  (the  plains of central and southern Lombardy  allow intensive cattle farming).  Polenta  is common across the region. Regional desserts include the famous  panettone  (soft sweet bread with  raisins  and  candied citron and orange chunks ).
 
 Marche [ edit ] 
   Olive ascolane 
 On the coast of  Marche , fish and seafood are produced. Inland, wild and domestic pigs are used for sausages and  hams . These hams are not thinly sliced, but cut into bite-sized chunks.  Suckling pig ,  chicken , and  fish  are often stuffed with  rosemary  or  fennel  fronds and  garlic  before being roasted or placed on the spit. [159] 
 Ascoli, Marche's southernmost province, is well known for  olive ascolane , (stoned olives stuffed with several minced meats, egg, and Parmesan, then fried). [160]  Another well-known Marche product are the  Maccheroncini di Campofilone , from little town of  Campofilone , a kind of hand-made pasta made only of hard grain flour and eggs, cut so thin that melts in one's mouth.
 
 Piedmont [ edit ] 
   Traditional Piedmontese  agnolotti 
 Between the Alps and the  Po valley , featuring a large number of different ecosystems, the  Piedmont  region offers a refined and varied cuisine. As a point of union between traditional Italian and French cuisine, Piedmont is the Italian region with the largest number of cheeses with  protected geographical status  and wines under  DOC . It is also the region where both the  Slow Food  association and the most prestigious school of Italian cooking, the  University of Gastronomic Sciences , were founded. [161] 
 Piedmont is a region where gathering nuts,  mushrooms , and  cardoons , as well as  hunting  and  fishing , are commonplace.  Truffles , garlic, seasonal vegetables, cheese, and rice feature in the cuisine. Wines from the  Nebbiolo  grape such as  Barolo  and  Barbaresco  are produced as well as wines from the  Barbera  grape, fine  sparkling wines , and the sweet, lightly sparkling,  Moscato d'Asti . The region is also famous for its  Vermouth  and  Ratafia  production. [161] 
 
   Polenta  with  bagna càuda 
 Castelmagno  is a prized cheese of the region. Piedmont is also famous for the quality of its  Carrù  beef (particularly  bue grasso , "fat ox"), hence the tradition of eating raw meat seasoned with garlic oil, lemon, and salt;  carpaccio ;  Brasato al vino , wine stew made from marinated beef; and boiled beef served with various sauces. [161] 
 The food most typical of the Piedmont tradition are  agnolotti  (pasta folded over with roast beef and vegetable stuffing),  paniscia  (a typical dish of  Novara , a kind of  risotto  with  Arborio rice  or  Maratelli  rice, the typical kind of  Saluggia  beans, onion,  Barbera  wine, lard, salami, season vegetables, salt and pepper),  taglierini  (thinner version of tagliatelle),  bagna cauda  (sauce of garlic, anchovies, olive oil, and butter), and  bicerin  (hot drink made of coffee, chocolate, and whole milk). Piedmont is one of the Italian capitals of pastry and chocolate in particular, with products like  Nutella ,  gianduiotto , and  marron glacé  that are famous worldwide. [161] 
 
 Sardinia [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Sardinian cuisine 
   Traditional  carasau  bread 
 Suckling pig  and  wild boar  are roasted on the spit or boiled in stews of beans and vegetables, thickened with bread. Herbs such as mint and  myrtle  are widely used in the regional cuisine. Sardinia also has many special types of bread, made dry, which keeps longer than high-moisture breads. [162]   Malloreddus  is a typical pasta of the region.
 Also baked are  carasau  bread,  civraxu  bread,  coccoi a pitzus , a highly decorative bread, and  pistocu  bread, made with flour and water only, originally meant for herders, but often served at home with tomatoes, basil, oregano, garlic, and a strong cheese.  Rock lobster ,  scampi , squid, tuna, and sardines are the predominant seafoods. [162] 
 Casu marzu  is a sheep's cheese produced in Sardinia, but is of questionable legality due to hygiene concerns. [163] 
 
 Sicily [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Sicilian cuisine 
   Pasta alla Norma  is amongst Sicily's most historic and iconic dishes. 
 Sicily  shows traces of all the cultures which established themselves on the island over the last two millennia. Although its cuisine undoubtedly has a predominantly Italian base, Sicilian food also has Spanish, Greek and Arab influences.  Dionysus  is said to have introduced wine to the region; a trace of historical influence from  Ancient Greece . [164] 
 The ancient Romans introduced lavish dishes based on  goose . The  Byzantines  favoured sweet and sour flavours and the Arabs brought  sugar ,  citrus , rice, spinach, and saffron. The  Normans  and  Hohenstaufens  had a fondness for meat dishes. The Spanish introduced items from the  New World  including chocolate, maize, turkey, and tomatoes. [164] 
 
   Grilled swordfish 
 Much of the island's cuisine encourages the use of fresh vegetables such as  eggplant ,  peppers , and tomatoes, as well as fish such as  tuna ,  sea bream ,  sea bass ,  swordfish  and  cuttlefish . In  Trapani , in the extreme western corner of the island,  North African  influences are clear in the use of various  couscous  based dishes, usually combined with fish. [165]  Mint is used extensively in cooking unlike the rest of Italy.
 Traditional specialties from Sicily include  arancini  (a form of deep-fried rice  croquettes ), pasta  alla Norma ,  caponata ,  pani ca meusa , and a host of desserts and sweets such as  cannoli ,  granita , and  cassata . [166] 
 Typical of Sicily is  Marsala , a red,  fortified wine  similar to  Port  and largely exported. [167] [168] 
 
 Trentino-Alto Adige [ edit ] 
   Traditional Speck knödel  soup. The cuisine of  South Tyrol  combines culinary influences from  Italy  and the  Mediterranean  with a strong  alpine  regional and  Austrian  influence 
 The cuisine of  South Tyrol  – the northern half of the Trentino-Alto Adige region – combines culinary influences from Italy and the Mediterranean with a strong  alpine  regional and  Austrian  influence. [169]  Before the  Council of Trent  in the middle of the 16th century, the region was known for the simplicity of its peasant cuisine. When the prelates of the Catholic Church established there, they brought the art of fine cooking with them. Later, also influences from  Venice  and the Austrian  Habsburg Empire  came in. [170] 
 The most renowned local product is traditional  speck  juniper-flavoured ham which, as  Speck Alto Adige , is regulated by the  European Union  under the  PGI  status.  Goulash ,  knödel ,  apple strudel ,  kaiserschmarrn ,  krapfen ,  rösti ,  spätzle , and  rye bread  are regular dishes, along with potatoes, dumpling, homemade  sauerkraut , and lard. [170]  Since the 20th century the cuisine has come under the influence of other Italian regions, so that various  pizza  and  pasta  dishes have now become staples. [171]  This fusion has led to the creation of dishes such as pasta with speck cream sauce and baked apple rings. [172]  The territory of  Bolzano  is also reputed for its  Müller-Thurgau  white wines.
 The cuisine of the  Trentino  subregion leans more towards  Veneto . It is influenced by its geographical position which ranges from isolated Alpine valleys to the southern  prealpine lakes . The cuisine is characterized by its peasant dishes and especially the wide presence of soups. Trentino produces various types of sausages,  polenta , yogurt, cheese,  gnocchi ,  buckwheat , potato cake, funnel cake and freshwater fish. Typical dishes from Trentino include  zuppa d'orzo  (barley soup),  canederli  (bread dumplings),  strangolapreti  (spinach gnocchi),  smacafam  (savory  carnival  pie),  panada  (bread soup),  brö brusà  (toasted soup),  tortel di patate  (potato pancakes) and  risotto  with  Teroldego . Trentino's protected products include its  Non Valley  apples.
 
 Tuscany [ edit ] 
   Finocchiona , a classic Tuscan Salami 
 Simplicity is central to the  Tuscan  cuisine. Legumes, bread, cheese, vegetables, mushrooms, and fresh  fruit  are used. A good example of typical Tuscan food is  ribollita , a notable soup whose name literally means "reboiled". Like most Tuscan cuisine, the soup has peasant origins.  Ribollita  was originally made by reheating (i.e. reboiling) the leftover  minestrone  or vegetable soup from the previous day. There are many variations but the main ingredients always include leftover bread, cannellini beans, and inexpensive vegetables such as carrot, cabbage, beans,  silverbeet ,  cavolo nero  (Tuscan kale), onion, and olive oil.
 
   Bistecca alla fiorentina 
 A regional Tuscan pasta known as  pici  resembles thick, grainy-surfaced spaghetti, and is often rolled by hand. White  truffles  from  San Miniato  appear in October and November. High-quality beef, used for the traditional  Florentine steak , come from the  Chianina  cattle breed of the  Chiana Valley  and the  Maremmana  from  Maremma .
 Pork is also produced. [173]  The region is well-known also for its rich  game , especially  wild boar ,  hare ,  fallow deer ,  roe deer , and  pheasant  that often are used to prepare  pappardelle  dishes.  Maiale Ubriaco , or "Drunken Pork", is another regional preparation in which pork is braised in Chianti wine and often paired with Tuscan kale. [174] 
 
   Maiale Ubriaco - Pork Braised in Chianti with Tuscan Kale 
 Regional desserts include  cantucci  (oblong-shaped almond biscuits),  castagnaccio  (a chestnut flour cake),  pan di ramerino  [  it ]  (a sweet bread containing raisins and rosemary),  panforte  (prepared with honey, fruits, and nuts),  ricciarelli  (biscuits made using an almond base with sugar, honey, and egg white),  necci  ( galettes  made with chestnut flour) and  cavallucci  (cookies made with almonds, candied fruits, coriander, flour, and honey).
 Well-known regional wines include  Brunello di Montalcino ,  Carmignano ,  Chianti ,  Morellino di Scansano ,  Parrina ,  Sassicaia , and  Vernaccia di San Gimignano .
 
 Umbria [ edit ] 
   A varietal  Sagrantino  indigenous to the region of Umbria 
 Many  Umbrian  dishes are prepared by boiling or roasting with local olive oil and herbs. Vegetable dishes are popular in the spring and summer, [175]  while fall and winter sees meat from hunting and  black truffles  from  Norcia . Meat dishes include the traditional  wild boar  sausages,  pheasants ,  geese ,  pigeons ,  frogs , and  snails . 
 Castelluccio  is known for its lentils.  Spoleto  and Monteleone are known for spelt. Freshwater  fish  include  lasca ,  trout , freshwater  perch ,  grayling ,  eel ,  barbel ,  whitefish , and  tench . [176]   Orvieto  and  Sagrantino di Montefalco  are important regional wines.
 
 Valle d'Aosta [ edit ] 
   Fontina  cheese from Valle d'Aosta 
 In the  Aosta Valley , bread-thickened  soups  are customary as well as  cheese   fondue , chestnuts, potatoes, rice.  Polenta  is a staple along with  rye bread , smoked  bacon ,  Motsetta  (cured chamois meat), and game from the mountains and forests. Butter and cream are important in stewed, roasted, and braised dishes. [177] 
 Typical regional products include  Fontina  cheese,  Vallée d'Aoste Lard d'Arnad , red wines and  Génépi  Artemisia-based liqueur. [178] 
 
 Veneto [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Venetian cuisine 
 Venice  and many surrounding parts of Veneto are known for  risotto , a dish whose ingredients can highly vary upon different areas. Fish and seafood are added in regions closer to the coast while  pumpkin ,  asparagus ,  radicchio , and  frog legs  appear farther away from the  Adriatic Sea .
 
   Polenta  served with  sopressa  and mushrooms, a traditional  peasant food  of Veneto 
 Made from finely ground maize meal,  polenta  is a traditional, rural food typical of Veneto and most of Northern Italy. It may be included in stirred dishes and baked dishes.  Polenta  can be served with various cheese, stockfish, or meat dishes. Some polenta dishes include  porcini ,  rapini , or other vegetables or meats, such as small  songbirds  in the case of the  Venetian  and  Lombard  dish  polenta e osei , or  sausages . In some areas of Veneto it can be also made of a particular variety of cornmeal, named  biancoperla , so that the colour of polenta is white and not yellow (the so-called  polenta bianca ).
 Beans ,  peas , and other  legumes  are seen in these areas with  pasta e fagioli  (beans and pasta) and  risi e bisi  ( rice and peas ). Venice features heavy dishes using exotic spices and sauces. Ingredients such as  stockfish  or simple marinated  anchovies  are found here as well.
 Less fish and more meat is eaten away from the coast. Other typical products are sausages such as  Sopressa Vicentina , garlic salami,  Piave cheese , and  Asiago cheese . High quality vegetables are prized, such as red  radicchio  from  Treviso  and  white asparagus  from  Bassano del Grappa . Perhaps the most popular dish of  Venice  is  fegato alla veneziana , thinly-sliced veal liver sautéed with onions.
 Squid  and  cuttlefish  are common ingredients, as is  squid ink , called  nero di seppia . [179] [180]  Regional desserts include  tiramisu  (made of biscuits dipped in coffee, layered with a whipped mixture of  egg yolks  and  mascarpone , and flavoured with liquor and  cocoa [181] ),  baicoli  (biscuits made with butter and vanilla), and  nougat .
 The most celebrated Venetian wines include  Bardolino ,  Prosecco ,  Soave ,  Amarone , and  Valpolicella   DOC  wines.
 
 Meal structure [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Italian meal structure 
   A typical Italian breakfast ( colazione ), consisting of  cappuccino  and  cornetto 
   A classic Italian  aperitivo 
   An Italian-style  antipasto 
 Italian meal structure  is typical of the  European Mediterranean  region and differs from North, Central, and Eastern European meal structure, though it still often consists of  breakfast  ( colazione ),  lunch  ( pranzo ), and  supper  ( cena ). [182]  However, much less emphasis is placed on breakfast, and breakfast itself is often skipped or involves lighter meal portions than are seen in non-Mediterranean Western countries. [183]  Late-morning and mid-afternoon snacks, called  merenda  (plural  merende ), are also often included in this meal structure. [184] 
 Traditional meals in Italy typically contained four or five courses. [185]  Especially on weekends, meals are often seen as a time to spend with family and friends rather than simply for sustenance; thus, meals tend to be longer than in other cultures. During holidays such as  Christmas  and  New Year's Eve , feasts can last for hours. [186] 
 Today, full-course meals are mainly reserved for special events such as  weddings , while everyday meals include only a first or second course (sometimes both), a  side dish , and coffee. [187] [188]  The  primo  (first course) is usually a filling dish such as  risotto  or pasta, with sauces made from meat, vegetables, or seafood. [189]  Whole pieces of meat such as sausages, meatballs, and poultry are eaten in the  secondo  (second course). [190]  Italian cuisine has some single-course meals ( piatto unico ) combining starches and proteins. [191] 
 
 
 
 Meal stage
 
 Description
 
 
 Aperitivo 
 
 Apéritif  usually enjoyed as an appetizer before a large meal, may be:  Campari ,  Martini ,  Cinzano ,  Lucano ,  Prosecco ,  Aperol ,  Spritz ,  Vermouth ,  Negroni . [185] 
 
 
 Antipasto 
 
 Literally "before (the) meal", hot or cold, usually consist of cheese, ham, sliced sausage, marinated vegetables or fish, bruschetta and bread  appetizers . [185] 
 
 
 Primo 
 
 "First course", usually consists of a hot dish such as pasta,  risotto ,  gnocchi , or soup with a sauce, vegetarian, meat or fish  sugo  or  ragù  as a sauce. [185] 
 
 
 Secondo 
 
 "Second course", the main dish, usually fish or meat with potatoes. Traditionally veal, pork, and chicken are most commonly used, at least in the North, though beef has become more popular since World War II and wild game is found, particularly in Tuscany. Fish is also very popular, especially in the south. [185] 
 
 
 Contorno 
 
 " Side dish ", may be a salad or cooked vegetables. A traditional menu features salad along with the main course. [185] 
 
 
 Formaggio e frutta 
 
 "Cheese and fruits", the first dessert. Local cheeses may be part of the  antipasto  or  contorno  as well. [185] 
 
 
 Dolce 
 
 "Sweet", such as cakes (like  tiramisu ), cookies or ice cream. [185] 
 
 
 Caffè 
 
 Coffee. [185] 
 
 
 Digestivo 
 
 "Digestives", liquors/liqueurs ( grappa ,  amaro ,  limoncello ,  sambuca ,  nocino , sometimes referred to as  ammazzacaffè , "coffee killer"). [185] 
 
 
 Food establishments [ edit ] 
   Waiter pouring  Prosecco 
   Arancini 
   Italian wine  and  salumi 
   Baked  lasagne  with  ragù 
 Each type of establishment has a defined role and traditionally sticks to it. [192] 
 
 
 
 Establishment
 
 Description
 
 
 Agriturismo 
 
 Working farms that offer accommodations and meals. Sometimes meals are served to guests only. According to Italian law, they can only serve local-made products (except drinks). Marked by a green and gold sign with a knife and fork. [193] 
 
 
 Bar / Caffè 
 
 Locations which serve coffee,  soft drinks , juice and alcohol. Hours are generally from 6am to 10pm. Foods may include  croissants  and other sweet breads (often called 'brioche' in Northern Italy),  panini ,  tramezzini  (sandwiches) and  spuntini  (snacks such as  olives ,  potato crisps  and small pieces of  frittata ). [193] 
 
 
 Caffetteria 
 
 Locations where coffee and similar drinks are consumed, and desserts can also be eaten. [194] 
 
 
 Birreria 
 
 A bar that offers beer; found in central and northern  regions of Italy . [193] 
 
 
 Bruschetteria 
 
 Specialises in  bruschetta , though other dishes may also be offered.
 
 
 Enoteca 
 
 Place where wines are sold or offered for tasting, displayed to the public on the basis of criteria that facilitate their choice. [195] 
 
 
 Fiaschetteria 
 
 Locations which serve wine in  fiaschi  and bottles, though other dishes may also be offered. [196] 
 
 
 Formaggeria 
 
 A shop serving cheese. [197] 
 
 
 Frasca 
 
 Friulian  wine producers that open for the evening and may offer food along with their wines. [193] 
 
 
 Gelateria 
 
 An Italian ice cream shop/bar that sells  gelato . A shop where the customer can get  gelato  to go, or sit down and eat it in a cup or a cone. Bigger ice desserts, coffee, or liquors may also be ordered.
 
 
 Locanda 
 
 Locations where it is possible to consume food and where one can be accommodated. [198] 
 
 
 Osteria 
 
 Focused on simple food of the region, often having no written menu. Many are open only at night but some are open for lunch. [199]  The name has become fashionable for upscale restaurants with a rustic regional style.
 
 
 Panificio/Panetteria 
 
 A shop serving  flour -based food  baked  in an  oven  such as  bread ,  cookies ,  cakes ,  pastries , and  pies . [200] 
 
 
 Paninoteca/Panineria 
 
 Sandwich shop open during the day. [199] 
 
 
 Pasticceria 
 
 A shop serving a variety of pastries, confectioneries, biscuits and cakes. [201] 
 
 
 Pastificio 
 
 A shop serving artisanal pasta. [202] 
 
 
 Piadineria 
 
 Specialises in  piadina , though other dishes may also be offered. [203] 
 
 
 Pizzeria 
 
 Specialises in pizza, often with wood-fired ovens. [204] 
 
 
 Polenteria 
 
 Serving  polenta ; uncommon, and found only in northern regions. [204] 
 
 
 Ristorante 
 
 Often offers upscale cuisine and printed menus. [204] 
 
 
 Rosticceria 
 
 Fast food restaurant, offering local dishes like  cotoletta alla milanese , roasted meat (usually pork or chicken),  supplì  and  arancini  even as take-away.
 
 
 Sagra 
 
 Popular festival, which takes place in a town or in a district to celebrate an event, or an agro-food product, where it is possible to consume food. [205] 
 
 
 Salumeria 
 
 A shop serving  salumi  and cheese. [206] 
 
 
 Spaghetteria 
 
 Originating in  Naples , offering pasta dishes and other main courses. [207] 
 
 
 Tavola calda 
 
 Literally "hot table", offers pre-made regional dishes. Most open at 11am and close late. [208] 
 
 
 Trattoria 
 
 A dining establishment, often family-run, with inexpensive prices and an informal atmosphere. [208] 
 
 
 Food establishments 
 
 
 
 The garden at an  osteria  in  Castello Roganzuolo ,  Veneto , Italy
 
 
 
 
 
 
 A  pizzeria  in  Naples , Italy circa 1910
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Interior of a  trattoria  in  Tolmezzo ,  Friuli , Italy
 
 
 
 
 
 
 An  agriturismo  in  Montepulciano ,  Tuscany , Italy
 
 
 
 
 Drinks  [ edit ] 
 Coffee [ edit ] 
 See also:  Espresso  and  Coffee in Italy 
   Espresso 
 Italian style coffee ( caffè ), also known as  espresso , is made from a blend of coffee beans.  Espresso  beans are roasted medium to medium dark in the north, and darker as one moves south.
 A common misconception is that  espresso  has more caffeine than other coffee; in fact, the opposite is true. The longer roasting period extracts more caffeine. The modern  espresso machine , invented in 1937 by Achille Gaggia, uses a pump and pressure system with water heated to 90 to 95 °C (194 to 203 °F) and forced at high pressure through a few grams of finely ground coffee in 25–30 seconds, resulting in about 25 millilitres (0.85  fl oz , two tablespoons) of liquid. [209] 
 Home coffee makers are simpler but work under the same principle.  La Napoletana  is a four-part stove-top unit with grounds loosely placed inside a filter; the kettle portion is filled with water and once boiling, the unit is inverted to drip through the grounds. The  Moka per il caffè  is a three-part stove-top unit that is placed on the stovetop with loosely packed grounds in a strainer; the water rises from steam pressure and is forced through the grounds into the top portion. In both cases, the water passes through the grounds just once. [210] 
 Espresso  is usually served in a  demitasse  cup.  Caffè macchiato  is topped with a bit of steamed milk or foam;  ristretto  is made with less water, and is stronger;  cappuccino  is mixed or topped with steamed, mostly frothy, milk. It is generally considered a morning beverage, and usually is not taken after a meal;  caffelatte  is equal parts  espresso  and steamed milk, similar to  café au lait , and is typically served in a large cup.  Latte macchiato  (spotted milk) is a glass of warm milk with a bit of coffee and  caffè corretto  is "corrected" with a few drops of an alcoholic beverage such as  grappa  or  brandy .
 The  bicerin  is also an Italian coffee, from  Turin . It is a mixture of  cappuccino  and traditional  hot chocolate , as it consists of a mix of coffee and  drinking chocolate , and with a small addition of milk. It is quite thick and often whipped cream/foam with chocolate powder and sugar is added on top.
 
 Alcoholic beverages [ edit ] 
 Wine [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Italian wine 
   Tuscan  Chianti  in a traditional  fiasco 
 Italy is the world's  largest producer of wine , as well as the country with the widest variety of indigenous  grapevine  varieties in the world. [26] [27]  Only about a quarter of this wine is put into bottles for individual sale. Two-thirds is bulk wine used for blending in France and Germany. The wine distilled into spirits in Italy exceeds the production of wine in the entirety of the  New World . [211]  There are twenty separate wine regions. [212]  The Italian wine industry is among the most varied in the world due to hundreds of indigenous  grape  varieties grown throughout Italy. Some of the most iconic red wines include  Barolo ,  Barbaresco , Brunello di Montalcino and Amarone. [213] 
 The Italian government passed the  Denominazione di origine controllata  (DOC) law in 1963 to regulate place of origin, quality, production method, and type of grape. The designation  Indicazione Geografica Tipica  (IGT) is a less restrictive designation to help a wine maker graduate to the DOC level. In 1980, the government created the  Denominazione di origine controllata e garantita  (DOCG), reserved for only the best wines. [214] 
 In Italy wine is commonly consumed (alongside water) in meals, which are rarely served without it, though it is extremely uncommon for meals to be served with any other drink, alcoholic, or otherwise.
 
 Beer [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Beer in Italy 
 Italy  is considered to be part of the  wine belt  of Europe. Nevertheless, beer, particularly mass-produced  pale lagers , are common in the country. It is traditionally considered to be an ideal accompaniment to  pizza ; since the 1970s, beer has spread from  pizzerias  and has become much more popular for drinking in other situations. [215]  Among many popular brands, the most notable Italian breweries are  Peroni  and  Moretti .
 
 Other [ edit ] 
   Bottles of  limoncello 
 There are also several other popular alcoholic drinks in Italy.  Limoncello , a traditional lemon liqueur from Campania ( Sorrento ,  Amalfi  and the  Gulf of Naples ) is the second most popular liqueur in Italy after  Campari . [216]  Made from lemon, it is usually consumed in very small proportions, served chilled in small glasses or cups. [216] 
 Amaro Siciliano  are common Sicilian digestifs, made with herbs, which are usually drunk after heavy meals.  Mirto , an herbal distillate made from the berries (red mirto) and leaves (white mirto) of the myrtle bush, is popular in  Sardinia  and other regions. Another well-known digestif is  Amaro Lucano  from  Basilicata . [217] 
 Grappa  is the typical alcoholic drink of northern Italy, generally associated with the culture of the  Alps  and of the  Po Valley . The most famous grappas are distilled in  Friuli-Venezia Giulia ,  Veneto ,  Piedmont , and  Trentino . The three most notable and recognizable Italian aperitifs are  Martini ,  Vermouth , and  Campari . A sparkling drink which is becoming internationally popular as a less expensive substitute for  French champagne  is  Prosecco , from the Veneto region. [218] [219] 
 
 Desserts [ edit ] 
 Main article:  List of Italian desserts 
 See also:  List of Italian dishes—Desserts and pastry 
 See also:  Sicilian cuisine—Desserts and sweets 
 From the Italian perspective, cookies and  candy  belong to the same category of sweets. [220]  Traditional candies include  candied fruits ,  torrone , and  nut brittles , all of which are still popular in the modern era. In medieval times, northern Italy became so famous for the quality of its stiff fruit pastes (similar to  marmalade  or  conserves , except stiff enough to mold into shapes) that "Paste of  Genoa " became a generic name for high-quality fruit conserves. [221]  Italy is famous for artisanal  gelato  (the Italian  ice cream ) and has become widespread with the  ice cream cone , covering 55% of the Italian market. [222] 
 Silver-coated almond  dragées , which are called, in Italian,  confetti , are thrown at weddings (white coating) and baptisms (blue or pink coating, according to the sex of the newborn baby), or graduations (red coating), often wrapped in a small  tulle  bag as a gift to the guests. [223]  The idea of including a romantic note with candy may have begun with Italian dragées, no later than the early 19th century, and is carried on with the multilingual love notes included in boxes of Italy's most famous chocolate, Baci by  Perugina  in Milan. [224]  The most significant chocolate style is a combination of hazelnuts and milk chocolate, which is featured in  gianduja  pastes like  Nutella , which is made by  Ferrero SpA  in  Alba, Piedmont , as well as Perugnia's Baci and many other chocolate confections. [220] 
 
 
 
 
 
 Panettone  is a traditional Christmas cake
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gelato  is Italian ice cream
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Panna Cotta  with garnish
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tiramisu  with cocoa powder garnish
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cannoli  with pistachio, candied fruit, and chocolate chips
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mimosa cake 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cassata  marzipan cake
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sfogliatelle  with custard filling
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Zuccotto 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Crostata 
 
 
 
 
 Holiday cuisine [ edit ] 
   Zeppole 
 Every  region  has its own holiday recipes. During  La Festa di San Giuseppe  ( St. Joseph's Day ) on 19 March, Sicilians give thanks to  St. Joseph  for preventing a famine during the  Middle Ages . [225] [226]  The  fava bean  saved the population from starvation, and is a traditional part of St. Joseph's Day altars and traditions. [227]  Other customs celebrating this festival include wearing red clothing and eating  zeppole . [228] 
 On  Easter  Sunday,  lamb  is served throughout Italy. [229]  The common cake for Easter Day is the  Colomba Pasquale  (literally, Easter dove), which is often simply known as "Italian Easter Cake" abroad. [230]  It represents a  dove , [231]  and is topped with  almonds  and  pearl sugar .
 On  Christmas Eve  a symbolic fast is observed with the  cena di magro  ("light dinner"), a meatless meal. [232]  Typical cakes of the Christmas season are  panettone  and  pandoro . [233] 
 
 International [ edit ] 
 Africa [ edit ] 
 Former Italian colonies [ edit ] 
   A  pizzeria  in  Rosebank, Gauteng ,  South Africa 
 Due to several  Italian colonies  established in Africa, mainly in  Ethiopia ,  Eritrea ,  Libya , and  Somalia  (except the  northern part , which was under British rule), there is a considerable Italian influence on the cuisines of these nations. [234] 
 
 South Africa [ edit ] 
 All major cities and towns in South Africa have substantial populations of  Italian South Africans . Italian foods, like ham and cheeses, are imported and some also made locally, and every city has a popular Italian restaurant or two, as well as pizzerias. [235]  The production of good quality olive oil is on the rise in  South Africa , especially in the drier south-western parts where there is a more Mediterranean-type of rainfall pattern. [236]  Some oils have even won top international awards. [237] 
 
 Europe [ edit ] 
 Croatia [ edit ] 
 The  Croatian cuisine  of  Istria ,  Fiume  and  Dalmatia  was influenced by Italian cuisine, given the historical presence of local ethnic Italians ( Istrian Italians  and  Dalmatian Italians ), influence that has eased after the  Istrian-Dalmatian exodus . [238] [239]  For example, the influence of Italian cuisine on Croatian dishes can be seen in the  pršut  (similar to Italian  prosciutto ) and on the preparation of homemade pasta. [240] 
 
 France [ edit ] 
   A traditional Corsican meal with (from left to right):  brocciu ,  pulenda  and  figatellu 
 In  France  the  cuisine of Corsica  has much in common with the Italian cuisine, since the island was, from the  Early Middle Ages  until 1768, a  Pisan  possession followed by a  Genoese  possession. [241]  The cuisine of the  County of Nice  was also influenced by Italian cuisine due to its proximity to Italy and the fact that the County of Nice belonged to the  Kingdom of Piedmont-Sardinia  until 1860, when it was annexed by France. [242] 
 
 Malta [ edit ] 
 Maltese cuisine , given the proximity of  Malta  to Italy, shows strong Italian influences as well as influences from  Spanish ,  French ,  Provençal , and other  Mediterranean cuisines , with some later British culinary influence. [243] 
 
 Monaco [ edit ] 
 Monégasque cuisine  has undergone significant influences from Italian cuisine (especially  Ligurian cuisine ), given the proximity of  Monaco  to Italy, and from  Provencal  and French cuisines. [244] 
 
 San Marino [ edit ] 
   Bustrengo , a traditional Christmas dish in the  Republic of San Marino . [245] 
 Sammarinese cuisine  is strongly similar to Italian cuisine, especially that of the adjoining  Emilia-Romagna  and  Marche  regions. [246] [247]   San Marino 's primary agricultural products are cheese, wine and livestock, and  cheesemaking  is a primary economic activity in San Marino. [248] [249] 
 
 Slovenia [ edit ] 
 Given the proximity of  Slovenia  to Italy,  Slovenian cuisine  was influenced by Italian cuisine. [250]  Slovenian dishes of Italian origin are  njoki  (similar to Italian  gnocchi ),  rizota  (the Slovenian version of  risotto ) and  zilkrofi  (similar to Italian  ravioli ). [251]  Italian cuisine has particularly influenced the cuisine of  Slovenian Istria , given the historical presence of local ethnic Italians ( Istrian Italians ), influence that has eased after the  Istrian-Dalmatian exodus . [239] [252] 
 
 Switzerland [ edit ] 
 The cuisine of the  Canton of Ticino  is greatly influenced by Italian cuisine and above all by  Lombard cuisine  due to the centuries-old domination of the  Duchy of Milan  and the economic and linguistic ties with  Lombardy . [253] 
 
 North and Central America [ edit ] 
   An Italian-American pizza with pepperoni (salami), mushrooms, olives and peppers 
   Milanesa  a la napolitana  with  French fries , an Italian-inspired dish based on the original  cotoletta  dish from  Milan , common in  South America . 
 United States [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Italian-American cuisine 
 Much of  Italian-American cuisine  is based on Italian cuisine, heavily  Americanized  to reflect ingredients and conditions found in the United States.  Italian-Americans  often identify foods with their  regional heritage .  Southern Italy  staples include dry  pasta ,  tomato sauce , and  olive oil , whereas Northern Italian staples include foods such as  risotto ,  white sauce  and  polenta . [254] 
 Pizza  arrived in the United States in the early 20th century along with waves of Italian immigrants who settled primarily in the large cities of the Northeast. It got a boost both in  popularity and regional spread  after soldiers stationed in  Italy  returned from  World War II . [255] 
 
 Mexico [ edit ] 
 Throughout the country the  torta de milanesa  is a common item offered at food carts and stalls. [256]  It is a sandwich made from locally baked bread and contains a  breaded, pan-fried cutlet  of pork or beef. [256] 
 
 South America [ edit ] 
 Argentina [ edit ] 
 Due to large  Italian immigration to Argentina , Italian food and drink is heavily featured in  Argentine cuisine . [257]  An example could be  milanesas  (The name comes from the original  cotoletta  alla milanese from  Milan , Italy). [258]  There are several other Italian-Argentine dishes, such as  sorrentinos  and Argentine gnocchi. [259] 
 
 Brazil [ edit ] 
   Uruguayan  torta frita , which derives from Italian  gnocco fritto 
 Italian cuisine is popular in Brazil, due to  great immigration there  in the late 1800s and early 1900s. [260]  Due to the  huge Italian community ,  São Paulo  is the place where this cuisine is most appreciated. [260]  The city has also developed its particular variety of  pizza , different from both  Neapolitan  and  American  varieties, and it is largely popular on weekend dinners. [261] 
 
 Uruguay [ edit ] 
   A  Chicken parmigiana , based on a combination of the Italian  parmigiana di melanzane  with a  cotoletta . It is widespread in  North America  and  Australia 
 The conspicuous  Italian immigration in Uruguay  has strongly influenced  Uruguayan cuisine , with a vast number of dishes deriving from Italian cuisine, with dishes from all Italian regions. [262] [263]  In addition to the extensive use of pasta, including  tallarines  (Italian  tagliatelle ),  raviolesi  (Italian  ravioli ),  capeletis  (Italian  cappelletti ) and  tortelines  (Italian  tortellini ), they are part of the Uruguayan cuisine the  baña cauda  (Italian  bagna cauda ),  boloñesa  (Italian  ragù ),  cazuela de mondongo  (Italian  trippa alla milanese ),  pesto  and  torta frita  (Italian  gnocco fritto ). [262] [263] 
 
 Venezuela [ edit ] 
 Venezuelan cuisine  is influenced by its European ( Italian ,  Spanish ,  Portuguese , and  French ), West African, and indigenous traditions. [264]  Examples of Venezuelan dishes influenced by Italian cuisine, thanks to  Italian immigration in this country , is  pasticho  (from the Italian "pasticcio"), which is the Venezuelan version of  lasagna , and  Pan Chabata  bread, corresponding to the Italian  ciabatta . [265] 
 
 Oceania [ edit ] 
 The conspicuous  Italian immigration in Australia  has strongly influenced  Australian cuisine . [266]  The  Chicken parmigiana , based on a combination of the Italian  melanzane alla parmigiana  with a  cotoletta , [267]  was known in Australia by the 1950s. [268]  In 1952, the first  espresso  machines began to appear in  Sydney  (probably the first in  Australia ) and a plethora of fine Italian coffee houses were emerging in other Australian cities, such as  Melbourne . [269] 
 
 
 See also [ edit ] 
 
 Italy portal Food portal 
 
 Il cucchiaio d'argento , an Italian cookbook 
 Il talismano della felicità  by Ada Boni, an Italian cookbook 
 Italian food products 
 List of Italian cheeses 
 List of Italian DOP cheeses 
 List of Italian dishes 
 List of Italian soups 
 List of Italian restaurants 
 Sammarinese cuisine 
 Italian meal structure 
 Italian wine 
 
 Notes [ edit ] 
 
 
 ^   David 1988, Introduction, pp.101–103 [ full citation needed ] 
 
 ^   "Italian Food" .  Life in Italy . Archived from  the original  on 8 May 2017 . Retrieved  15 May  2017 . 
 
 ^   "The History of Italian Cuisine I" .  Life in Italy . 30 October 2019 . Retrieved  16 April  2020 . 
 
 ^   Thoms, Ulrike.  "From Migrant Food to Lifestyle Cooking: The Career of Italian Cuisine in Europe Italian Cuisine" .  EGO ( http://www.ieg-ego.eu ) . Retrieved  17 April  2020 . 
 
 ^   "The Making of Italian Food...From the Beginning" . Epicurean . Retrieved  24 April  2010 . 
 
 ^   Del Conte 2004 , pp. 11–21. 
 
 ^   For example, in 2019, the American network  CNN  ranked first in a ranking of the best cuisines in the world; see:  "Which country has the best food?" . Retrieved  14 November  2021 . . According to a survey conducted by the British company of  market analysis  YouGov, out of 24 countries, Italian cuisine was the most internationally appreciated gastronomy with 84% of total preferences; see:  "Sondaggio YouGov:l'84% delle persone nel mondo preferisce la cucina italiana" . Retrieved  14 November  2021 . 
 
 ^   Related Articles (2 January 2009).  "Italian cuisine" .  Britannica Online Encyclopedia . Britannica.com . Retrieved  24 April  2010 . 
 
 ^   "Italian Food – Italy's Regional Dishes & Cuisine" . Indigo Guide. Archived from  the original  on 2 January 2011 . Retrieved  24 April  2010 . 
 
 ^   "Regional Italian Cuisine" . Rusticocooking.com . Retrieved  24 April  2010 . 
 
 ^   "Cronistoria della cucina italiana"  (in Italian) . Retrieved  13 November  2021 . 
 
 ^   "Piatti regionali a diffusione nazionale"  (in Italian) . Retrieved  13 November  2021 . 
 
 ^  a   b   "How pasta became the world's favourite food" . bbc. 15 June 2011 . Retrieved  28 September  2014 . 
 
 ^   Freeman, Nancy (2 March 2007).  "American Food, Cuisine" . Sallybernstein.com . Retrieved  24 April  2010 . 
 
 ^   "Intervista esclusiva allo chef Carlo Cracco: "La cucina è cultura" "  (in Italian) . Retrieved  5 January  2020 . 
 
 ^   "Storia della cucina italiana: le tappe della nostra cultura culinaria"  (in Italian). 25 May 2019 . Retrieved  5 January  2020 . 
 
 ^   "La cucina italiana nel mondo: un business da 229 miliardi"  (in Italian). Archived from  the original  on 14 August 2020 . Retrieved  5 January  2020 . 
 
 ^   "Individualità territoriale e stagionalità nella cucina italiana"  (in Italian) . Retrieved  5 January  2020 . 
 
 ^   "Regole e stagionalità della cucina italiana"  (in Italian). 2 December 2016 . Retrieved  5 January  2020 . 
 
 ^   "Nonne come chef"  (in Italian) . Retrieved  5 January  2020 . 
 
 ^   The Silver Spoon  ISBN   88-7212-223-6 , 1997 ed. 
 
 ^   Marshall, Lee (30 September 2009).  "Italian coffee culture: a guide" .  The Daily Telegraph .  Archived  from the original on 10 October 2013 . Retrieved  5 September  2013 . 
 
 ^   Jewkes, Stephen (13 October 2012).  "World's first museum about gelato culture opens in Italy" .  Times Colonist .  Archived  from the original on 16 October 2013 . Retrieved  5 September  2013 . 
 
 ^   Squires, Nick (23 August 2013).  "Tiramisu claimed by Treviso" .  The Daily Telegraph .  Archived  from the original on 29 August 2013 . Retrieved  5 September  2013 . 
 
 ^   Keane, John.  "Italy leads the way with protected products under EU schemes" .  Bord Bia . Archived from  the original  on 29 March 2014 . Retrieved  5 September  2013 . 
 
 ^  a   b   "L'Italia è il maggiore produttore di vino"  (in Italian) . Retrieved  11 November  2021 . 
 
 ^  a   b   "L'Italia è il paese con più vitigni autoctoni al mondo"  (in Italian). 3 June 2017 . Retrieved  11 November  2021 . 
 
 ^   "History of Italian Food" .  yourguidetoitaly.com . 
 
 ^   "First pizzeria was settled in Naples" . Retrieved  25 November  2021 . 
 
 ^   Kummer, Corby (1 July 1986).  "Pasta" .  The Atlantic . 
 
 ^   Alberto Capatti, Massimo Montanari "La cucina italiana. Storia di una cultura." (2002). 
 
 ^  a   b   Del Conte 2004 , p. 11. 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   e   f   Last, John (13 December 2022).  "There Is No Such Thing As Italian Food" .  Noema Magazine . 
 
 ^   Jenkins, Nancy Harmon (18 October 1989).  "Arab-Sicilian Food: Tale of 1,001 Years" .  The New York Times .  ISSN   0362-4331 . Retrieved  3 May  2017 . 
 
 ^   Team, Delicious Italy.  "Arab Culinary Influence in Sicilian Food" . Retrieved  3 May  2017 . 
 
 ^  a   b   Del Conte 2004 , p. 12. 
 
 ^   Capatti 2003 , pp. 253–254. 
 
 ^   Capatti 2003 , p. 6. 
 
 ^   Capatti 2003 , pp. 9–10. 
 
 ^   Capatti 2003 , p. 10. 
 
 ^   Del Conte 2004 , p. 13. 
 
 ^  a   b   c   Del Conte 2004 , pp. 14–15. 
 
 ^  a   b   Del Conte 2004 , p. 15. 
 
 ^   Del Conte 2004 , p. 16. 
 
 ^   Capatti 2003 , pp. 158–159. 
 
 ^   Capatti 2003 , pp. 282–284. 
 
 ^   Gentilcore, David (15 June 2010).  Pomodoro!: A History of the Tomato in Italy . Columbia University Press. p. x.  ISBN   978-0-231-15206-8 . Retrieved  24 February  2013 . 
 
 ^   Del Conte 2004 , p. 17. 
 
 ^   Faccioli 1987 , p. 753. 
 
 ^   Del Conte 2004 , pp. 18–19. 
 
 ^   "Gli italiani all'estero veri ambasciatori della cucina italiana nel mondo"  (in Italian) . Retrieved  1 December  2021 . 
 
 ^   Keane, John.  "Italy leads the way with protected products under EU schemes" .  Bord Bia . Archived from  the original  on 29 March 2014 . Retrieved  5 September  2013 . 
 
 ^   "Lista dei prodotti italiani riconosciuti come: DOP, IGP, STG, IG e PAT"  (in Italian) . Retrieved  29 November  2021 . 
 
 ^   "Lista dei prodotti italiani riconosciuti come: De.CO"   (PDF)  (in Italian) . Retrieved  29 November  2021 . 
 
 ^   "DOC e DOCG in Italia"  (in Italian) . Retrieved  29 November  2021 . 
 
 ^   "Oli DOP e IGP in Italia"  (in Italian) . Retrieved  29 November  2021 . 
 
 ^   "Dal Prosek al Parmesan, le imitazioni delle eccellenze italiane nel mondo"  (in Italian) . Retrieved  30 November  2021 . 
 
 ^  a   b   "In cosa consiste l'Italian Sounding"  (in Italian). 25 March 2020 . Retrieved  30 November  2021 . 
 
 ^  a   b   "I finti prodotti italiani? Anche in Italia!"  (in Italian). 4 February 2016 . Retrieved  30 November  2021 . 
 
 ^   "Indagine conoscitiva sulle ricadute sul sistema agroalimentare italiano dell'accordo di partenariato transatlantico su commercio e investimenti (TTIP)"  (in Italian) . Retrieved  30 November  2021 . 
 
 ^   "Rapporto IPERICO sulla Lotta alla Contraffazione in Italia nel Settore Agroalimentare 2009–2012"   (PDF)  (in Italian) . Retrieved  30 November  2021 . 
 
 ^   Montagnoli, Livia (19 May 2021).  "Italian sounding: cos'è, come funziona e quali danni fa al made in Italy"  (in Italian). 
 
 ^   "Italian sounding: giro di affari da 55 miliardi"  (in Italian) . Retrieved  17 December  2021 . 
 
 ^   "Lista dei presidi Slow Food in Italia e nel mondo"   (PDF)  (in Italian) . Retrieved  29 November  2021 . 
 
 ^   "Eat less meat, of better quality: don't do it with sadness. Do it with joy!" . 26 August 2019 . Retrieved  30 November  2021 . 
 
 ^   "Food waste - Themes" .  Slow Food International . Retrieved  27 April  2021 . 
 
 ^   "Slow Food movement" . Retrieved  30 November  2021 . 
 
 ^   "Fair Trade - How We Work" .  Slow Food Foundation . Retrieved  27 April  2021 . 
 
 ^   "Perchè Gualtiero Marchesi è il fondatore della Cucina Italiana Moderna"  (in Italian) . Retrieved  15 December  2021 . 
 
 ^   Rafael García Santos.  "Profilo su "Lo Mejor de la Gastronomia" "  (in Spanish). Archived from  the original  on 6 January 2006 . Retrieved  20 November  2008 . 
 
 ^   "Gualtiero Marchesi, il grande italiano"  (in Italian). 26 December 2017 . Retrieved  15 December  2021 . 
 
 ^  a   b   "Nouvelle Cuisine - Storia tra Francia e Italia"  (in Italian). 23 April 2021 . Retrieved  15 December  2021 . 
 
 ^   "Nouvelle Cuisine: conosciamo i piatti più famosi"  (in Italian) . Retrieved  15 December  2021 . 
 
 ^   Bastianich, Lidia ; Tania, Manuali.  Lidia Cooks from the Heart of Italy: A Feast of 175 Regional Recipes  (1st ed.). 
 
 ^   Bastianich, Lidia ; John, Mariani.  How Italian Food Conquered the World  (1st ed.). 
 
 ^   Conte, Anna Del (16 May 2016).  "Ten commandments of Italian cooking" .  The Guardian .  ISSN   0261-3077 . Retrieved  25 April  2017 . 
 
 ^   Kyle Phillips.  "Northern Regional Cuisines" .  About . Archived from  the original  on 18 January 2017 . Retrieved  2 December  2011 . 
 
 ^   Arturo Iengo (2008).  Cucina Napoletana: 100 Recipes from Italy's Most Vibrant City . New Holland Publishers. p. 126.  ISBN   978-1-84537-989-6 . Archived from  the original  on 16 June 2018 . Retrieved  12 December  2017 . 
 
 ^   "Cucina laziale: l'abc dei prodotti tipici della regione"  (in Italian). 16 September 2019 . Retrieved  12 November  2021 . 
 
 ^   "Ragù alla toscana: per la pasta fatta in casa"  (in Italian) . Retrieved  12 November  2021 . 
 
 ^   Bay, Allan; Salvatori, Paola (4 November 2021).  Nuova cucina italiana: 1400 ricette tra tradizione e innovazione  (in Italian).  ISBN   9788865769539 . Retrieved  12 November  2021 . 
 
 ^   "L'Italia ha la maggiore varietà di formaggi al mondo"  (in Italian). 29 June 2015 . Retrieved  11 November  2021 . 
 
 ^   "Elenco interattivo dei 600 tipi di formaggi italiani"  (in Italian) . Retrieved  11 November  2021 . 
 
 ^   Scotto, Paolo (2004).  I numeri del formaggio italiano  (in Italian).  ISBN   9788884403438 . Retrieved  11 November  2021 . 
 
 ^   Cremona, Luigi; Soletti, Francesco (2002).  Elenco dei 490 tipi di formaggi italiani tra DOP, IGP e PAT  (in Italian).  ISBN   9788836527274 . Retrieved  11 November  2021 . 
 
 ^   May, Tony (1 June 2005).  Italian Cuisine: The New Essential Reference to the Riches of the Italian Table . Macmillan. pp. 7–.  ISBN   978-0-312-30280-1 . Retrieved  24 February  2013 . 
 
 ^   "UNCTAD (2005)" . Archived from  the original  on 31 May 2009 . Retrieved  25 November  2021 . 
 
 ^   "L'Italia possiede la maggior varietà di cultivar di olivo al mondo"  (in Italian) . Retrieved  11 November  2021 . 
 
 ^   "L'Italia ha la seconda maggiore produzione di olio d'oliva al mondo"  (in Italian) . Retrieved  11 November  2021 . 
 
 ^  a   b   "Pane"  (in Italian) . Retrieved  11 November  2021 . 
 
 ^   "Salumi e insaccati italiani DOP e IGP"  (in Italian) . Retrieved  11 November  2021 . 
 
 ^   "Il 34% dei salumi e insaccati DOP e IGP in Europa sono italiani"  (in Italian) . Retrieved  11 November  2021 . 
 
 ^   "Salumi e insaccati italiani PAT"  (in Italian). 5 April 2019 . Retrieved  11 November  2021 . 
 
 ^  a   b   "Tipi di carne nella cucina italiana"  (in Italian) . Retrieved  11 November  2021 . 
 
 ^   "Estate a tutto pesce, molluschi e crostacei: i consigli dell'esperto"  (in Italian). 24 July 2021 . Retrieved  13 November  2021 . 
 
 ^   "Pasta e pesce: quante ricette!"  (in Italian). 6 July 2020 . Retrieved  13 November  2021 . 
 
 ^   "Antipasti di pesce caldi e freddi, 100 ricette"  (in Italian). 4 July 2020 . Retrieved  13 November  2021 . 
 
 ^  a   b   "Formati (tipi) di pasta"  (in Italian) . Retrieved  11 November  2021 . 
 
 ^   "Pasta recipes" . Retrieved  11 November  2021 . 
 
 ^   "Pasta fatta in casa con i consigli degli esperti: la ricetta degli spätzle"  (in Italian). 6 June 2020 . Retrieved  11 November  2021 . 
 
 ^   "La pasta secca"  (in Italian). 25 July 2015 . Retrieved  11 November  2021 . 
 
 ^   "Tipi e formati di pasta italiani regione per regione"  (in Italian) . Retrieved  11 November  2021 . 
 
 ^   "The colours of durum wheat: a review" . Retrieved  11 November  2021 . 
 
 ^   "Pasta al dente. Origine e storia del cavallo di battaglia della cucina italiana"  (in Italian). 16 November 2018 . Retrieved  11 November  2021 . 
 
 ^   "Il Grano: ecco come il cereale più diffuso al mondo è diventato"  (in Italian). 6 February 2018 . Retrieved  11 November  2021 . 
 
 ^   "Pizzoccheri alla valtellinese"  (in Italian) . Retrieved  11 November  2021 . 
 
 ^   "Pasta all'uovo"  (in Italian) . Retrieved  11 November  2021 . 
 
 ^   "Ricetta pastasciutta"  (in Italian) . Retrieved  11 November  2021 . 
 
 ^   "Come cucinare la minestra"  (in Italian) . Retrieved  11 November  2021 . 
 
 ^   "Pasta al forno"  (in Italian) . Retrieved  11 November  2021 . 
 
 ^   "144843" .  Oxford English Dictionary  (Online ed.).  Oxford University Press .   (Subscription or  participating institution membership  required.) 
 
 ^   "Qual è la ricetta più famosa del mondo?"  (in Italian) . Retrieved  11 November  2021 . 
 
 ^   Official Journal of the European Union,  Commission regulation (EU) No 97/2010   Archived  3 June 2013 at the  Wayback Machine , 5 February 2010 
 
 ^   International Trademark Association,  European Union: Pizza napoletana obtains "Traditional Speciality Guaranteed" status   Archived  19 August 2014 at the  Wayback Machine , 1 April 2010 
 
 ^   "Naples' pizza twirling wins Unesco 'intangible' status" .  The Guardian . London. Agence France-Presse. 7 December 2017.  ISSN   0261-3077 .  Archived  from the original on 7 December 2017 . Retrieved  7 December  2017 . 
 
 ^   "Ricetta per fare la pizza al taglio perfetta a casa"  (in Italian). 23 February 2015 . Retrieved  13 November  2021 . 
 
 ^   "Sfincione, focaccia e scacciata: sfida caldissima in Sicilia"  (in Italian). 22 September 2015 . Retrieved  13 November  2021 . 
 
 ^   Hazan, Marcella  (27 October 1992). "Introduction".  Essentials of Classic Italian Cooking   (Kindle and printed.)  (1st ed.). Knopf.  ISBN   978-0394584041 . Retrieved  2 November  2015 .  ...Italian cooking? It would seem no single cuisine answers to that name. The cooking of Italy is really the cooking of regions that long antedate the Italian nation.... 
 
 ^   For further references: CAPATTI, A.; MONTANARI, M.,  Italian Cuisine: A Cultural History , Columbia University Press, 2003 –  http://blog.tuscany-cooking-class.com/regional-diversity-in-italian-cuisine/   Archived  6 April 2018 at the  Wayback Machine 
 
 ^   "Exploring Italian Cuisine: Flavorful Regions and a Fresh Perspective" .  tableagent.com . Retrieved  15 May  2017 . 
 
 ^  a   b   Piras 2000 , p. 319. 
 
 ^   "Abruzzo wine and food, Tortoreto and Abruzzo cooking – Hotel Poseidon Tortoreto" . Archived from  the original  on 12 December 2013 . Retrieved  15 August  2016 . 
 
 ^   "Italian Wine Regions" . Archived from  the original  on 8 February 2014. 
 
 ^   "THE BEST ITALIAN WINE IS TREBBIANO D'ABRUZZO 2007 BY VALENTINI, THEN BAROLO RESERVE MONPRIVATO CÀ D'MORISSIO 2004 BY MASCARELLO AND SASSICAIA 2009 BY SAN GUIDO ESTATE. THE "BEST ITALIAN WINE AWARDS-THE 50 BEST WINES OF ITALY" – Visualizzazione per stampa" .  WineNews . 25 September 2012. Archived from  the original  on 10 November 2014 . Retrieved  10 November  2014 . 
 
 ^   "Brodetto Vastese – the Winding Barter Fish Soup" . 9 June 2012. 
 
 ^   "Fish Chutney | Regione Abruzzo - Dipartimento Turismo, Cultura e Paesaggio" . 
 
 ^   "Baccalà all'abruzzese | Regione Abruzzo | Dipartimento Sviluppo Economico - Turismo" . 
 
 ^   "Cozze allo zafferano"  (in Italian) . Retrieved  22 December  2022 . 
 
 ^   "Prodotti Tipici"  (in Italian) . Retrieved  22 December  2022 . 
 
 ^   "CAMPOTOSTO: LA RESILIENZA DI FILOMENA E DELLA SUA FAMIGLIA, DA GENERAZIONI RISTORATORI SUL LAGO"  (in Italian). 27 February 2019 . Retrieved  22 December  2022 . 
 
 ^   Piras 2000 , p. 361. 
 
 ^   Shulman, Martha (22 July 2008).  "Pasta With Cherry Tomatoes and Arugula" .  New York Times . Retrieved  1 October  2011 . 
 
 ^   "The complete foodie guide to Basilicata" .  greatitalianchefs.com . 8 August 2019 . Retrieved  16 November  2020 . 
 
 ^   "Certificazione di origine, i meccanismi di vigilanza"   (PDF) .  consiglio.basilicata.it  (in Italian and English). Archived from  the original   (PDF)  on 3 January 2015 . Retrieved  3 January  2015 . 
 
 ^   "Crusco Peppers: the Red Necklaces of Basilicata Towns" .  lacucinaitaliana.com . 16 September 2019 . Retrieved  30 August  2020 . 
 
 ^   "Peperoni cruschi" .  tasteatlas.com . Retrieved  30 August  2020 . 
 
 ^   "Strascinati con mollica e peperoni cruschi" .  tasteatlas.com . Retrieved  30 August  2020 . 
 
 ^   "Lagane with Chick Peas" .  basilicatacultural.ca . Retrieved  4 January  2015 . 
 
 ^   Riley, Gillian (2007).  The Oxford Companion to Italian Food . Oxford University Press. p. 44. 
 
 ^   "Basilicata" .  italianowine.com . Retrieved  30 August  2020 . 
 
 ^   "Basilicata – On the waterways: Basilicata land of Mefitis" .  expo2015.org . Archived from  the original  on 7 April 2018 . Retrieved  26 March  2016 . 
 
 ^   Edward Lear,  Diario di un viaggio a piedi – Calabria 1847 , Edizione italiana a cura di Parallelo 38, Reggio Calabria, 1973 
 
 ^   Piras 2000 , p. 401. 
 
 ^  a   b   Piras 2000 , p. 337. 
 
 ^   "Hanna Miller" . Archived from  the original  on 12 July 2009 . Retrieved  25 November  2021 .  "American Pie,"  American Heritage , April/May 2006. 
 
 ^   Piras 2000 , p. 187. 
 
 ^   Georges Desrues "Eine Lange Nacht am Meer", In: Triest - Servus Magazin (2020), p 73. 
 
 ^   Paola Agostini, Mariarosa Brizzi: Cucina friulana - Ricettario Verlag: Giunti Demetra, Florenz 2007,  ISBN   978-88-440-3360-6 . 
 
 ^   Christoph Wagner: Friaul Kochbuch. Carinthia Verlag, Klagenfurt 2007. 
 
 ^  a   b   Piras 2000 , pp. 167 and 177. 
 
 ^  a   b   Boni 1983 , p. 13. 
 
 ^   Boni 1983 , p. 14. 
 
 ^   Eats, Serious.  "Gina DePalma's Guide To Rome Sweets" .  sweets.seriouseats.com . Retrieved  14 November  2017 . 
 
 ^  a   b   Piras 2000 , p. 291. 
 
 ^   Daniela Guaiti (2010). "Lombardia".  La grande cucina regionale italiana  (in Italian). Gribaudo. p. 10. 
 
 ^   "Per un codice della cucina lombarda"  (in Italian). p. 1. Archived from  the original   (PDF)  on 5 October 2020 . Retrieved  25 October  2017 . 
 
 ^   "Ricetta Ossobuco e risotto, piatto unico di Milano"  [Recipe for ossobuco and risotto, one-course meal dish of Milano].  Le ricette de La Cucina Italiana  (in Italian) . Retrieved  4 July  2017 . 
 
 ^   Piras 2000 , p. 87. 
 
 ^   Piras 2000 , p. 273. 
 
 ^   "Provvedimento 15 febbraio 2006: Iscrizione della denominazione «Oliva Ascolana del Piceno» nel registro delle denominazioni di origine protette e delle indicazioni geografiche protette, GURI n. 46"  (in Italian). Archived from  the original  on 30 January 2012 . Retrieved  25 November  2021 . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   Davide Paolini,  Prodotti Tipici D'Italia , Garzanti. 
 
 ^  a   b   Piras 2000 , pp. 457 and 460. 
 
 ^   "Casu frazigu – Formaggi"   (PDF)  (in Italian). Regione autonoma della Sardegna – ERSAT: Ente Regionale di Sviluppo e Assistenza Tecnica . Retrieved  29 October  2010 . 
 
 ^  a   b   Piras 2000 , p. 423. 
 
 ^   Team, Delicious Italy.  "Arab Culinary Influence in Sicilian Food" . Retrieved  10 May  2017 . 
 
 ^   greatbritishchefs.  "Sicily's North African Influences – Great Italian Chefs" .  Great Italian Chefs . Retrieved  10 May  2017 . 
 
 ^   "The Marsala wine: an English story with a Sicilian flavour | Italian Food Excellence" .  Italian Food Excellence . 15 May 2014 . Retrieved  10 May  2017 . 
 
 ^   "What is Marsala Wine | Wine Folly" .  Wine Folly . 8 August 2014 . Retrieved  10 May  2017 . 
 
 ^   "South Tyrolean Cuisine in Lana and Surroundings near Merano in South Tyrol" . Retrieved  21 January  2022 . 
 
 ^  a   b   Piras 2000 , p. 67. 
 
 ^   "Reise durch Bella Italia: Südtirol" . Retrieved  21 January  2022 . 
 
 ^   "Reise durch Bella Italia: Südtirol" . Retrieved  21 January  2022 . 
 
 ^   Piras 2000 , pp. 221–239. 
 
 ^   Cameron J. N. (2022). Homestyle Mediterranean : Rustic Cooking from Around the Sea. Beneva Publishing. p. 104. ISBN 978-0-9966261-3-2. 
 
 ^   Reference: MAXWELL, V.; LEVITON, A.; PETTERSEN, L.;  Tuscany and Umbria , Lonely Planet, 2010. For the richness of Umbrian cuisine and its history:  http://blog.tuscany-cooking-class.com/etruscan-roots-beyond-tuscany-umbrian-cuisine/ .  Archived  9 April 2018 at the  Wayback Machine 
 
 ^   Piras 2000 , pp. 255-256 and 260-261. 
 
 ^   Piras 2000 , pp. 123–124, 128 and 133. 
 
 ^   "Exploring Italian Cuisine: Flavorful Regions and a Fresh Perspective" .  tableagent.com . Retrieved  15 May  2017 . 
 
 ^   Piras 2000 , p. 33. 
 
 ^   "Venice Cuisine – by food author Howard Hillman" . Hillmanwonders.com. Archived from  the original  on 11 June 2008 . Retrieved  4 April  2010 . 
 
 ^   "history of tiramisu" . Archived from  the original  on 4 June 2012 . Retrieved  16 August  2010 . 
 
 ^   "Mangiare all'italiana"  (in Italian) . Retrieved  12 November  2021 . 
 
 ^   "Colazioni da incubo in giro per il mondo"  (in Italian). 29 March 2016 . Retrieved  12 November  2021 . 
 
 ^   "Merenda, una abitudine tutta italiana: cinque ricette salutari per tutta la famiglia"  (in Italian) . Retrieved  12 November  2021 . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   e   f   g   h   i   j   "Guide to the Traditional Italian Meal Structure" .  Cucina Toscana . 22 September 2015 . Retrieved  15 May  2017 . 
 
 ^   "At the Italian Dinner Table | Italian Dinner and Food Traditions" .  DeLallo . Archived from  the original  on 4 September 2017 . Retrieved  15 May  2017 .   
 
 ^   "Quante portate per un matrimonio di nuova generazione?"  (in Italian) . Retrieved  12 November  2021 . 
 
 ^   "Portate a tavola: qual è la sequenza corretta per non sbagliare?"  (in Italian). 12 June 2020 . Retrieved  12 November  2021 . 
 
 ^   "Primo piatto"  (in Italian) . Retrieved  12 November  2021 . 
 
 ^   "Secondo piatto"  (in Italian) . Retrieved  12 November  2021 . 
 
 ^   "Il piatto unico, cos'è"  (in Italian) . Retrieved  12 November  2021 . 
 
 ^   Evans 2000 , pp. 198–200. 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   Evans 2000 , p. 200. 
 
 ^   "Caffetteria"  (in Italian) . Retrieved  19 December  2021 . 
 
 ^   "Enotèca"  (in Italian) . Retrieved  19 December  2021 . 
 
 ^   "Fiaschetterìa"  (in Italian) . Retrieved  25 November  2021 . 
 
 ^   "Formaggerìa"  (in Italian) . Retrieved  11 January  2022 . 
 
 ^   "Locanda"  (in Italian) . Retrieved  19 December  2021 . 
 
 ^  a   b   Evans 2000 , p. 201. 
 
 ^   "Panifìcio"  (in Italian) . Retrieved  11 January  2022 . 
 
 ^   "Significato della pasticceria (cos'è, concetto e definizione)"  (in Italian) . Retrieved  24 November  2021 . 
 
 ^   "Aprire un pastificio artigianale"  (in Italian) . Retrieved  11 January  2022 . 
 
 ^   "Cosa serve per aprire una piadineria nel 2021"  (in Italian). 11 January 2021 . Retrieved  14 November  2021 . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   Evans 2000 , p. 203. 
 
 ^   "Sagra"  (in Italian) . Retrieved  19 December  2021 . 
 
 ^   "Salumerìa"  (in Italian) . Retrieved  11 January  2022 . 
 
 ^   Evans 2000 , p. 204. 
 
 ^  a   b   Evans 2000 , p. 205. 
 
 ^   Piras 2000 , p. 300. 
 
 ^   Piras 2000 , p. 301. 
 
 ^   Koplan 1996 , p. 301. 
 
 ^   Koplan 1996 , p. 311. 
 
 ^   Hyland, Tom.  "The Best Of Italy's Wines - Highly Recommended New Releases" .  Forbes . Retrieved  22 November  2021 . 
 
 ^   Koplan 1996 , pp. 307–308. 
 
 ^   Michael Jackson (1998).  Le birre: oltre 600 marche e produttori di tutto il mondo . Milan: Vallardi. p. 52.  ISBN   9788882112073 . 
 
 ^  a   b   "Drinking Limoncello in Italy" .  Luxury Retreats Magazine . 8 December 2017. Archived from  the original  on 30 September 2019 . Retrieved  30 September  2019 . [ full citation needed ] 
 
 ^   Piras 2000 , p. 383. 
 
 ^   Atkin, Tim,  The Observer  (11 November 2007).  "The fizz that's the bizz" .  The Guardian . London . Retrieved  29 December  2008 . 
 
 ^   Dane, Ana,  TheStreet.com  (3 July 2006).  "Pop the Cork on Prosecco" . Archived from  the original  on 13 September 2015 . Retrieved  29 December  2008 .   
 
 ^  a   b   Richardson, Tim H. (2002).  Sweets: A History of Candy . Bloomsbury USA. pp.  364–365 .  ISBN   1-58234-229-6 . 
 
 ^   Richardson, Tim H. (2002).  Sweets: A History of Candy . Bloomsbury USA. pp.  119 .  ISBN   1-58234-229-6 . 
 
 ^   "Gelato artigianale in Italia, business da 4.7 miliardi l'anno"  (in Italian). 4 August 2016 . Retrieved  14 November  2021 . 
 
 ^   "Confetti: qual è il colore giusto per ogni festa e anniversario? Il significato del colore dei confetti"  (in Italian) . Retrieved  29 November  2021 . 
 
 ^   Richardson, Tim H. (2002).  Sweets: A History of Candy . Bloomsbury USA. pp.  210 .  ISBN   1-58234-229-6 . 
 
 ^   Long, C.M. (2001).  Spiritual Merchants: Religion, Magic, and Commerce . University of Tennessee Press. p. 67.  ISBN   978-1-57233-110-5 . 
 
 ^   Ball, A. (2003).  Encyclopedia of Catholic Devotions and Practices . Our Sunday Visitor. p. 579.  ISBN   978-0-87973-910-2 . Archived from  the original  on 4 May 2016.   
 
 ^   Canatella, R. (2011).  The YAT Language of New Orleans . iUniverse. pp. 131–132.  ISBN   978-1-4620-3295-2 . Retrieved  11 December  2015 . 
 
 ^   Brown, Ellen (2015).  Donut Nation: A Cross-Country Guide to America's Best Donut Shops .  Running Press  p. 53.  ISBN   978-0-7624-5525-6 . 
 
 ^   "Agnello a Pasqua, il suo significato"  (in Italian) . Retrieved  13 November  2021 . 
 
 ^   "Colomba: Italian Easter Cake" . 17 March 2021 . Retrieved  13 November  2021 . 
 
 ^   "Chi ha inventato la Ccolomba di Pasqua ?"  (in Italian). 26 March 2021 . Retrieved  13 November  2021 . 
 
 ^   "Perché la vigilia di Natale non si mangia carne?"  (in Italian). 24 December 2015 . Retrieved  13 November  2021 . 
 
 ^   "Natale, Panettone o Pandoro? Ecco le differenze e la loro storia"  (in Italian). 24 December 2019 . Retrieved  13 November  2021 . 
 
 ^   "Mulini e pasta, una storia coloniale in Eritrea e nell'AOI"  (in Italian). 17 January 2021 . Retrieved  13 November  2021 . 
 
 ^   "L'Italia in Sudafrica"  (in Italian) . Retrieved  13 November  2021 . 
 
 ^   "L'olio d'oliva sudafricano diventa selvaggio"  (in Italian) . Retrieved  13 November  2021 . 
 
 ^   "L'olio d'oliva sudafricano diventa selvaggioIl Sudafrica è il re dell'olio d'oliva"  (in Italian). 14 September 2015 . Retrieved  13 November  2021 . 
 
 ^   "Cucina Croata. I piatti della cucina della Croazia"  (in Italian) . Retrieved  26 November  2021 . 
 
 ^  a   b   "I sopravvissuti: i 10 gioielli della cucina istriana"  (in Italian) . Retrieved  26 November  2021 . 
 
 ^   "Assaporate il cibo dell'Istria: il paradiso gastronomico della Croazia"  (in Italian) . Retrieved  2 December  2021 . 
 
 ^   "Storia cucina corsa"  (in Italian) . Retrieved  13 November  2021 . 
 
 ^   "La cucina nizzarda punta al Patrimonio Unesco. Un esempio di protezione della tradizione che guarda al futuro"  (in Italian) . Retrieved  26 November  2021 . 
 
 ^   "La Cucina Maltese" . Archived from  the original  on 9 October 2011 . Retrieved  26 November  2021 . 
 
 ^   John J. B. Anderson and Marilyn C. Sparling,  The Mediterranean Way of Eating: Evidence for Chronic Disease Prevention and Weight Management  (Florida: CRC Press, 2015) 16. 
 
 ^   Roufs, T.G.; Roufs, K.S. (2014).  Sweet Treats around the World: An Encyclopedia of Food and Culture: An Encyclopedia of Food and Culture . ABC-CLIO. p. 198.  ISBN   978-1-61069-221-2 . Retrieved  26 October  2017 . 
 
 ^   World and Its Peoples . World and Its Peoples: Europe. Marshall Cavendish Reference. 2010. p. 855.  ISBN   978-0-7614-7893-5 . Retrieved  26 October  2017 . 
 
 ^   "San Marino: A small, fairy tale land" .  The Jakarta Post . 7 March 2017 . Retrieved  26 October  2017 . 
 
 ^   San Marino Business Law Handbook: Strategic Information and Laws . International Business Publications USA. 2013. p. 42.  ISBN   978-1-4387-7092-5 . Retrieved  26 October  2017 . [ permanent dead link ] 
 
 ^   Cuhaj, G.S.; Michael, T. (2011).  Coins of the World: Italy, San Marino, Vatican . F+W Media. p. 159.  ISBN   978-1-4402-3139-1 . Retrieved  26 October  2017 . [ permanent dead link ] 
 
 ^   "Cosa vale la pena provare in Slovenia ?"  (in Italian) . Retrieved  26 November  2021 . 
 
 ^   "La cucina slovena"  (in Italian) . Retrieved  26 November  2021 . 
 
 ^   "Selezione culinaria dell' Istria Slovena"  (in Italian) . Retrieved  26 November  2021 . 
 
 ^   "Ticino, meta gourmet in crescita: i ristoranti da non perdere"  (in Italian) . Retrieved  26 November  2021 . 
 
 ^   Montany, Gail (19 June 2011).  "Lidia Bastianich on the quintessential Italian meal" .  The Aspen Business Journal . Archived from  the original  on 30 January 2012 . Retrieved  1 January  2012 . 
 
 ^   Stradley, Linda. "Pizza - History & Legends of Pizza".  What's Cooking America . N.p., n.d. Web. 28 January 2014. 
 
 ^  a   b   "Ricetta facile della torta alla milanese messicana"  (in Italian) . Retrieved  13 November  2021 . 
 
 ^   "Cucina Argentina"  (in Italian) . Retrieved  13 November  2021 . 
 
 ^   "La verdad de la milanesa"  [The truth of the milanesa].  En Pampa y la vía [In Pampa and the road]  (in Spanish). 8 October 2005. Archived from  the original  on 27 May 2008 . Retrieved  9 October  2008 . 
 
 ^   "Noquis caceros, come vedono gli gnocchi gli argentini"  (in Italian) . Retrieved  13 November  2021 . 
 
 ^  a   b   "Brasile, a San Paolo la settimana della Cucina regionale italiana"  (in Italian). 16 October 2018 . Retrieved  13 November  2021 . 
 
 ^   "Pizza in Brasile? Un'istituzione a San Paolo"  (in Italian) . Retrieved  13 November  2021 . 
 
 ^  a   b   "Carne sí, ma sempre con pasta, milanesa, fainá, tallarines con tuco e il 29 di ogni mese, gnocchi"  (in Italian) . Retrieved  27 November  2021 . 
 
 ^  a   b   "Dizionario Gastronomico Italia-Uruguay"  (in Italian) . Retrieved  27 November  2021 . 
 
 ^   Kohnstamm, Thomas; Kohn, Beth.  "Venezuela."  Lonely Planet. Accessed October 2011. 
 
 ^   Romero, Aldemaro (21 June 1998).  "Pasticho" . notitarde.com (Spanish). Archived from  the original  on 23 March 2002 . Retrieved  28 April  2006 . 
 
 ^   "La cucina australiana tra piatti tipici e tradizioni locali"  (in Italian) . Retrieved  15 December  2021 . 
 
 ^   Kaminski, Margot (12 October 2006).  "Fake Accent" .  Chowhound . Retrieved  1 November  2015 . 
 
 ^   "I Say" .  The Mail (Adelaide) . Vol. 43, no. 2, 164. South Australia. 28 November 1953. p. 55 . Retrieved  24 March  2019  – via National Library of Australia.  They ask for steak and eggs, but change to Chicken Parmigiana when the waiter explains that it's chicken cooked in light wine and served with grated cheese 
 
 ^   "Half a Century of Australian Espresso" . Retrieved  15 December  2021 . 
 
 
 References [ edit ] 
 Boni, Ada (1983) [1930].  La Cucina Romana  (in Italian). Roma: Newton Compton Editori.  ISBN   978-8862630030 . 
 Capatti, Alberto; Montanari, Massimo (2003).  Italian Cuisine: a Cultural History . Columbia University Press.  ISBN   0-231-12232-2 . 
 David, Elizabeth  (1988) [1950].  A Book of Mediterranean Food . Dorling Kindersley [John Lehmann].  ISBN   978-0-14-027328-1 . 
 Del Conte, Anna  (2004).  The Concise Gastronomy of Italy . Barnes & Noble Books.  ISBN   1-86205-662-5 . 
 Dickie, John (2008).  Delizia! The Epic History of Italians and Their Food . Free Press.  ISBN   978-0-7432-7807-2 . 
 Evans, Matthew; Cossi, Gabriella; D'Onghia, Peter (2000).  World Food Italy . Lonely Planet Publications Pty Ltd.  ISBN   1-86450-022-0 . . 
 Faccioli, Emilio (1987).  L'Arte della Cucina in Italia  (in Italian). Einaudi.  ISBN   978-8806598808 . 
 Hazan, Marcella  (1992).  Essentials of Classic Italian Cooking . Knopf.  ISBN   978-0-394-58404-1 . 
 Koplan, Steven; Smith, Brian; Weiss, Michael (1996).  Exploring Wine . Van Nostrand Reinhold.  ISBN   0-471-35295-0 . 
 Piras, Claudia; Medagliani, Eugenio (2000).  Culinaria Italy . Könemann Verlagsgesellschaft mbh.  ISBN   3-8290-2901-2 . 
 Further reading [ edit ] 
 Chrissie McClatchie (9 March 2023).  "The return of Europe's colourless food: Europe's forgotten transalpine cuisine (cucina bianca)" .  BBC World's Table . 
 Riley, Gillian  (2007).  The Oxford Companion to Italian Food . Oxford University Press.  ISBN   978-0-19-860617-8 . . 
 The Italian Academy of Cuisine (Accademia Italiana della Cucina) (2009).  La Cucina: The Regional Cooking of Italy . Trans. Jay Hyams. New York: Rizzoli.  ISBN   978-0-8478-3147-0 .  OCLC   303040489 . 
 Thoms, Ulrike (2011).  From Migrant Food to Lifestyle Cooking: The Career of Italian Cuisine in Europe .  Institute of European History . Retrieved  22 June  2011 . 
 External links [ edit ] 
 
 
 
 Wikibooks  Cookbook  has a recipe/module on
 
  Cuisine of Italy 
  Italian cooking 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons has media related to  Cuisine of Italy . 
 
 
 
 
 Wikivoyage has a travel guide for  Cuisine of Italy . 
 
 "Italian Food – World's Most Influential Food" .  Thrillist . 
 v t e   Cuisine of Italy History 
 Ancient Roman cuisine 
 Medieval cuisine 
 Early modern cuisine 
 Contemporary cuisine 
 Regional cuisines 
 Abruzzese 
 Apulian 
 Arbëreshë 
 Ligurian 
 Lombard 
 Lucanian 
 Neapolitan 
 Roman 
 Sardinian 
 Sicilian 
 Venetian 
 Pasta and sauces 
 Pasta  ( List ) 
 Carbonara 
 Pesto 
 Ragù 
 Neapolitan ragù 
 Arrabbiata sauce 
 Amatriciana sauce 
 Marinara sauce 
 Genovese sauce 
 Bolognese sauce 
 Checca sauce 
 Fettuccine Alfredo 
 Pasta alla Norma 
 Pasta con i peperoni cruschi 
 Pasta con le sarde 
 Pasta e fagioli 
 Pasta al pomodoro 
 Pasta all'Ortolana 
 Rigatoni con la Pajata 
 Cacio e pepe 
 Spaghetti aglio e olio 
 Spaghetti alla puttanesca 
 Spaghetti alle vongole 
 Tumact me tulez 
 Soups 
 Soup alla canavese 
 Soup alla modenese 
 Acquacotta 
 Bagnun 
 Minestrone 
 Ribollita 
 Other dishes ( List ) 
 Bagna càuda 
 Braciola 
 Bruschetta 
 Cotoletta 
 Cotoletta alla milanese 
 Crostino 
 Bollito misto 
 Baccalà alla lucana 
 Baccalà alla vicentina 
 Cacciatore 
 Cacciucco 
 Caponata 
 Cappon magro 
 Caprese salad 
 Carciofi alla romana 
 Carpaccio 
 Carne pizzaiola 
 Cassoeula 
 Ciambotta 
 Ciccioli 
 Coda alla vaccinara 
 Fiorentina 
 Fondue 
 Frico 
 Frittata 
 Frìttuli 
 Istrian stew 
 Lampredotto 
 Polenta 
 Porchetta 
 Panzanella 
 Parmigiana 
 Ossobuco 
 Orzotto 
 Rafanata 
 Risotto 
 Rollatini 
 Saltimbocca 
 Scaloppine 
 Timballo 
 Vitello tonnato 
 Pizza and street food 
 Pizza 
 al taglio 
 Neapolitan pizza 
 Sicilian pizza 
 Focaccia 
 Piscialandrea 
 Calzone 
 Panzerotti 
 Crocchè 
 Arancini 
 Supplì 
 Frittula 
 Panelle 
 Pani câ meusa 
 Panino 
 Piadina 
 Arrosticini 
 Farinata 
 Tramezzino 
 Zippuli 
 Sardenara 
 Scaccia 
 U' pastizz 'rtunnar 
 Cheeses and charcuterie 
 Cheeses 
 PDO 
 Salumi 
 Pastry and desserts ( List ) 
 Bocconotto 
 Bombolone 
 Bruttiboni 
 Buccellato 
 Budino 
 Cannoli 
 Cantuccini 
 Cassata 
 Cassatella di sant'Agata 
 Castagnaccio 
 Cavallucci 
 Colomba di Pasqua 
 Crostata 
 Crocetta of Caltanissetta 
 Gelato 
 Granita 
 Grattachecca 
 Marzipan 
 Mustacciuoli 
 Neapolitan ice cream 
 Neccio 
 Pandoro 
 Panettone 
 Panforte 
 Panna cotta 
 Panpepato 
 Parrozzo 
 Pastiera 
 Pignolata 
 Pizzelle 
 Ricciarelli 
 Seada 
 Semifreddo 
 Sfogliatelle 
 Sorbetto 
 Sponge cake 
 Spumoni 
 Struffoli 
 Tartufo 
 Tiramisu 
 Torrone 
 Torta caprese 
 Zabaione 
 Zeppole 
 Zuccotto 
 Zuppa Inglese 
 Breads 
 Borlengo 
 Breadstick 
 Ciabatta 
 Coppia Ferrarese 
 Filone 
 Michetta 
 Pane carasau 
 Pane di Altamura 
 Pane sciocco 
 Sgabeo 
 Taralli 
 Vastedda 
 Wines 
 Varieties 
 IGT 
 DOCG 
 DOC 
 Abruzzo 
 Calabrian 
 Friulan 
 Lombardy 
 Piedmont 
 Tuscan 
 Veneto 
 Alcoholic beverages 
 Beer 
 Grappa 
 Sambuca 
 Mirto 
 Vermouth 
 Spritz 
 Limoncello 
 Fernet 
 Campari 
 Aperol 
 Cynar 
 Amaro 
 Amaretto 
 Nocino 
 Centerbe 
 Bargnolino 
 Maraschino 
 Sassolino 
 Strega 
 Rosolio 
 Galliano 
 Frangelico 
 Alchermes 
 Aurum 
 Coffee 
 Caffè 
 Espresso 
 Lungo 
 Ristretto 
 Doppio 
 Espressino 
 Cappuccino 
 Caffelatte 
 Latte macchiato 
 Caffè macchiato 
 Caffè corretto 
 Affogato 
 Mocaccino 
 Marocchino 
 Bicerin 
 Barbajada 
 Bombardino 
 See also 
 Sammarinese cuisine 
 Italian-American cuisine 
 Italian food products 
 Osteria 
 Trattoria 
 Enoteca 
 Sagra 
 List of Italian chefs 
 List of Italian dishes 
 Meal structure 
 Italian Sounding 
 
   Italy portal 
   Food portal 
 
 v t e Cuisines Continental 
 African 
 North 
 West 
 list 
 Americas 
 Caribbean 
 North 
 South 
 list 
 Asian 
 Caucasian 
 Central 
 Indian subcontinent 
 Levantine 
 list 
 European 
 Balkan 
 Central 
 Eastern 
 list 
 Oceanic 
 Intercontinental
 Global 
 Latin American 
 Mediterranean 
 Middle Eastern 
 National  and regional 
 Afghan 
 Albanian 
 Algerian 
 American 
 Californian 
 Floribbean 
 Hawaiian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Lowcountry (South Carolina) 
 New England 
 New Mexico 
 Pacific Northwest 
 Pennsylvania Dutch 
 Puerto Rican 
 Southern US 
 Southwest US 
 Texas 
 Angolan 
 Argentine 
 Armenian 
 Australian 
 Austrian 
 Azerbaijani 
 Bahraini 
 Bangladeshi 
 Barbadian 
 Belarusian 
 Belgian 
 Belizean 
 Beninese 
 Bhutanese 
 Bolivian 
 Bosnian-Herzegovinian 
 Botswana 
 Brazilian 
 British 
 Channel Islands 
 English 
 Gibraltarian 
 Northern Irish 
 Saint Helena 
 Scottish 
 Welsh 
 Bruneian 
 Bulgarian 
 Burkinabé 
 Burmese 
 Burundian 
 Cambodian 
 Cameroonian 
 Canadian 
 Acadian 
 Québécois 
 Central African Republic 
 Chadian 
 Chilean 
 Chinese 
 Cantonese 
 Hong Kong 
 Macanese 
 Tibetan 
 Xinjiang 
 Colombian 
 Congolese 
 Corsican 
 Croatian 
 Cuban 
 Cypriot 
 Czech 
 Danish 
 Faroese 
 Greenlandic 
 Djiboutian 
 Dominican 
 Dominican Republic 
 Dutch 
 East Timorese 
 Ecuadorian 
 Egyptian 
 Emirati 
 Equatorial Guinean 
 Eritrean 
 Estonian 
 Ethiopian 
 Fijian 
 Filipino 
 Finnish 
 French 
 Occitan 
 French Guianan 
 Gabonese 
 Gambian 
 Georgian 
 German 
 Ghanaian 
 Greek 
 Cretan 
 Epirotic 
 Greek Macedonian 
 Heptanesean 
 Guatemalan 
 Guinea-Bissauan 
 Guinean 
 Haitian 
 Honduran 
 Hungarian 
 Icelandic 
 Indian 
 Arunachalese 
 Assamese 
 Bengali 
 Bihari 
 Goan 
 Gujarati 
 Himachal Pradesh 
 Kashmiri 
 Jharkhandi 
 Karnataka 
 Kerala 
 Maharashtrian 
 Manipuri 
 Meghalayan 
 Mizo 
 Naga 
 Odia 
 Punjabi 
 Rajasthani 
 Sikkimese 
 Sindhi 
 Tamil 
 Telangana 
 Telugu 
 Indonesian 
 Acehnese 
 Balinese 
 Banjar 
 Batak 
 Betawi 
 Indo 
 Javanese 
 Madurese 
 Makassar 
 Minahasan 
 Minangkabau 
 Palembangese 
 Sundanese 
 Iranian 
 Iraqi 
 Irish 
 Israeli 
 Italian 
 Abruzzese 
 Ligurian 
 Lombard 
 Lucanian 
 Neapolitan 
 Roman 
 Sardinian 
 Sicilian 
 Venetian 
 Ivorian 
 Jamaican 
 Japanese 
 Okinawan 
 Jordanian 
 Kazakh 
 Kenyan 
 Korean 
 North Korean 
 South Korean 
 Kosovan 
 Kuwaiti 
 Kyrgyz 
 Lao 
 Latvian 
 Lebanese 
 Lesotho 
 Liberian 
 Libyan 
 Liechtensteiner 
 Lithuanian 
 Luxembourg 
 Macedonian 
 Malagasy 
 Malawian 
 Malaysian 
 Sabahan 
 Sarawakian 
 Maldivian 
 Malian 
 Maltese 
 Mauritanian 
 Mauritian 
 Mexican 
 Moldovan 
 Monégasque 
 Mongolian 
 Montenegrin 
 Moroccan 
 Mozambican 
 Namibian 
 Nauruan 
 Nepalese 
 New Zealand 
 Nicaraguan 
 Niger 
 Nigerian 
 Niuean 
 Norwegian 
 Omani 
 Pakistani 
 Palestinian 
 Panamanian 
 Peruvian 
 Polish 
 Portuguese 
 Qatari 
 Romanian  (incl.  Transylvanian Saxon ) 
 Russian 
 Bashkir 
 Chechen 
 Circassian 
 Komi 
 Mordovian 
 Sakha 
 Tatar 
 Udmurt 
 Yamal 
 Rwandan 
 Saint Lucian 
 Salvadoran 
 Sammarinese 
 São Tomé and Príncipe 
 Saudi Arabian 
 Senegalese 
 Serbian 
 Seychellois 
 Sierra Leonean 
 Singaporean 
 Slovak 
 Slovenian 
 Somali 
 South African 
 Spanish 
 Andalusian 
 Asturian 
 Balearic 
 Basque 
 Canarian 
 Cantabrian 
 Catalan 
 Extremaduran 
 Galician 
 Manchegan 
 Valencian 
 Sri Lankan 
 Sudanese 
 Swazi 
 Swedish 
 Swiss 
 Syrian 
 Taiwanese 
 Tajik 
 Tanzanian 
 Zanzibari 
 Thai 
 Togolese 
 Tunisian 
 Turkish 
 Turkmen 
 Trinidadian and Tobagonian 
 Ugandan 
 Ukrainian 
 Uruguayan 
 Uzbek 
 Venezuelan 
 Vietnamese 
 Western Saharan 
 Yemeni 
 Zambian 
 Zimbabwean 
 Ethnic 
 Ainu 
 Arab 
 Indonesian 
 Aromanian 
 Assyrian 
 Balochi 
 Berber 
 Cajun 
 Chinese 
 American 
 Canadian 
 Chifa 
 Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Crimean Tatar 
 Greek American 
 Hazaragi 
 Indian 
 Anglo-Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Indigenous American 
 Inuit 
 Italian American 
 Kurdish 
 Livonian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Malay 
 Ossetian 
 Parsi 
 Pashtun 
 Peranakan 
 Romani 
 Sámi 
 Soul food 
 Sylheti 
 Transylvanian Saxon 
 Yup'ik 
 Religious 
 Buddhist 
 Christian 
 Goan Catholic 
 Mangalorean Catholic 
 Mennonite 
 Hindu 
 Islamic 
 Chinese 
 Ital 
 Jain 
 Jewish 
 American 
 Ashkenazi 
 Bukharan 
 Ethiopian 
 Mizrahi 
 Sephardic 
 Syrian 
 Ritual slaughter 
 Sikh 
 Historical 
 Ancient Egyptian 
 Ancient Greek 
 Ancient Israelite 
 Ancient Roman 
 Antebellum America 
 Aztec 
 Byzantine 
 Early modern European 
 Historical Chinese 
 Historical Indian subcontinent 
 Historical North Indian and Pakistani 
 History of agriculture 
 History of alcoholic drinks 
 History of bread 
 History of seafood 
 History of vegetarianism 
 Historical Argentine 
 Historical Japanese 
 Inca 
 Mayan 
 Muisca 
 Mughal 
 Medieval 
 Ottoman 
 Peasant 
 Soviet 
 Thirteen Colonies 
 Styles 
 Classique 
 Fast food 
 Fusion 
 New American 
 Eurasian 
 Haute 
 Molecular gastronomy 
 Note by Note 
 Nouvelle 
 Lists 
 List of cuisines 
 List of historical cuisines 
 Lists of prepared foods 
 Related 
 Cookbook 
 Cooking 
 Culinary arts 
 Drink 
 Food 
 history 
 Diet 
 Meal preparation 
 
   Food portal 
   Drink portal 
   Category 
   Commons 
   Cookbook 
   WikiProject 
   Outline 
 
 v t e European cuisine Sovereign states European Union 
 Austria 
 Belgium 
 Bulgaria 
 Croatia 
 Cyprus 
 Czech Republic 
 Denmark 
 Estonia 
 Finland 
 France 
 Germany 
 Greece 
 Hungary 
 Republic of Ireland 
 Italy 
 Latvia 
 Lithuania 
 Luxembourg 
 Malta 
 Netherlands 
 Poland 
 Portugal 
 Romania 
 Slovakia 
 Slovenia 
 Spain 
 Sweden 
 Other 
 Albania 
 Andorra 
 Armenia 
 Azerbaijan 
 Belarus 
 Bosnia and Herzegovina 
 Georgia 
 Iceland 
 Kazakhstan 
 Liechtenstein 
 Moldova 
 Monaco 
 Montenegro 
 North Macedonia 
 Norway 
 Russia 
 San Marino 
 Serbia 
 Switzerland 
 Turkey 
 Ukraine 
 United Kingdom 
 Vatican City 
 States with limited recognition 
 Abkhazia 
 Kosovo 
 Nagorno-Karabakh 
 Northern Cyprus 
 South Ossetia 
 Transnistria 
 Dependencies  and other territories 
 Faroe Islands 
 Gibraltar 
 Guernsey 
 Isle of Man 
 Jersey 
 
 v t e Mediterranean cuisine Regions Southern Maghrebi 
 Algerian 
 Chakhchoukha 
 Berber 
 Libyan 
 Bazin 
 Moroccan 
 Méchoui 
 Tajine 
 Tunisian 
 Shakshouka 
 Regional
 Couscous 
 Egyptian 
 Duqqa 
 Ful medames 
 Kushari 
 Mulukhiyah 
 Levant 
 Israeli 
 Hamin 
 Lebanese 
 Kibbeh 
 Palestinian 
 Musakhan 
 Syrian 
 Regional 
 Baba ghanoush 
 Hummus 
 Northern Turkish 
 Cheeses 
 Desserts 
 Kebabs 
 Rakı 
 Turkish tea 
 Greek 
 Gyros 
 Greek salad 
 Stifado 
 Feta 
 Skordalia 
 Loukaniko 
 Melomakarono 
 Ionian Islands 
 Bourdeto 
 Pastitsada 
 Crete 
 Dakos 
 Paximadi 
 Other Balkan 
 Albanian 
 Aromanian 
 Bosnia and Herzegovina 
 Croatian 
 Montenegrin 
 Slovenian 
 Regional
 Pita 
 Shish kebab 
 Yogurt 
 Baklava 
 Moussaka 
 Italian 
 Regional
 Pasta 
 Pizza 
 Abruzzese 
 Arrosticini 
 Mortadella di Campotosto 
 Maccheroni alla chitarra 
 Pizzelle 
 Timballo 
 Bocconotto 
 Parrozzo 
 Apulian 
 Arbëreshë 
 Ligurian 
 Ciuppin 
 Focaccia 
 Pesto 
 Ravioli 
 Lombard 
 Mantuan 
 Lucanian 
 Neapolitan 
 Neapolitan ragù 
 Pasta e fagioli 
 Roman 
 Carbonara 
 Sardinian 
 Pane carasau 
 Malloreddus 
 Mirto (liqueur) 
 Abbamele 
 Pecorino sardo 
 Culurgiònes 
 Bottarga 
 Seada 
 Sicilian 
 Cannoli 
 Caponata 
 Pasta alla Norma 
 Scaccia 
 Tuscan 
 Ribollita 
 Venetian 
 Carpaccio 
 Polenta 
 Risotto 
 French 
 Corsican 
 Brocciu 
 Occitan 
 Cassoulet 
 Brandade 
 Provencal 
 Bouillabaisse 
 Ratatouille 
 Salade niçoise 
 Spanish 
 Andalusian 
 Gazpacho 
 Sherry 
 Balearic 
 Caldereta 
 Tombet 
 Catalan 
 Escalivada 
 Escudella 
 Ollada 
 Valencian 
 Paella 
 Other 
 Gibraltarian 
 Monégasque 
 Islands 
 Cypriot 
 Afelia 
 Halloumi 
 Maltese 
 Staples 
 Wheat 
 Bread 
 Couscous 
 Pasta 
 Pizza 
 Semolina 
 Olive 
 Olive oil 
 Grape 
 Wine 
 Shared 
 Anise spirits 
 Bottarga 
 Lamb 
 Exemplars 
 Elizabeth David 
 A Book of Mediterranean Food 
 
 Category 
 
 v t e Italy   articles History Overviews 
 Prehistory 
 Timeline of Italian history 
 Ancient 
 Ancient peoples of Italy 
 Italic peoples 
 Latins 
 Samnites 
 Umbri 
 Etruscan civilization 
 Nuragic civilization 
 Phoenician/Carthaginian colonies 
 Celts 
 Magna Graecia 
 Ligures 
 Ancient Rome 
 Kingdom 
 Republic 
 Empire 
 Western Empire 
 Middle Ages 
 Middle Ages 
 Italy under  Odoacer 
 Ostrogoths 
 Byzantium 
 Lombards 
 Papal States 
 the Holy Roman Empire 
 the Sardinian Judicates 
 Arabs 
 Normans 
 Guelphs and Ghibellines 
 Kingdom of Sicily 
 War of the Sicilian Vespers 
 Kingdom of Naples 
 Early modern 
 Italian city-states 
 Florence 
 Siena 
 Milan 
 The  maritime republics 
 Venice 
 Genoa 
 Pisa 
 Amalfi 
 Kingdom of Sardinia 
 Grand Duchy of Tuscany 
 Duchy of Savoy 
 Renaissance 
 Italian Wars 
 Early Modern period 
 Napoleonic Italy 
 Austrian occupation and Kingdom of Lombardy-Venetia 
 Kingdom of the Two Sicilies 
 Unification 
 Revolutions of 1820 
 Revolutions of 1830 
 Revolutions of 1848 
 Sicilian revolution of 1848 
 First War of Independence 
 Crimean War 
 Second War of Independence 
 Expedition of the Thousand 
 Third War of Independence 
 Capture of Rome 
 Late modern 
 Monarchy and the World Wars 
 Kingdom of Italy 
 Irredentism 
 Colonial Empire 
 World War I 
 Fascist Italy 
 World War II 
 Resistance  and  Social Republic 
 Civil War 
 Republic 
 Economic Boom 
 Years of Lead 
 Maxi Trial 
 Mani pulite 
 Great Recession 
 European migrant crisis 
 Coronavirus pandemic 
 By topic 
 Citizenship 
 Currency 
 Economy 
 Fashion 
 Flags 
 Genetic 
 Historic states 
 Military 
 Music 
 Name 
 Railways 
 Geography 
 Geographical region 
 Peninsula 
 Northern 
 Northwest 
 Northeast 
 Central 
 Southern 
 South 
 Insular 
 Climate 
 Geology 
 Fauna 
 Flora 
 Mountains 
 Prealps 
 Alps 
 Apennines 
 Volcanism 
 Volcanoes 
 Beaches 
 Canals 
 Caves 
 Earthquakes 
 Islands 
 Lakes 
 Marine protected areas 
 National parks 
 Regional parks 
 Rivers 
 Valleys 
 Politics 
 Constitution 
 Elections 
 Foreign relations 
 Government 
 Human rights 
 LGBT rights 
 Judiciary 
 Law 
 Law enforcement 
 Military 
 Parliament 
 Political parties 
 President  ( List ) 
 Prime Minister  ( List ) 
 Council of Ministers 
 Regions 
 Provinces 
 Metropolitan cities 
 Cities 
 Comune 
 Municipalities 
 Renamed municipalities 
 Fused municipalities 
 Economy 
 Economic history 
 Italian regions by GDP 
 Agriculture 
 Automotive industry 
 Banking 
 Banks 
 Central Bank 
 Companies 
 Energy 
 Electricity sector 
 Renewable energy 
 Exports 
 Government debt 
 Science and technology 
 Stock exchange 
 Southern question 
 Taxation 
 Telecommunications 
 Tourism 
 Trade unions 
 Transportation 
 Welfare 
 Society 
 Aristocracy 
 Corruption 
 Crime 
 Organized crime 
 Demographics 
 Education 
 Secondary 
 Higher 
 Emigration and diaspora 
 Gambling 
 Health 
 Healthcare 
 Immigration 
 Inventions and discoveries 
 Italians 
 People 
 Languages 
 Italian 
 Regional 
 Orders, decorations, and medals 
 Public administration 
 Religion 
 Social class 
 Terrorism 
 Women 
 Culture 
 Trecento 
 Quattrocento 
 Cinquecento 
 Seicento 
 Settecento 
 Ottocento 
 Architecture 
 Art 
 Castles 
 Cathedrals 
 Cinema 
 Futurism in cinema 
 Neorealism 
 Cuisine 
 Meal structure 
 Cultural icons 
 Design 
 Fashion 
 Folklore 
 Folk dance 
 Folk music 
 Gardens 
 Italian garden 
 Internet 
 Italophilia 
 Libraries 
 Literature 
 Media 
 Monuments 
 Museums 
 Music 
 Mythology 
 National symbols 
 Animal 
 Anthem 
 Cockade 
 Colours 
 Emblem 
 Flag 
 Regions 
 Monument 
 Personification 
 Tree 
 Palaces 
 Philosophy 
 Italian idealism 
 Public holidays 
 Sculpture 
 Sport 
 Television 
 Theatre 
 Commedia dell'arte 
 Traditions 
 World Heritage Sites 
 
   Italy portal 
 
 
 Authority control : National libraries  
 France 
 BnF data 
 Israel 
 United States 
 Latvia 
 Japan 
 
  
NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw2390
Cached time: 20230311165331
Cache expiry: 1814400
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc, no‐toc‐conversion]
CPU time usage: 3.013 seconds
Real time usage: 3.474 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 35246/1000000
Post‐expand include size: 703883/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 39277/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 77/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 713397/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.694/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 24857417/52428800 bytes
Lua Profile:
    ?                                                                400 ms       21.1%
    MediaWiki\Extension\Scribunto\Engines\LuaSandbox\LuaSandboxCallback::callParserFunction      280 ms       14.7%
    dataWrapper <mw.lua:672>                                         240 ms       12.6%
    recursiveClone <mwInit.lua:41>                                   160 ms        8.4%
    MediaWiki\Extension\Scribunto\Engines\LuaSandbox\LuaSandboxCallback::getAllExpandedArguments      100 ms        5.3%
    MediaWiki\Extension\Scribunto\Engines\LuaSandbox\LuaSandboxCallback::plain       80 ms        4.2%
    MediaWiki\Extension\Scribunto\Engines\LuaSandbox\LuaSandboxCallback::match       80 ms        4.2%
    MediaWiki\Extension\Scribunto\Engines\LuaSandbox\LuaSandboxCallback::getExpandedArgument       60 ms        3.2%
    MediaWiki\Extension\Scribunto\Engines\LuaSandbox\LuaSandboxCallback::formatDate       60 ms        3.2%
    <mw.lua:706>                                                      40 ms        2.1%
    [others]                                                         400 ms       21.1%
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/400
 
 
Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 2685.916      1 -total
 41.92% 1125.866      1 Template:Reflist
 25.27%  678.695    167 Template:Cite_web
 13.52%  363.093      9 Template:Navbox
 10.56%  283.506     66 Template:Sfn
  6.26%  168.265     36 Template:Cite_book
  6.01%  161.326    134 Template:Lang
  5.11%  137.342      1 Template:European_topic
  4.74%  127.264      2 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  4.41%  118.319      1 Template:Culture_of_Italy
 
  Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:idhash:3735620-0!canonical and timestamp 20230311165328 and revision id 1144058946. Rendering was triggered because: page-view
  
 esi <esi:include src="/esitest-fa8a495983347898/content" />  
 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Italian_cuisine&oldid=1144058946#Tuscany " 
 Categories :  Italian cuisine Mediterranean cuisine Hidden categories:  Articles containing Italian-language text All articles with incomplete citations Articles with incomplete citations from May 2021 CS1 Italian-language sources (it) CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) Webarchive template wayback links All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from February 2023 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from January 2023 Articles containing explicitly cited English-language text Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing Croatian-language text Articles containing Corsican-language text Articles containing Slovene-language text Articles containing Spanish-language text Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with BNF identifiers Articles with J9U identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers Articles with LNB identifiers Articles with NDL identifiers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  This page was last edited on 11 March 2023, at 16:01  (UTC) . 
 Text is available under the  Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0 ;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the  Terms of Use  and  Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the  Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. 
 
 
 Privacy policy 
 About Wikipedia 
 Disclaimers 
 Contact Wikipedia 
 Mobile view 
 Developers 
 Statistics 
 Cookie statement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
