
 
 
 Jump to content 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle sidebar 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Create account Log in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Personal tools 
 
 
 
 
   Create account   Log in 
 
 
 
 
		Pages for logged out editors  learn more 
 
 
 Contributions Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Navigation 
 
 
 Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate 
 
 
 
 
 Contribute 
 
 
 Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file 
 
 
 
 
 Tools 
 
 
 What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item 
 
 
 
 
 Print/export 
 
 
 Download as PDF Printable version 
 
 
 
 
 In other projects 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons Wikibooks Wikivoyage 
 
 
 
 
 Languages 
 
 On this Wikipedia the language links are at the top of the page across from the article title.  Go to top . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CentralNotice  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Contents 
 move to sidebar 
 hide 
 
 
 
 
 (Top) 
 
 
 
 
 
 1 Terminology 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 Traditional cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 History 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4 Seasonality 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5 Traditional ingredients 
 
 
				Toggle Traditional ingredients subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 5.1 Meat consumption 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5.2 Cooking oil 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5.3 Seasonings 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5.4 Garnishes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6 Salads 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 7 Cooking techniques 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8 Dishes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 9 Classification 
 
 
				Toggle Classification subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 9.1 Kaiseki 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 9.2 Vegetarian 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 10 Rice 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 11 Noodles 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 12 Sweets 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 13 Beverages 
 
 
				Toggle Beverages subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 13.1 Tea 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 13.2 Beer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 13.3 Sake 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 13.4 Shōchū 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 13.5 Whisky 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 13.6 Wine 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 14 Regional cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 15 Traditional table settings 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 16 Dining etiquette 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 17 Dishes for special occasions 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 18 Imported and adapted foods 
 
 
				Toggle Imported and adapted foods subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 18.1 Yōshoku – Foreign (Western) food, dishes [16] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 18.2 Chūka ryōri - Japanese Chinese cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 18.3 Okonomiyaki 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 18.4 Tonkatsu 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 18.5 Curry 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 18.6 Wafū burgers (Japanese-style burgers) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 18.7 Italian 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 19 Outside Japan 
 
 
				Toggle Outside Japan subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 19.1 Australia 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 19.2 Brazil 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 19.3 Canada 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 19.4 Indonesia 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 19.5 Mexico 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 19.6 Philippines 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 19.7 Taiwan 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 19.8 Thailand 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 19.9 United Kingdom 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 19.10 United States 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 20 Cultural heritage 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 21 Food controversies 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 22 See also 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 23 References 
 
 
				Toggle References subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 23.1 Works cited 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 24 Further reading 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 25 External links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
						Toggle the table of contents
					 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle the table of contents 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Japanese cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 52 languages 
 
 
 
 العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা Беларуская Български Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Gàidhlig 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Jawa ქართული Kurdî Lietuvių Magyar Македонски Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål ଓଡ଼ିଆ Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Polski Português Română Русский Sicilianu Simple English Slovenčina Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Tagalog ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 
 Edit links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Article Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 English 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 More 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
 
 
 Culinary traditions of Japan 
 
 
   Osechi , new year special dishes 
 Part of  a series  on the Culture of Japan 
 History 
 Era names 
 Historical currency 
 Earthquakes 
 Economic history 
 Education 
 Imperial history 
 Foreign relations 
 Historiography 
 Military history 
 Naval history 
 Post-occupation Japan 
 
 People 
 Japanese 
 Zainichi Koreans 
 Ainu 
 Ōbeikei Islanders 
 Yamato 
 Ryukuyuans 
 
 Languages 
 Japonic 
 Japanese 
 Ryukyuan 
 Hachijō 
 Ainu 
 Writing system 
 Japanese Sign Language 
 
 Traditions 
 Clothing 
 Etiquette 
 Funerals 
 Games 
 Geisha 
 Wasōbon 
 Marriage 
 Onsen  /  Sentō 
 Tea ceremony 
 Values 
 
 Mythology  and  Folklore 
 Deities 
 Legendary creatures 
 Urban legends 
 Folktales 
 
 Cuisine 
 Food history 
 Ingredients 
 Dishes 
 
 Festivals 
 Obon 
 Coming of Age Day 
 Hinamatsuri 
 Buddha's Birthday 
 Tanabata 
 Shichi-Go-San 
 Cultural festivals 
 Japanese New Year 
 
 Religion 
 Buddhism 
 Christianity 
 New religions 
 Shinto 
 
 Art 
 Bonsai 
 Gardens 
 Ikebana 
 Pottery and porcelain 
 
 Literature 
 Light novel 
 Manga 
 Poetry 
 
 Music  and  Performing arts 
 J-pop 
 Kayōkyoku 
 Noh 
 
 Media 
 Radio 
 Television 
 Cinema 
 Anime 
 Media mix 
 Mobile phone culture 
 Video games 
 Pornography 
 
 Sport 
 Martial arts 
 
 Monuments 
 World Heritage Sites 
 Architecture 
 Cultural Landscapes 
 Cultural Properties 
 National Treasures 
 
 Symbols 
 Flag 
 Coat of arms 
 National anthem 
 
 Organisations 
 Museums 
 
   Japan portal v t e 
 Japanese cuisine  encompasses the regional and traditional foods of  Japan , which have developed through centuries of political, economic, and social changes. The traditional cuisine of Japan ( Japanese :  washoku ) is based on rice with  miso soup  and other dishes; there is an emphasis on seasonal ingredients. Side dishes often consist of fish, pickled vegetables, and vegetables cooked in broth. Seafood is common, often grilled, but also served raw as  sashimi  or in  sushi . Seafood and vegetables are also deep-fried in a light batter, as  tempura . Apart from rice, a staple includes noodles, such as  soba  and  udon . Japan also has many simmered dishes, such as fish products in broth called  oden , or beef in  sukiyaki  and  nikujaga .
 Historically influenced by  Chinese cuisine , Japanese cuisine has also opened up to influence from  Western cuisines  in the modern era. Dishes inspired by foreign food—in particular Chinese food—like  ramen  and  gyōza , as well as foods like  spaghetti ,  curry  and  hamburgers , have been adapted to Japanese tastes and ingredients. Some regional dishes have also become familiar throughout Japan, including the  taco rice  staple of  Okinawan cuisine  that has itself been influenced by  American  and  Mexican  culinary traditions. [1]  Traditionally, the Japanese  shunned meat  as a result of adherence to  Buddhism , but with the modernization of Japan in the 1880s, meat-based dishes such as  tonkatsu  and  yakiniku  have become common. Since this time, Japanese cuisine, particularly sushi and ramen, has become popular globally.
 In 2011, Japan overtook  France  to become the country with the most  3-starred Michelin restaurants ; as of 2018 [update] , the capital of  Tokyo  has maintained the title of the city with the most 3-starred restaurants in the world. [2]  In 2013, Japanese cuisine was added to the  UNESCO Intangible Heritage List . [3] 
 
 
 Terminology [ edit ] 
   A Japanese meal including tempura, sashimi, and miso soup 
 The word  washoku  ( 和食 )  is now the common word for traditional Japanese cooking. The term  kappō  [ ja ]  ( 割烹 , lit. "cutting and boiling (meats)")  is synonymous with "cooking", but became a reference to mostly Japanese cooking, or restaurants, and was much used in the  Meiji  and  Taishō  eras. [4] [5]  It has come to connote a certain standard, perhaps even of the highest caliber, a restaurant with the most highly trained chefs. [6]  However,  kappō  is generally seen as an eating establishment which is slightly more casual or informal compared to the  kaiseki . [7] 
 The  kaiseki  ( 懐石 , lit. "warming stone")  is tied with the Japanese  tea ceremony . [8]  The  kaiseki  is considered a (simplified) form of  honzen-ryōri  ( 本膳料理 , lit. "main tray cooking") , [9]  which was formal banquet dining where several trays of food was served. [10]  The  homophone  term  kaiseki ryōri  ( 会席料理 , lit. "gathering + seating")  originally referred to a gathering of composers of  haiku  or  renga , and the simplified version of the  honzen  dishes served at the poem parties became  kaiseki ryōri . [11]  However, the meaning of  kaiseki ryōri  degenerated to become just another term for a sumptuous carousing banquet, or  shuen  ( 酒宴 ) . [12] 
 
 Traditional cuisine [ edit ] 
 Japanese cuisine is based on combining the  staple food , which is steamed  white rice  or  gohan  ( 御飯 ) , with one or more  okazu , "main" or "side" dishes. This may be accompanied by a clear or miso soup and  tsukemono  (pickles). The phrase  ichijū-sansai  ( 一汁三菜 , "one soup, three sides")  refers to the makeup of a typical meal served but has roots in classic  kaiseki ,  honzen , and  yūshoku  cuisine. The term is also used to describe the first course served in standard  kaiseki  cuisine nowadays. [12] 
 The origin of Japanese "one soup, three sides" cuisine is a dietary style called Ichiju-Issai (一汁一菜, "one soup, one dish"), [13]  tracing back to the Five Great Zen Temples of the 12-century Kamakura period ( Kamakura Gozan ), developed as a form of meal that emphasized frugality and simplicity.
 Rice is served in its own small bowl ( chawan ), and each main course item is placed on its own small plate ( sara ) or bowl ( hachi ) for each individual portion. This is done even in Japanese homes. This contrasts with Western-style home dinners in which each individual takes helpings from large serving dishes of food placed in the middle of the dining table. Japanese style traditionally abhors different flavored dishes touching each other on a single plate, so different dishes are given their own individual plates as mentioned or are partitioned using, for example, leaves. Placing main dishes on top of rice, thereby "soiling" it, is also frowned upon by traditional etiquette. [14] 
 
   Breakfast at a  ryokan (Japanese inn) , featuring grilled  mackerel , Kansai-style  dashimaki  egg,  tofu  in  kaminabe  (paper pot) 
 Although this tradition of not placing other foods on rice originated from classical Chinese dining formalities, especially after the adoption of Buddhist tea ceremonies; it became most popular and common during and after the  Kamakura period , such as in the  kaiseki . Although present-day Chinese cuisine has abandoned this practice, Japanese cuisine retains it. One exception is the popular  donburi , in which toppings are directly served on rice.
 The small rice bowl  ( 茶碗 ,  chawan ) , literally "tea bowl", doubles as a word for the large tea bowls in tea ceremonies. Thus in common speech, the drinking cup is referred to as  yunomi-jawan  or  yunomi  for the purpose of distinction. Among the nobility, each course of a full-course Japanese meal would be brought on serving napkins called  zen  ( 膳 ) , which were originally platformed trays or small dining tables. In the modern age,  faldstool  trays or stackup-type legged trays may still be seen used in  zashiki , i.e.  tatami -mat rooms, for large banquets or at a  ryokan  type inn. Some restaurants might use the suffix  -zen  ( 膳 )  as a more sophisticated though  dated  synonym to the more familiar  teishoku  ( 定食 ) , since the latter basically is a term for a  combo meal  served at a  taishū-shokudō , akin to a  diner . [15]   Teishoku  means a meal of fixed menu (for example, grilled fish with rice and soup), a dinner  à prix fixe [16]  served at  shokudō  ( 食堂 , "dining hall")  or  ryōriten  ( 料理店 , "restaurant") , which is somewhat vague ( shokudō  can mean a diner-type restaurant or a corporate lunch hall); writer on Japanese popular culture Ishikawa Hiroyoshi [17]  defines it as fare served at  teishoku  dining halls  ( 定食食堂 ,  teishoku-shokudō ) , and comparable diner-like establishments.
 
 History [ edit ] 
   Osechi , new year dishes 
 Main article:  History of Japanese cuisine 
 Rice is a staple in Japanese cuisine. Wheat and soybeans were introduced shortly after rice. All three act as staple foods in Japanese cuisine today. At the end of the  Kofun Period  and beginning of the  Asuka Period , Buddhism became the official religion of the country. Therefore, eating meat and fish was prohibited. In 675 AD,  Emperor Tenmu  prohibited the eating of horses, dogs, monkeys, and chickens. [18]  In the 8th and 9th centuries, many emperors continued to prohibit killing many types of animals. The number of regulated meats increased significantly, leading to the banning of all mammals except whale, which were categorized as fish. [19]  During the Asuka period, chopsticks were introduced to Japan. Initially, they were only used by the nobility. [20]  The general population used their hands, as utensils were quite expensive.
 Due to the lack of meat products Japanese people minimized spice utilization. Spices were rare to find at the time. Spices like pepper and garlic were only used in a minimalist amount. In the absence of meat, fish was served as the main protein, as Japan is an island nation. Fish has influenced many iconic Japanese dishes today. In the 9th century, grilled fish and sliced raw fish were widely popular. [21]  Japanese people who could afford it would eat fish at every meal; others would have to make do without animal protein for many of their meals. In traditional Japanese cuisine, oil and fat are usually avoided within the cooking process, because Japanese people were trying to keep a healthy lifestyle. [21] 
 Preserving fish became a sensation;  sushi  was originated as a means of preserving fish by fermenting it in boiled rice. Fish that are salted and then placed in rice are preserved by  lactic acid fermentation , which helps prevent the proliferation of the bacteria that bring about putrefaction. [22]  During the 15th century, advancement and development helped shorten the fermentation of sushi to about one to two weeks. Sushi thus became a popular snack food and main entrée, combining fish with rice. During the late  Edo period  (early-19th century), sushi without fermentation was introduced. Sushi was still being consumed with and without fermentation till the 19th century when the hand-rolled and nigri-type sushi was invented. [23] 
 In 1854, Japan started to gain new trade deals with Western countries when a new Japanese ruling order took over (known as the  Meiji Restoration ).  Emperor Meiji , the new ruler, staged a New Years' feast designed to embrace the Western world and countries in 1872. The feast contained food that had a lot of European emphases. [ citation needed ]  For the first time in a thousand years, people were allowed to consume meat in public. After this New Years feast, the general population from Japan started to consume meat again. [24] 
 
 Seasonality [ edit ] 
   Kaiseki appetizers on a wooden plate 
 Emphasis is placed on  seasonality of food  or  shun  ( 旬 ) , [25] [26]  and dishes are designed to herald the arrival of the four seasons or calendar months.
 Seasonality means taking advantage of the "fruit of the mountains"  ( 山の幸 ,  yama no sachi , alt. "bounty of the mountains")  (for example,  bamboo shoots  in spring,  chestnuts  in the autumn) as well as the "fruit of the sea"  ( 海の幸 ,  umi no sachi , alt. "bounty of the sea")  as they come into season. Thus the first catch of  skipjack  tunas  ( 初鰹 ,  hatsu-gatsuo )  that arrives with the  Kuroshio Current  has traditionally been greatly prized. [27] 
 If something becomes available rather earlier than what is usual for the item in question, the first crop or early catch is called  hashiri . [28] 
 Use of tree leaves and branches as decor is also characteristic of Japanese cuisine. Maple leaves are often floated on water to exude coolness or  ryō  ( 涼 ) ; sprigs of  nandina  are popularly used. The  haran  ( Aspidistra ) and sasa bamboo leaves were often cut into shapes and placed underneath or used as separators. [29] 
 
 Traditional ingredients [ edit ] 
 Further information:  History of Japanese cuisine  and  List of Japanese ingredients 
 A characteristic of traditional Japanese food is the sparing use of  red meat , oils and fats, and dairy products. [30]  Use of ingredients such as  soy sauce ,  miso , and  umeboshi  tends to result in dishes with high salt content, though there are low-sodium versions of these available.
 
 Meat consumption [ edit ] 
   Yakiniku 
 As Japan is an  island nation  surrounded by an ocean, its people have always taken advantage of the abundant seafood supply. [25]  It is the opinion of some food scholars that the Japanese diet always relied mainly on "grains with vegetables or seaweeds as main, with poultry secondary, and  red meat  in slight amounts" even before the advent of Buddhism which placed an even stronger taboo. [25]  The eating of "four-legged creatures"  ( 四足 ,  yotsuashi )  was spoken of as taboo, [31]  unclean or something to be avoided by personal choice through the  Edo period . [32]  The consumption of  whale  and  terrapin  meat were not forbidden under this definition. Despite this, the consumption of red meat did not completely disappear in Japan. Eating wild game—as opposed to domesticated livestock—was tolerated; in particular, trapped  hare  was counted using the  measure word   wa  ( 羽 ) , a term normally reserved for birds.
 In 1872 of the Meiji restoration, as part of the opening up of Japan to Western influence,  Emperor Meiji  lifted the ban on the consumption of  red meat . [33]  The removal of the ban encountered resistance and in one notable response, ten monks attempted to break into the Imperial Palace. The monks asserted that due to foreign influence, large numbers of Japanese had begun eating meat and that this was "destroying the soul of the Japanese people." Several of the monks were killed during the break-in attempt, and the remainder were arrested. [33] [24]  On the other hand, the consumption of meat was accepted by the common people.  Gyūnabe  (beef hot pot), the prototype of  Sukiyaki , became the rage of the time. Western restaurants moved in, and some of them changed their form to  Yōshoku .
 Vegetable consumption has dwindled while processed foods have become more prominent in Japanese households due to the rising costs of general foodstuffs. [34]  Nonetheless, Kyoto vegetables, or  Kyoyasai , are rising in popularity and different varieties of Kyoto vegetables are being revived. [35] 
 
 Cooking oil [ edit ] 
 Generally speaking, traditional Japanese cuisine is prepared with little cooking oil. A major exception is the  deep-frying  of foods. This cooking method was introduced during the  Edo period  due to influence from Western (formerly called  nanban-ryōri  ( 南蛮料理 ) ) and Chinese cuisine, [36]  and became commonplace with the availability of cooking oil due to increased productivity. [36]  Dishes such as  tempura ,  aburaage , and  satsuma age [36]  are now part of established traditional Japanese cuisine. Words such as  tempura  or  hiryōzu  (synonymous with  ganmodoki ) are said to be of Portuguese origin.
 Also, certain rustic sorts of traditional Japanese foods such as  kinpira ,  hijiki , and  kiriboshi  daikon usually involve  stir-frying  in oil before stewing in soy sauce. Some standard  osōzai  or  obanzai  dishes feature stir-fried Japanese greens with either  age  or  chirimen-jako  [ ja ] , dried sardines.
 
 Seasonings [ edit ] 
 See also:  Japanese seasonings 
   The use of  soy sauce  is prevalent in Japanese cuisine. 
 Traditional Japanese food is typically seasoned with a combination of  dashi ,  soy sauce ,  sake  and  mirin , vinegar, sugar, and salt. A modest number of herbs and spices may be used during cooking as a hint or accent, or as a means of neutralizing fishy or gamy odors present. Examples of such spices include  ginger ,  perilla  and  takanotsume  [ ja ]  ( 鷹の爪 )  red pepper. [37] 
 Intense condiments such as  wasabi  or Japanese  mustard  are provided as condiments to raw fish, due to their effect on the mucus membrane which paralyze the sense of smell, particularly from fish odors. [38]  A sprig of  mitsuba  or a piece of  yuzu  rind floated on soups are called  ukimi . Minced  shiso  leaves and  myoga  often serve as  yakumi , a type of condiment paired with  tataki  of  katsuo  or  soba .  Shichimi  is also a very popular spice mixture often added to soups, noodles and rice cakes. Shichimi is a chilli-based spice mix which contains seven spices: chilli, sansho, orange peel, black sesame, white sesame, hemp, ginger, and nori. [39] 
 
 Garnishes [ edit ] 
 Once a main dish has been cooked, spices such as minced ginger and various pungent herbs may be added as a garnish, called  tsuma . Finally, a dish may be garnished with minced seaweed in the form of crumpled  nori  or flakes of  aonori . [ citation needed ] 
 Inedible garnishes are featured in dishes to reflect a holiday or the season. Generally these include inedible leaves, flowers native to Japan or with a long history of being grown in the country, as well as their artificial counterparts. [40] 
 
 Salads [ edit ] 
   Japanese boiled spinach salad ( ohitashi ) 
 The  o-hitashi  or  hitashi-mono  ( おひたし ) [16]  is boiled green-leaf vegetables bunched and cut to size, steeped in  dashi  broth, [41] [42]  eaten with dashes of soy sauce. Another item is  sunomono  ( 酢の物 , "vinegar item") , which could be made with  wakame  seaweed, [43]  or be something like a  kōhaku  namasu  ( 紅白なます , "red white namasu") [44]  made from thin toothpick slices of daikon and carrot. The so-called vinegar that is blended with the ingredient here is often  sanbaizu  [ ja ]  ( 三杯酢 , "three cupful/spoonful vinegar") [43]  which is a blend of vinegar, mirin, and soy sauce. A  tosazu  [ ja ]  ( 土佐酢 , " Tosa  vinegar")  adds katsuo dashi to this.
 An  aemono  [ ja ]  ( 和え物 )  is another group of items, describable as a sort of "tossed salad" or "dressed" (though  aemono  also includes thin strips of squid or fish sashimi ( itozukuri ) etc. similarly prepared). One types are  goma-ae  ( 胡麻和え ) [45]  where usually vegetables such as green beans are tossed with white or black  sesame  seeds ground in a  suribachi  mortar bowl, flavored additionally with sugar and soy sauce.  Shira-ae  ( 白和え )  adds  tofu  (bean curd) in the mix. [45]  An  aemono  is tossed with vinegar-white miso mix and uses  wakegi [45]   scallion  and  baka-gai  ( バカガイ / 馬鹿貝 , a  trough shell ,  Mactra chinensis )  as standard.
 
 Cooking techniques [ edit ] 
 Different cooking techniques are applied to each of the three  okazu ; they may be raw ( sashimi ),  grilled ,  simmered  (sometimes called  boiled ),  steamed ,  deep-fried , vinegared, or  dressed .
 
 Dishes [ edit ] 
 Main article:  List of Japanese dishes 
 Further information:  okazu , and sōzai  ( 惣菜 ) 
 In  ichijū-sansai  ( 一汁三菜 ,  "one soup, three sides" ) , the word  sai  ( 菜 )  has the basic meaning of "vegetable", but secondarily means any accompanying dish (whether it uses fish or meat), [46]  with the more familiar combined form  sōzai  [ ja ]  ( 惣菜 ) , [46]  which is a term for any side dish, such as the vast selections sold at Japanese supermarkets or  depachikas  [ ja ] . [47] 
 It figures in the Japanese word for appetizer,  zensai  ( 前菜 ) ; main dish,  shusai  ( 主菜 ) ; or  sōzai  ( 惣菜 )  (formal synonym for  okazu ), but the latter is considered somewhat of a ladies' term or  nyōbō kotoba . [48] 
 
   Tempura  battered and deep fried seafood and vegetables 
   Yakitori  grilled chicken 
 Below are listed some of the most common categories for prepared food:
 
 Yakimono  (焼き物), grilled and pan-fried dishes 
 Nimono  (煮物), stewed/simmered/cooked/boiled dishes 
 Itamemono  (炒め物), stir-fried dishes 
 Mushimono  (蒸し物), steamed dishes 
 Agemono  (揚げ物), deep-fried dishes 
 Sashimi  (刺身), sliced raw fish 
 Suimono  (吸い物) and  shirumono  (汁物), soups 
 Tsukemono  (漬け物), pickled/salted vegetables 
 Aemono  (和え物), dishes dressed with various kinds of sauce 
 Sunomono  (酢の物), vinegared dishes 
 Chinmi  (珍味), delicacies [16] 
 Classification [ edit ] 
 Kaiseki [ edit ] 
 Kaiseki , closely associated with tea ceremony ( chanoyu ), is a high form of hospitality through cuisine. The style is minimalist, extolling the aesthetics of  wabi-sabi . Like the tea ceremony, appreciation of the diningware and vessels is part of the experience. In the modern standard form, the first course consists of  ichijū-sansai  (one soup, three dishes), followed by the serving of sake accompanied by dish(es) plated on a square wooden bordered tray of sorts called  hassun  ( 八寸 ) . Sometimes another element called  shiizakana  ( 強肴 )  is served to complement the sake, for guests who are heavier drinkers.
 
 Vegetarian [ edit ] 
   Nattō , Japanese soybean-based vegetarian food 
 Strictly vegetarian food is rare since even vegetable dishes are flavored with the ubiquitous dashi stock, usually made with  katsuobushi  (dried  skipjack tuna  flakes), and are therefore  pescetarian  more often than carnivorous. An exception is  shōjin-ryōri  (精進料理), vegetarian dishes developed by Buddhist monks. However, the advertised  shōjin-ryōri  at public eating places includes some non-vegetarian elements. Vegetarianism,  fucha-ryōri  [ ja ]  ( 普茶料理 )  was introduced from China by the  Ōbaku  sect (a sub-sect of Zen Buddhism), and which some sources still regard as part of "Japanese cuisine". [25]  The sect in Japan was founded by the priest  Ingen  (d. 1673), and is headquartered in  Uji, Kyoto . The Japanese name for the  common green bean  takes after this priest who allegedly introduced the New World crop via China. One aspect of the fucha-ryōri practiced at the temple is the wealth of  modoki-ryōri  ( もどき料理 ,  "mock foods" ) , one example being mock-eel, made from strained  tofu , with  nori  seaweed used expertly to mimic the black skin. [49]  The secret ingredient used is grated  gobō  (burdock) roots. [50] [51] 
 Masakazu Tada, Honorary Vice-President of the  International Vegetarian Union  for 25 years from 1960, stated that "Japan was vegetarian for 1,000 years". The taboo against eating meat was lifted in 1872 by the Meiji Emperor as part of an effort towards westernizing Japan. [24]  British journalist  J. W. Robertson Scott  reported in the 1920s that the society was still 90% vegetarian, and 50–60% of the population ate fish only on festive occasions, probably due to poverty more than for any other reason.
 
 Rice [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Japanese rice 
   Gyūdon  beef rice bowl (right) and  niku shoyu ramen  beef noodle (left) 
 Rice has historically been the staple food of the Japanese people. Its fundamental importance is evident from the fact that the word for cooked rice,  gohan  or  meshi , also stands for a "meal". [52]  While rice has an ancient history of cultivation in Japan, its use as a staple has not been universal. Notably, in northern areas (northern Honshū and Hokkaidō), other grains such as wheat were more common into the 19th century.
 In most of Japan, rice used to be consumed for almost every meal, and although a 2007 survey showed that 70% of Japanese still eat it once or twice a day, its popularity is now declining. In the 20th century there has been a shift in dietary habits, with an increasing number of people choosing wheat-based products (such as bread and noodles) over rice. [53] 
 Japanese rice is short-grained and becomes sticky when cooked. Most rice is sold as  hakumai  (白米, "white rice"), with the outer portion of the grains (糠,  nuka ) polished away. Unpolished  brown rice  (玄米,  genmai ) is considered less desirable, but its popularity has been increasing. [53] 
 
 Noodles [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Japanese noodles 
   Udon  noodles 
   Soba  noodles 
 Japanese noodles often substitute for a rice-based meal.  Soba  (thin, grayish-brown noodles containing  buckwheat  flour) and  udon  (thick wheat noodles) are the main traditional noodles, while ramen is a modern import and now very popular. There are also other, less common noodles, such as  somen  (thin, white noodles containing wheat flour).
 Japanese noodles, such as soba and udon, are eaten as a standalone, and usually not with a side dish, in terms of general custom. It may have toppings, but they are called  gu  ( 具 ) . The fried battered shrimp tempura sitting in a bowl of tempura-soba would be referred to as "the shrimp" or "the tempura", and not so much be referred to as a topping ( gu ). The identical toppings, if served as a dish to be eaten with plain white rice could be called  okazu , so these terms are context-sensitive. Some noodle dishes derive their name from Japanese folklore, such as  kitsune  and  tanuki , reflecting dishes in which the noodles can be changed, but the broth and garnishes correspond to their respective legend. [54] 
 Hot noodles are usually served in a bowl already steeped in their broth and are called  kakesoba  or  kakeudon . Cold soba arrive unseasoned and heaped atop a  zaru  or  seiro , and are picked up with a chopstick and dunked in their dip sauce. The broth is a soy-dashi-mirin type of mix; the dip is similar but more concentrated (heavier on soy sauce).
 In the simple form,  yakumi  (condiments and spices) such as  shichimi , nori, finely chopped scallions, wasabi, etc. are added to the noodles, besides the broth/dip sauce.
 Udon may also be eaten in  kama-age  style, piping hot straight out of the boiling pot, and eaten with plain soy sauce and sometimes with raw egg also.
 Japanese noodles are traditionally eaten by bringing the bowl close to the mouth, and sucking in the noodles with the aid of  chopsticks . The resulting loud slurping noise is considered normal in Japan, although in the 2010s concerns began to be voiced about the slurping being offensive to others, especially tourists. The word  nuuhara  (ヌーハラ, from "nuudoru harasumento", noodle harassment) was coined to describe this. [55] 
 
 Sweets [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Wagashi 
 See also:  List of Japanese desserts and sweets 
 See also:  List of Japanese sweets and snacks 
 Traditional Japanese sweets are known as  wagashi . Ingredients such as  red bean paste  and  mochi  are used. More modern-day tastes includes  green tea ice cream , a very popular flavor. Almost all manufacturers produce a version of it.  Kakigōri  is a  shaved ice  dessert flavored with syrup or condensed milk. It is usually sold and eaten at summer festivals. A dessert very popular amongst children in Japan is  dorayaki . They are sweet  pancakes  filled with a sweet red bean paste. They are mostly eaten at room temperature but are also considered very delicious hot.
 
 Beverages [ edit ] 
 Main article:  List of Japanese dishes § Tea and other drinks 
 Tea [ edit ] 
 Green tea  may be served with most Japanese dishes. It is produced in Japan and prepared in various forms such as  matcha , the tea used in the  Japanese tea ceremony . [56] 
 
 Beer [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Beer in Japan 
 Beer production started in Japan in the 1860s. The most commonly consumed beers in Japan are pale-colored light  lagers , with an alcohol strength of around 5.0% ABV. Lager beers are the most commonly produced  beer style  in Japan, but beer-like beverages, made with lower levels of malts called  Happoshu  (発泡酒, literally, "bubbly alcohol") or non-malt Happousei (発泡性, literally "effervescence") have captured a large part of the market as tax is substantially lower on these products. Beer and its varieties have a market share of almost 2/3 of alcoholic beverages.
 Small local  microbreweries  have also gained increasing popularity since the 1990s, supplying distinct tasting beers in a variety of styles that seek to match the emphasis on craftsmanship, quality, and ingredient provenance often associated with Japanese food.
 
 Sake [ edit ] 
 Sake  is a brewed rice beverage that typically contains 15–17%  alcohol  and is made by multiple  fermentation  of rice. At traditional formal meals, it is considered an equivalent to rice and is not simultaneously taken with other rice-based dishes, although this notion is typically no longer applied to modern, refined, premium ("ginjo") sake, which bear little resemblance to the sakes of even 100 years ago. Side dishes for sake are particularly called  sakana  or  otsumami .
 Sake is brewed in a highly labor-intensive process more similar to beer production than winemaking, hence, the common description of sake as rice "wine" is misleading.
Sake is made with, by legal definition, strictly just four ingredients:  special rice , water,  koji , and special  yeast .
 As of 2014, Japan has some 1500 registered breweries, [57]  which produce thousands of different sakes. Sake characteristics and flavor profiles vary with regionality, ingredients, and the styles (maintained by brewmaster guilds) that brewery leaders want to produce.
 Sake flavor profiles lend extremely well to pairing with a wide variety of cuisines, including non-Japanese cuisines.
 
 Shōchū [ edit ] 
 Shōchū  is a  distilled spirit  that is typically made from  barley ,  sweet potato ,  buckwheat , or rice.  Shōchū  is produced everywhere in Japan, but its production started in  Kyushu . [58] 
 
 Whisky [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Japanese whisky 
 Japanese whisky  began commercial production in the early 20th century, and is now extremely popular, primarily consumed in  highballs  ( ハイボール ,  haibōru ) . It is produced in the Scottish style, with malt whisky produced since the 1980s, and has won top international awards since the 2000s.
 
 Wine [ edit ] 
 A  domestic wine production  exists since the 1860s yet most wine is imported. The total market share of wine on alcoholic beverages is about 3%. [59] 
 
 Regional cuisine [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Japanese regional cuisine 
 Japanese cuisine offers a vast array of regional specialties known as  kyōdo-ryōri  (郷土料理), many of them originating from dishes prepared using traditional recipes with local ingredients. Foods from the  Kantō region  taste very strong. For example, the  dashi -based broth for serving  udon  noodles is heavy on dark  soy sauce , similar to  soba  broth. On the other hand,  Kansai region  foods are lightly seasoned, with clear udon noodles. [60]  made with light soy sauce. [61] 
 
 Traditional table settings [ edit ] 
 The traditional Japanese  table setting  has varied considerably over the centuries, depending primarily on the type of table common during a given era. Before the 19th century, small individual box tables ( hakozen , 箱膳) or flat floor trays were set before each diner. Larger low tables ( chabudai , ちゃぶ台) that accommodated entire families were gaining popularity by the beginning of the 20th century, but these gave way to Western-style dining tables and chairs by the end of the 20th century.
 The traditional Japanese table setting is to place a bowl of rice on the diner’s left and to place a bowl of miso soup on the diner’s right side at the table. Behind these, each  okazu  is served on its own individual plate. Based on the standard three  okazu  formula, behind the rice and soup are three flat plates to hold the three  okazu ; one to far back left, one at far back right, and one in the center. Pickled vegetables are often served on the side but are not counted as part of the three  okazu .  Chopsticks  are generally placed at the very front of the tray near the diner with pointed ends facing left and supported by a  chopstick rest , or  hashioki . [61] 
 
 Dining etiquette [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Customs and etiquette in Japanese dining 
 Many restaurants and homes in Japan are equipped with Western-style chairs and tables. However, traditional Japanese low tables and cushions, usually found on  tatami  floors, are also very common. Tatami mats, which are made of straw, can be easily damaged and are hard to clean, thus shoes or any type of footwear are always taken off when stepping on tatami floors. [62] 
 When dining in a traditional tatami room, sitting upright on the floor is common. In a casual setting, men usually sit with their feet crossed and women sit with both legs to one side. Only men are supposed to sit cross-legged. The formal way of sitting for both sexes is a kneeling style known as  seiza . To sit in a  seiza  position, one kneels on the floor with legs folded under the thighs and the buttocks resting on the heels. [62] 
 When dining out in a restaurant, the customers are guided to their seats by the host. The honored or eldest guest will usually be seated at the center of the table farthest from the entrance. In the home, the most important guest is also seated farthest away from the entrance. If there is a  tokonoma , or alcove, in the room, the guest is seated in front of it. The host sits next to or closest to the entrance. [63] 
 In Japan, it is customary to say  itadakimasu  ("I [humbly] receive") before starting to eat a meal. [64]  When saying  itadakimasu , both hands are put together in front of the chest or on the lap.  Itadakimasu  is preceded by complimenting the appearance of food. The Japanese attach as much importance to the aesthetic arrangement of the food as its actual taste. Before touching the food, it is polite to compliment the host on his artistry. [ citation needed ]  It is also a polite custom to wait for the eldest guest at the table to start eating before the other diners start. [ citation needed ]  Another customary and important etiquette is to say  go-chisō-sama deshita  ("It was a feast") to the host after the meal and the restaurant staff when leaving. [65] 
 
 Dishes for special occasions [ edit ] 
 In Japanese tradition some dishes are strongly tied to a festival or event. These dishes include:
 
 Botamochi , a sticky rice dumpling with sweet azuki paste served in spring, while a similar sweet  Ohagi  is served in autumn. 
 Chimaki  (steamed sweet rice cake):  Tango no sekku  and  Gion Festival . 
 Hamo  (a type of fish, often  eel ) [66]  and  sōmen :  Gion Festival . 
 Osechi : New Year. 
 Sekihan  is red rice, which is served for any celebratory occasion. It is usually sticky rice cooked with azuki, or red bean, which gives the rice its distinctive red color. [67] 
 Soba : [68]  New Year's Eve. This is called  toshi koshi soba  (literally "year crossing soba"). 
 Chirashizushi , Ushiojiru (clear soup of clams) and  amazake :  Hinamatsuri . 
 In some regions, on every first and fifteenth day of the month, people eat a mixture of rice and azuki ( azuki meshi  (小豆飯); see  Sekihan ).
 
 Imported and adapted foods [ edit ] 
 Japan has a long history of importing food from other countries, some of which are now part of Japan's most popular cuisine.  Ramen  is considered an important part to their culinary history, to the extent where in survey of 2,000 Tokyo residents,  instant ramen  came up many times as a product they thought was an outstanding Japanese invention. [69]  Believed to have originated in China, ramen became popular in Japan after the  Second Sino-Japanese war  (1937–1945), when many Chinese students were displaced to Japan. [70] 
 
   Curry  is so widely consumed that it can be called a  national dish . [71] 
 Curry is another popular imported dish and is ranked near the top of nearly all Japanese surveys for favorite foods. The average Japanese person eats curry at least once a week. [72]  The origins of curry, as well many other foreign imports such as  pan  or bread, are linked to the emergence of  yōshoku , or western cuisine.  Yōshoku  can be traced as far back as the late  Muromachi period  (1336–1573) during a culinary revolution called  namban ryori  (南蛮料理), which means "Southern barbarian cooking", as it is rooted in European cuisine. [70]  This cuisine style was first seen in  Nagasaki , which served as the point of contact between Europe and Japan at that point in time. Food items such as potatoes, corn, dairy products, as well as the hard candy  kompeito  (金平糖), spread during this time. [70]  This cuisine became popular in the  Meiji period , which is considered by many historians to be when Japan first opened itself to the outside world. Today, many of these imported items still hold a heavy presence in Japan. [ citation needed ] 
 
 Foods imported from Portugal in the 16th century 
 Other adapted cuisines in Japan 
 Yōshoku – Foreign (Western) food, dishes [16] [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Yōshoku 
 Japan today abounds with home-grown, loosely Western-style food. Many of these were invented in the wake of the 1868  Meiji Restoration  and the end of  national seclusion , when the sudden influx of foreign (in particular, Western) culture led to many restaurants serving Western food, known as  yōshoku  (洋食), a shortened form of  seiyōshoku  (西洋食, "Western cuisine"), opening up in cities. Restaurants that serve these foods are called  yōshokuya  (洋食屋, "Western cuisine restaurants"). [ citation needed ] 
 Many  yōshoku  items from that time have been adapted to a degree that they are now considered Japanese and are an integral part of any Japanese family menu. Many are served alongside rice and miso soup, and eaten with chopsticks. Yet, due to their origins these are still categorized as  yōshoku  as opposed to the more traditional  washoku  (和食, "Japanese cuisine"). [73] 
 
 Chūka ryōri - Japanese Chinese cuisine [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Japanese Chinese cuisine 
 Chinese cuisine is one of the oldest the most common foreign cuisines in Japan, predating the introduction of Western food dishes into the country. Many Chinese dishes have been altered to suit Japanese palates in a type of cuisine known as "chuka ryori". Iconic dishes of chuka ryori include  ramen ,  gyoza , and  chukaman .
 
 Okonomiyaki [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Okonomiyaki 
   Japanese pancake,  Okonomiyaki 
 Okonomiyaki is a savoury pancake containing a variety of ingredients in a wheat-flour-based batter. [74] 
 
 Tonkatsu [ edit ] 
   Tonkatsu  pork cutlet 
 Main article:  Tonkatsu 
 Tonkatsu is a breaded, deep-fried pork cutlet. It is frequently served with  tonkatsu sauce . [ citation needed ] 
 
 Curry [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Japanese curry 
 Curry  was introduced by  Anglo -Indian officers of the  Royal Navy  from  India  who brought curry powder to Japan in the  Meiji period . [75]  The  Imperial Japanese Navy  adopted curry to prevent  beriberi . Overtime it was reinvented and adapted to suit Japanese tastes that it became uniquely Japanese. [75]  It is consumed so much that it is considered a  national dish . [71]  Many recipes are on the menu of the  JMSDF . [76]  A variety of vegetables and meats are used to make  Japanese curry , usually vegetables like onions, carrots, and potatoes. The types of meat used are beef, pork, and chicken. A popular dish is  Katsu-karē  which is a  breaded deep-fried cutlet  ( tonkatsu ; usually pork or chicken) with Japanese curry sauce. [77]   Japanese curry  can be found in foods such as curry  udon ,  curry bread , and  katsukarē ,  tonkatsu  served with curry. It's very commonly made with rice beside the curry on the dish called "curry"  ( カレー ,  karē ) . This can be eaten during dinner.
 
 Wafū burgers (Japanese-style burgers) [ edit ] 
 Hamburger  chains active in Japan include  McDonald's ,  Burger King ,  First Kitchen ,  Lotteria  and  MOS Burger . Many chains developed uniquely Japanese versions of American fast food such as the  teriyaki  burger,  kinpira  ( sauté ) rice burger, fried shrimp burgers, and green tea  milkshakes . [ citation needed ] 
 
 Italian [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Itameshi 
 High-class Japanese chefs have preserved many Italian seafood dishes that are forgotten in other countries. These include pasta with  prawns ,  lobster  (a specialty known in Italy as pasta all'aragosta),  crab  (an Italian specialty; in Japan it is served with a different species of crab), and pasta with  sea urchin  sauce (sea urchin pasta being a specialty of the  Puglia region ). [78] 
 
 Outside Japan [ edit ] 
   California roll , a fusion makizushi created outside of Japan 
 Many countries have imported portions of Japanese cuisine. Some may adhere to the traditional preparations of the cuisines, but in some cultures the dishes have been adapted to fit the palate of the local populace. In 1970s sushi travelled from Japan to Canada and the United States, it was modified to suit the American palate, and re-entered the Japanese market as "American Sushi". [79]  An example of this phenomenon is the  California roll , which was created in North America in the 1970s, rose in popularity across the United States through the 1980s, and thus sparked Japanese food's – more precisely, sushi's – global popularity.
 In 2014, Japanese Restaurant Organization has selected potential countries where Japanese food is becoming increasingly popular, and conducted research concerning the Japanese restaurants abroad. These key nations or region are  Taiwan , Hong Kong, China, Singapore,  Thailand  and  Indonesia . [80]  This was meant as an effort to promote Japanese cuisine and to expand the market of Japanese ingredients, products and foodstuffs. Numbers of Japanese foodstuff and seasoning brands such as  Ajinomoto ,  Kikkoman ,  Nissin  and  Kewpie  mayonnaise, are establishing production base in other Asian countries, such as China, Thailand and Indonesia.
 
 Australia [ edit ] 
 Japanese cuisine is very popular in Australia, and Australians are becoming increasingly familiar with traditional Japanese foods. [81]  Restaurants serving Japanese cuisine feature prominently in popular rankings, including Gourmet Traveller and The Good Food Guide. [82] 
 Sushi in particular has been described as being "as popular as sandwiches", particularly in large cities like Melbourne, Sydney, or Brisbane. [83]  As such, sushi bars are a mainstay in shopping centre food courts, and are extremely common in cities and towns all over the country. [83] 
 
 Brazil [ edit ] 
 In Brazil, Japanese food is widespread due to the large  Japanese-Brazilian  population living in the country, which represents the largest Japanese community living outside Japan. Over the past years, many restaurant chains such as  Koni Store [84]  have opened, selling typical dishes such as the popular  temaki .  Yakisoba , which is readily available in all supermarkets, and often included in non-Japanese restaurant menus. [85] 
 
 Canada [ edit ] 
 In Canada, Japanese cuisine has become quite popular.  Sushi ,  sashimi , and instant ramen are highly popular at opposite ends of the income scale, with instant ramen being a common low-budget meal. Sushi and sashimi takeout began in  Vancouver  and  Toronto , and is now common throughout Canada. The largest supermarket chains all carry basic sushi and sashimi, and Japanese ingredients and instant ramen are readily available in most supermarkets. Most mid-sized mall food courts feature fast-food teppan cooking.  Izakaya  restaurants have surged in popularity. Higher-end ramen restaurants (as opposed to instant ramen noodles of variable quality) are increasingly common. [86] 
 
 Indonesia [ edit ] 
   Chicken  teriyaki   bento  set, [87]  including salmon  sashimi ,  gyoza , salad and miso soup, served in a Japanese restaurant in  Jakarta 
 In the  ASEAN  region, Indonesia is the second largest market for Japanese food, after Thailand. Japanese cuisine has been increasingly popular as the growth of the Indonesian middle-class expecting higher quality foods. [80]  This is also contributed to the fact that Indonesia has large numbers of  Japanese expatriates . The main concern is the  halal  issue. As a  Muslim  majority country, Indonesians expected that Japanese food served there are halal according to Islamic dietary law, which means no pork and alcohol allowed. Japanese restaurants in Indonesia often offer a set menu which include rice served with an array of Japanese favourites in a single setting. A set menu might include a choice of yakiniku or sukiyaki, including a sample of sushi, tempura, gyoza and miso soup. Quite authentic Japanese style  izakaya  and  ramen  shops can be found in Little Tokyo (Melawai) area in  Blok M , South Jakarta, serving both Japanese expats and local clienteles. [88]  Today, Japanese restaurants can be found in most of Indonesian major cities, with high concentration in  Greater Jakarta  area,  Bandung ,  Surabaya  and  Bali .
 In some cases, Japanese cuisine in Indonesia is often slanted to suit Indonesian taste.  Hoka Hoka Bento  in particular is an Indonesian-owned Japanese fast food restaurant chain that cater to the Indonesian clientele. As a result the foods served there have been adapted to suit Indonesians' taste. Examples of the change include stronger flavours compared to the authentic subtle Japanese taste, the preference for fried food, as well as the addition of  sambal  to cater to the Indonesians' preference for hot and spicy food.
 
   Okonomiyaki  and  takoyaki  served in a festival of  2018 Asian Games  in  Jakarta 
 Japanese food popularity also had penetrated  street food culture , as modest  Warjep  or  Warung  Jepang  (Japanese food stall) offer Japanese food such as tempura, okonomiyaki and takoyaki, at very moderately low prices. [89]  Today, okonomiyaki and takoyaki are popular street fare in Jakarta and other Indonesian cities. [90] [91]  This is also pushed further by the Japanese convenience stores operating in Indonesia, such as  7-Eleven  and  Lawson  offering Japanese favourites such as  oden , chicken katsu (deep-fried chicken cutlet), chicken teriyaki and  onigiri . [92] 
 Some chefs in Indonesian sushi establishment has created a Japanese-Indonesian fusion cuisine, such as krakatau roll,  gado-gado  roll,  rendang  roll and  gulai  ramen. [93]  The idea of fusion cuisine between spicy Indonesian  Padang  and Japanese cuisine was thought because both cuisine traditions are well-liked by Indonesians. [94]  Nevertheless, some of these Japanese eating establishments might strive to serve authentic Japanese cuisine abroad. [95]  Numbers of Japanese chain restaurants has established their business in Indonesia, such as  Yoshinoya  gyūdon restaurant chain, [96]   Gyu-Kaku  yakiniku restaurant chain and  Ajisen Ramen  restaurant chain.
 
 Mexico [ edit ] 
 In  Mexico , certain Japanese restaurants have created what is known as "sushi Mexicano", in which spicy sauces and ingredients accompany the dish or are integrated in sushi rolls. The  habanero  and  serrano  chiles have become nearly standard and are referred to as chiles toreados, as they are fried, diced and tossed over a dish upon request.
 
 Philippines [ edit ] 
 In the  Philippines , Japanese cuisine is also popular among the local population. [97]  The Philippines have been exposed to the influences from the Japanese,  Indian  and  Chinese . [98]  The cities of  Davao  and  Metro Manila  probably have the most Japanese influence in the country. [99] [100]  The popular dining spots for Japanese nationals are located in  Makati , which is called as "Little Tokyo", a small area filled with restaurants specializing in different types of Japanese food. Some of the best Japanese no-frills restaurants in the Philippines can be found in Makati's "Little Tokyo" area. [101]  In the Philippines,  Halo-halo  is derived from Japanese  Kakigori . Halo-halo is believed to be an indigenized version of the Japanese  kakigori  class of desserts, originating from pre- war  Japanese migrants into the islands. The earliest versions were composed only of cooked  red beans  or  mung beans  in crushed ice with sugar and milk, a dessert known locally as " mongo-ya ". Over the years, more native ingredients were added, resulting in the development of the modern  halo-halo . [102] [103]  Some authors specifically attribute it to the 1920s or 1930s Japanese migrants in the  Quinta Market  of  Quiapo , Manila, due to its proximity to the now defunct  Insular Ice Plant , which was the source of the city's ice supply. [104]  In  Cebu City , the Little Kyoto district let's you experience the feel of being in  Kyoto ,  Japan  with a statue of the reclining  Buddha  overlooking the city. The Little Kyoto district also features Japanese food stalls serving various Japanese dishes like  Takoyaki ,  Tempura , and various other Japanese cuisine that is enjoyed by the people of Cebu City, Philippines. [105] [106]   Odong , also called  pancit odong , is a  Visayan   noodle soup  made with  odong  noodles,  canned  smoked sardines ( tinapa ) in tomato sauce,  bottle gourd  ( upo ),  loofah  ( patola ),  chayote , ginger, garlic,  red onions , and various other vegetables. It is garnished and spiced with  black pepper ,  scallions , toasted garlic,  calamansi , or  labuyo chilis . [107] [108] [109] [110]  The dish is usually prepared as a soup, but it can also be cooked with minimal water, in which case, it is known as  odong guisado . [111] 
 It is a common simple and cheap meal in  Mindanao  (particularly the  Davao Region ) and the  Visayas Islands . [112] [111] [113]  It is almost always eaten with white rice, rarely on its own. [111] 
 It is named after the round flour noodles called  odong  which are closest in texture and taste to the  Okinawa soba . These noodles are characteristically sold dried into straight sticks around 6 to 8 in (15 to 20 cm) long. [113]  The name is derived from the  Japanese   udon  noodles, although it does not use  udon  noodles or bear any resemblance to  udon  dishes. It originates from the  Davao Region  of  Mindanao [114]  which had a large Japanese migrant community in the early 1900s. [115]  The  odong  noodles were previously locally manufactured by  Okinawans , but modern  odong  noodles (which are distinctly yellowish) are imported from  China . [114]  Because  odong  noodles are difficult to find in other regions, they can be substituted with other types of noodles; including  misua ,  miki  ( egg noodles ),  udon , and even  instant noodles . [109] [111] 
 
 Taiwan [ edit ] 
 Japan and Taiwan have shared  close historical and cultural relations . Dishes such as sushi, ramen, and donburi are very popular among locals. Japanese chain restaurants such as Coco Ichibanya, Ippudo, Kura Sushi, Marugame Seimen, Mister Donut, MOS Burger, Ootoya, Ramen Kagetsu Arashi, Saizeriya, Sukiya, Sushiro, Tonkatsu Shinjuku Saboten, Yayoi Ken, and Yoshinoya, can all be found in Taiwan, among others. Taiwan has adapted many Japanese food items. Tianbula ("Taiwanese tempura") is actually satsuma-age and was introduced to Taiwan during  Japanese rule  by people from Kyushu, where the word  tempura  is commonly used to refer to satsuma-age. [116] [117] [118]  It is popular as a night market snack and as an ingredient for oden, hot pot and lu wei. Taiwanese versions of oden are sold locally as olen or, more recently, as guandongzhu (from Japanese Kantō-ni) in convenience stores.
 
 Thailand [ edit ] 
 In Southeast Asia, Thailand is the largest market for Japanese food. This is partly because Thailand is a popular  tourist destination , having large numbers of  Japanese expatriates , as well as the local population having developed a taste for authentic Japanese cuisine. According to the Organisation that Promote Japanese Restaurants Abroad (JRO), the number of Japanese restaurants in Thailand jumped about 2.2-fold from 2007's figures to 1,676 in June 2012. In  Bangkok , Japanese restaurants accounts for 8.3 percent of all restaurants, following those that serve  Thai . [119]  Numbers of Japanese chain restaurants has established their business in Thailand, such as Yoshinoya gyūdon restaurant chain, Gyu-Kaku  yakiniku  restaurant chain and Kourakuen ramen restaurant chain.
 
 United Kingdom [ edit ] 
   A branch of Kokoro in  Sutton High Street ,  Sutton , Greater London 
 Japanese food Inspired restaurant chains in the UK include  Wagamama ,  YO! Sushi , Nudo Sushi Box,  Wasabi , Bone Daddies and Kokoro, often localising the food and mixing in other ingredients originating from  Southeast Asia  and  India .
 
 United States [ edit ] 
 The  California roll  has been influential in sushi's global popularity; its invention often credited to a Japanese-born chef working in Los Angeles, with dates assigned to 1973, or even 1964. [120] [121]  The dish has been snubbed by some purist sushi chefs, [120]  and also likened to the America-born  chop suey  by one scholar. [121] 
 As of 2015 [update]  the country has about 4,200 sushi restaurants. [122]  It is one of the most popular styles of sushi in the US market. Japanese cuisine is an integral part of food culture in Hawaii as well as in other parts of the United States. Popular items are sushi, sashimi, and teriyaki.  Kamaboko , known locally as fish cake, is a staple of  saimin , a noodle soup that is a local favorite in Hawaii. [123]  Sushi, long regarded as quite exotic in the west until the 1970s, has become a popular health food in parts of North America, Western Europe and Asia.
 Two of the first Japanese restaurants in the United States were Saito and Nippon. Restaurants such as these popularized dishes such as sukiyaki and tempura, while Nippon was the first restaurant in Manhattan to have a dedicated sushi bar. [124]  Nippon was also one of the first Japanese restaurants in the U.S. to grow and process their own soba [125]  and responsible for creation of the now standard  beef negimayak i dish. [126] 
 In the U.S., the  teppanyaki  "iron hot plate" cooking restaurant took foothold. Such restaurants featured steak, shrimp and vegetables (including  bean sprouts ), cooked in front of the customer on a "teppanyaki grill" (teppan) by a personal chef who turns cooking into performance art, twirling and juggling cutting knives like batons. The meal would be served with steamed rice and Japanese  soup. This style of cooking was made popular in the U.S. when  Rocky Aoki  founded his popular restaurant chain  Benihana  in 1964. [127] [128]  In Japan this type of cooking is thought to be American food, but in the U.S. it is thought to be Japanese. Aoki thought this would go over better in the U.S. than traditional Japanese cuisine because he felt that Americans enjoyed "eating in exotic surroundings, but are deeply mistrustful of exotic foods”. [129] 
 
 Cultural heritage [ edit ] 
 In February 2012, the  Agency for Cultural Affairs  recommended that 'Washoku: Traditional Dietary Cultures of the Japanese' be added to the  UNESCO   Representative List of the Intangible Cultural Heritage of Humanity . [130]  On December 4, 2013, "Washoku, traditional dietary cultures  [ sic ] of the Japanese, notably for the celebration of New Year" was added to UNESCO's Intangible Cultural Heritage, bringing the number of Japanese assets listed on UNESCO's Intangible Cultural Heritage list to 22. [131] [132] 
 
 Food controversies [ edit ] 
   Whale meat  sashimi, one of the most controversial Japanese dishes 
 Some elements of Japanese cuisine involving  eating live seafood , such as  Ikizukuri  and  Odori ebi , have received criticism overseas as a form of  animal cruelty . [133] 
 Japanese cuisine is heavily dependent on seafood products. About 45 kilograms of seafood are consumed per capita annually in Japan, more than most other developed countries. [134]  An aspect of environmental concern is Japanese appetite for seafood, which could contribute to the depletion of natural ocean resources. For example, Japan consumes 80% of the global supply of  blue fin tuna , a popularly sought sushi and sashimi ingredient, which could lead to its extinction due to commercial  overfishing . [135]  Another environmental concern is commercial  whaling  and the consumption of  whale meat , for which Japan is the world's largest market. [136] [137] 
 
 See also [ edit ] 
 
 Japan portal Food portal 
 
 Bento 
 Culture of Japan 
 Cuisine of Okinawa 
 Fake food in Japan 
 Honzen-ryōri 
 Japanese New Year 
 Kaiseki 
 List of Japanese condiments 
 List of Japanese cooking utensils 
 List of Japanese dishes 
 List of Japanese desserts and sweets 
 List of Japanese soups and stews 
 List of Japanese ingredients 
 List of Japanese restaurants 
 List of sushi restaurants 
 
 References [ edit ] 
 
 
 ^   Lucero, Mario J. (March 4, 2022).  "Mixing Food Cultures: Japan, Mexico and Southwest US" .  Tokyo Weekender . Retrieved  April 29,  2022 . 
 
 ^   Demetriou, Danielle (October 19, 2011).  "Japan relishes status as country with most three-starred Michelin restaurants" .  The Daily Telegraph .  ISSN   0307-1235 .  Archived  from the original on January 11, 2022 . Retrieved  January 15,  2019 . 
 
 ^   "Japanese cuisine added to Unesco 'intangible heritage' list" .  BBC News . December 5, 2013. 
 
 ^   " Kappō かっ‐ぽう【割烹】 ",  Kojien , 4th ed., 1991. 
 
 ^   Tada, Tetsunosuke   [in Japanese]  (1994).  "Kappo"  割烹 かつぽう .  Nihon Dai-hyakka zensho . Vol. 5.  Shogakukan . p. 436.  ISBN   9784095260013 . 
 
 ^   Burum, Linda (1992). "Koryori-ya, Kappo, and Robata Restaurants: Little Dishes with More Style".  A Guide to Ethnic Food in Los Angeles .  Harper Perennial . p. 43.  ISBN   9780062730381 . 
 
 ^   "What is Japanese Kappo cuisine?" .  Michelin . December 19, 2017 . Retrieved  January 15,  2020 . 
 
 ^   " Kaiseki(5) かい‐せき【懐石】 ",  Kojien , 4th ed., 1991. 
 
 ^   Assmann, Stephanie; Rath, Eric C. (2010).  "Koryori-ya, Kappo, and Robata Restaurants: Little Dishes with More Style" .  A Guide to Ethnic Food in Los Angeles .  University of Illinois Press . p. 4.  ISBN   9780252077524 . 
 
 ^   " Honzenryōri ほんぜん‐りょうり【本膳料理】 ",  Kojien , 4th ed., 1991. 
 
 ^   " Kaiseki(1) かい‐せき【会席】 ", "かいせき‐りょうり【会席料理】"  Kojien , 4th ed., 1991. 
 
 ^  a   b   Yomiuri Shimbun, Osaka (2005) [2001].  Zatsugaku shimbun   雑学新聞 . PHP Kenkyusho.  ISBN   978-4-569-64432-5 . , p. 158 
 
 ^   Kobayashi, T.  "Taste of Simplicity: Japanese One-Soup One-Dish Cuisine" .  WAWAZA . Retrieved  July 10,  2021 . 
 
 ^   Kondo, Tamami(近藤珠實) (2010).  日本の作法としきたり: 四季の行事と冠婚葬祭、その由来と常識  [ Nihon no saho to shikitari: shiki no gyoji to kankon sosai, sono yurai to joshiki ]  (preview) . PHP研究所.  ISBN   978-4-569-77764-1 . , p. 185 
 
 ^   " Taishūshokudō たいしゅう‐しょくどう【大衆食堂】 ",  Kojien , 4th ed., 1991. 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   Kenkyusha's New Japanese-English Dictionary ,  ISBN   4-7674-2015-6 
 
 ^   Ishikawa, Hiroyoshi   [in Japanese]  (1991).  Taishū bunka jiten . Kōbundō. p. 516.  ISBN   9784335550461 . 
 
 ^   Rath, E. C. (2013). "Reevaluating Rikyū: Kaisekiand the Origins of Japanese Cuisine".  The Journal of Japanese Studies , 39 (1), 67–96.  doi : 10.1353/jjs.2013.0022 
 
 ^   Stevens, C. S. (2011). "Touch: Encounters with Japanese Popular Culture".  Japanese Studies , 31 (1), 1–10.  doi : 10.1080/10371397.2011.559898 
 
 ^   Bestor, T. C. (2015). "Cuisine and identity in contemporary Japan".  Routledge Handbook of Japanese Culture and Society .  doi : 10.4324/9780203818459.ch22 
 
 ^  a   b   Ashkenazi, M. (2013). The Essence of Japanese Cuisine. The History and Culture of Japanese Food.  doi : 10.4324/9781315027487 
 
 ^   Jung, S. (2019).  The Japanese Culinary Academy teaches you the fundamentals of food from the Land of the Rising Sun 
 
 ^   Avey, T. (2012).  Discover the History of Sushi 
 
 ^  a   b   c   Allen, Kristi (March 26, 2019).  "Why Eating Meat Was Banned in Japan for Centuries" .  Atlas Obscura . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   Motoyama, Tekishū   [in Japanese]  (1969) [1968]. "Nihon ryōri"  日本料理 .  Sekai hyakka jiten 世界百科事典 . Vol. 17. Heibonsha. pp. 355–356. 
 
 ^   "A Day in the Life: Seasonal Foods"   Archived  January 16, 2013, at the  Wayback Machine , The Japan Forum Newsletter No.September 14, 1999. 
 
 ^   Itoh, Makiko (April 26, 2013).  "Katsuo, Japan's ubiquitous tuna" .  Japan Times . Retrieved  October 19,  2020 . 
 
 ^   Hepburn (1888)  dictionary "hashiri: The first fruits, or first caught fish of the season" 
 
 ^   Gordenker, Alice (January 15, 2008).  "Bento grass" .  Japan Times .  ISSN   0447-5763 . Retrieved  June 5,  2019 . 
 
 ^   Ehara, Ayako (1999).  "School Meals and Japan's Changing Diet" .  Japan Echo .  26 .  Relatively alien to the traditional Japanese diet were meat, oil and fats, and dairy products.. . 
 
 ^   Cawthorn (1997) , p. 7 
 
 ^   Morimatsu, Yoshiaki; Hinonishi, Sukenori; Sakamoto, Taro (1957).  風俗辞典 . 東京堂出版.  天武天皇三年に牛・馬。犬・猿,鶏の肉を食べゐこと古禁じてから肉食が演じ、江戸時代になっても四足・二足を食べない家が多かった。もっとも野獣の肉は食用に供した。 
 
 ^  a   b   Watanabe, Zenjiro.  "Removal of the Ban on Meat: The Meat-Eating Culture of Japan at the Beginning of Westernization"   (PDF) . Retrieved  December 26,  2019 . 
 
 ^   Pulvers, Roger (March 6, 2011).  "Japanese families' nutritional values pay dearly for 'progress' " .  Japan Times . Archived from  the original  on August 1, 2012 . Retrieved  March 22,  2011 . 
 
 ^   Ochiai, H. (November 25, 2014). Is it a potato or a prawn?: Kyoto farmers make a name selling strangely shaped vegetables, The Japan News by the Yomiuri Shimbun, the-japan-news.com/news/article/0001713547 
 
 ^  a   b   c   Fukuta, Ajio (福田アジオ) (1999).  Nihon minzoku daijiten(日本民俗大辞典) . Vol. 1. Yoshikawa Kobunkan (吉川弘文館).  ISBN   9784642013321 . , p.16 安土,桃山時代から江戸時代にかけて南蛮料理や中国料理の影響と油の生産増大に伴い、油揚や天麩羅,素揚,薩摩撝など副食物として 
 
 ^   Li, Jin-lin; Tu, Zong-cai; Zhang, Lu; Sha, Xiao-mei; Wang, Hui; Pang, Juan-juan; Tang, Ping-ping (August 1, 2016).  "The effect of ginger and garlic addition during cooking on the volatile profile of grass carp (Ctenopharyngodon idella) soup" .  Journal of Food Science and Technology .  53  (8): 3253–3270.  doi : 10.1007/s13197-016-2301-1 .  ISSN   0975-8402 .  PMC   5055890 .  PMID   27784920 . 
 
 ^   Hirasa, Kenji; Takemasa, Mitsuo (June 16, 1998).  Spice Science and Technology . CRC Press. pp. 76–77.  ISBN   978-0-585-36755-2 . 
 
 ^   Today, What Way.  "Food in Japan is not just about Sushi – Japanese Food Adventure" .  What Way Today . Retrieved  April 20,  2016 . 
 
 ^   Pemberton, Robert W. (1999).  "Japanese Food as Art and Symbol: Evidence from Inedible Leaf Garnishes" .  Petits Propos Culinaires . 
 
 ^   Andoh (2012) , p. 20 "spinach steeped in broth"; p. 63 "(spinach) blanched and then marinated" in smoky broth. 
 
 ^   Shimbo (2000) , p. 237: "Ohitashi literally means 'dipped item,' although the dressing is actually poured over the leaf vegetables." 
 
 ^  a   b   Shimbo (2000) , p. 147 "wakame and cucumber in sanbaizu dressing (sunomono)"; p. 74 "sanbaizu" recipe 
 
 ^   Tsuji, Fisher & Reichl (2006) , p. 429. 
 
 ^  a   b   c   Tsuji, Fisher & Reichl (2006) , pp. 241–253 
 
 ^  a   b   " Sai さい【菜】 ",  Kojien , 4th ed., 1991. 
 
 ^   Shapiro, Stephanie (September 22, 2004).  "Saving time, but losing a tradition among Japanese" .  The Baltimore Sun . 
 
 ^   " Okazu お‐かず【御数】】 ",  Kojien , 4th ed., 1991. 
 
 ^   "腹が鳴るなり万福寺 黄檗宗大本山万福寺（宇治市）" .  ひびき紀行 . September 3, 2011. 
 
 ^   Nagatomo, Akiko (長友麻希子) (September 3, 2011).  "普茶料理" .  「京都」×（もっと）ワかる . Industry and Tourism Bureau, City of Kyoto. Archived from  the original  on March 4, 2016 . Retrieved  May 6,  2012 . 
 
 ^   Andoh (2010) , p. 188 – gives a recipe. 
 
 ^   Kiple & Ornelas (2000) , p. 1176 
 
 ^  a   b   Kobayashi, Kazuhiko; Smil, Vaclav (2012).  Japan's Dietary Transition and Its Impacts . US:  Massachusetts Institute of Technology . p. 18.  ISBN   978-0-262-01782-4 . 
 
 ^   Ashkenazi, Michael; Jacob, Jeanne (2003).  Food Culture in Japan . Greenwood Publishing Group. p. 37.  ISBN   978-0-313-32438-3 . 
 
 ^   Ashcraft, Brian (May 6, 2019).  "Japan's Noodle Slurping Noises Disturb Tourists, It Seems" .  Kotaku . Retrieved  May 6,  2019 . 
 
 ^   Hosking, Richard  (1995).  A Dictionary of Japanese Food - Ingredients and Culture . Tuttle. p. 30.  ISBN   0-8048-2042-2 . 
 
 ^   "Sake FAQs" . Archived from  the original  on November 6, 2014 . Retrieved  November 14,  2014 . 
 
 ^   "What is Shochu?" . Retrieved  December 31,  2006 . 
 
 ^   "Japanese drinking" . April 13, 2007. 
 
 ^   Jo, Andrew.  "Japanese food includes dishes such as delicious Soba and Udon noodles" . Retrieved  December 15,  2015 . 
 
 ^  a   b   Introduction to Japanese Food   Archived  December 21, 2016, at the  Wayback Machine . Retrieved January 8, 2010 
 
 ^  a   b   "Japan Etiquette" .  Etiquette Scholar . Yellowstone Publishing, LLC . Retrieved  January 16,  2017 . 
 
 ^   Lininger, Mike.  "Japan Etiquette | International Dining Etiquette | Etiquette Scholar" .  Etiquette Scholar . Retrieved  October 3,  2018 . 
 
 ^   Ogura, Tomoko; 小倉朋子 (2008).  "Itadakimasu" o wasureta Nihonjin : tabekata ga migaku hinsei  (Shohan ed.). Tōkyō: Asukī Media Wākusu. p. 68.  ISBN   9784048672870 .  OCLC   244300317 . 
 
 ^   "ごちそうさまでした in English – Japanese–English Dictionary" .  Glosbe . Retrieved  June 2,  2019 . 
 
 ^   Davidson, Alan (2003).  Seafood of South-East Asia: a comprehensive guide with recipes . Ten Speed Press. p. 34.  ISBN   1-58008-452-4 . 
 
 ^   Tsuji, Shizuo; M.F.K. Fisher (2007).  Japanese Cooking: A Simple Art  (25 ed.). Kodansha International. pp. 280–281.  ISBN   978-4-7700-3049-8 . 
 
 ^   Mente, Boye Lafayette De (2007).  Dining Guide to Japan: Find the Right Restaurant, Order the Right Dish, and . Tuttle Publishing. p. 70.  ISBN   978-4-8053-0875-2 . 
 
 ^   Ayao, Okumura. "Japan's Ramen Romance."  Japan Quarterly  48.3 (2001): 66.  ProQuest Asian Business & Reference 
 
 ^  a   b   c   Seligman, Lucy. "The History of Japanese Cuisine."  Japan Quarterly  41.2 (1994): 165.  PAO Liberal Arts Collection 1. 
 
 ^  a   b   『カレーライス』に関するアンケート  (in Japanese). ネットリサーチ ディムスドライブ . Retrieved  February 1,  2016 . 
 
 ^   Morieda Takashi. "The Unlikely Love Affair with Curry and Rice."  Japan Quarterly  47.2 (2000): 66.  ProQuest Asian Business & Reference. 
 
 ^   "Japan's surprising 'Western' cuisine" .  BBC Travel . 
 
 ^   "Okonomiyaki Savoury Pancake Recipe" .  Japan Centre . Retrieved  March 27,  2022 . 
 
 ^  a   b   Itoh, Makiko (August 26, 2011).  "Curry — it's more 'Japanese' than you think" .  The Japan Times . Archived from  the original  on January 8, 2018 . Retrieved  March 31,  2018 . 
 
 ^   Curry Recipe  Japan Maritime Self-Defense Force  (in Japanese) 
 
 ^   "Chicken katsu curry" .  Food recipes . BBC. 2016. Archived from  the original  on July 14, 2021 . Retrieved  January 20,  2016 . 
 
 ^   Farrer, James (2015).  The Globalization of Asian Cuisines: Transnational Networks and Culinary Contact Zones .  ISBN   9781137514080 . 
 
 ^   Laemmerhirt, Iris-Aya (2014).  Embracing Differences: Transnational Cultural Flows between Japan and the United States, Volume 36 of Edition Kulturwissenschaft . transcript Verlag. pp. 102–103.  ISBN   978-3-8394-2600-5 . 
 
 ^  a   b   Fitriyanti, Azi  (January 25, 2014).  "Japanese Cuisine in Indonesia Focuses on Taste, Menus Food Safety" . Antara News . Retrieved  May 5,  2014 . 
 
 ^   "Asian Food and Australia's Changing Palate" .  Peril Magazine . Archived from  the original  on April 2, 2015 . Retrieved  March 26,  2015 . 
 
 ^   "Top 10 Restaurants of Australia" .  Top 10 Restaurants . Retrieved  March 26,  2015 . 
 
 ^  a   b   "Japanese Culture in Australia" .  Australian Good Food Guide . Retrieved  March 26,  2015 . 
 
 ^   Kugel, Seth (November 9, 2008).  "Rio de Janeiro: Koni Stores" .  The New York Times . Retrieved  May 5,  2010 . 
 
 ^   De Carvalho, André; Gerhard, Felipe; Ferreira De Freitas, Ana Augusta (2020).  "Food Experiences at Home: The Role of Ethnic Food in Brazilian Family Relations" .  Latin American Business Review .  22 : 53–73.  doi : 10.1080/10978526.2020.1812399 .  S2CID   225280313 . 
 
 ^   Duke, Laura Churchill (March 4, 2021).  " 'Ultimate comfort food': From traditional Japanese versions to Atlantic Canadian twists, ramen popular treat" . SaltWire Network. SaltWire . Retrieved  April 5,  2022 . 
 
 ^   "Chicken Teriyaki bento set" .  Ichiban Sushi . 
 
 ^   "7 Best Japanese Resto in Jakarta's Little Tokyo (Melawai)" .  Wanderbites . July 29, 2016. Archived from  the original  on March 30, 2022 . Retrieved  July 26,  2017 . 
 
 ^   Japanese Food Favorit ala Cafe  (in Indonesian). Gramedia Pustaka Utama.  ISBN   9789792227284 . 
 
 ^   Media, Kompas Cyber (February 10, 2011).  "Okonomiyaki Merambah Kaki Lima" .  Kompas.com  (in Indonesian) . Retrieved  September 15,  2018 . 
 
 ^   "10 Japanese Street Food yang Bisa Kamu Temukan di Jakarta" .  Qraved Journal . Retrieved  September 19,  2018 . 
 
 ^   Mustinda, Lusiana.  "Yang Hangat! di 4 Tempat Ini Ada Oden Enak dengan Harga Terjangkau" .  detikfood  (in Indonesian) . Retrieved  September 19,  2018 . 
 
 ^   "New: Suntiang, When Padang Marries Japanese Food" . Culinary Bonanza. February 6, 2014. Archived from  the original  on May 5, 2014 . Retrieved  May 5,  2014 . 
 
 ^   Resty Woro Yuniar (February 21, 2014).  "Food Fridays: When Rendang Said 'I Do' to Sushi" .  The Wall Street Journal . Archived from  the original  on September 8, 2018 . Retrieved  August 4,  2017 . 
 
 ^   I. Christianto (November 30, 2009).  "Enjoying internationally popular Japanese food" .  The Jakarta Post . Retrieved  May 5,  2014 . 
 
 ^   "Yoshinoya Indonesia" . Archived from  the original  on May 1, 2018 . Retrieved  December 17,  2018 . 
 
 ^   Cheryl M. Arcibal (July 8, 2013).  "Latest Japanese resto in town wants to conquer Pinoy bellies with pork and ramen | Food" .  The Philippine Star . Retrieved  March 3,  2014 . 
 
 ^   [1]   Archived  July 1, 2012, at the  Wayback Machine 
 
 ^   Adachi, Nobuko (2006).  Japanese Diasporas: Unsung Pasts, Conflicting Presents and Uncertain Futures .  ISBN   9780203968840 . Retrieved  March 3,  2014  – via Google Books. 
 
 ^   "From sushi to tempura to Wagyu: Japanese food 101" . May 15, 2012. 
 
 ^   Tiu, Cheryl (December 31, 2012).  "Best of Manila | CNN Travel" .  CNN . Archived from  the original  on February 22, 2014 . Retrieved  March 3,  2014 . 
 
 ^   Ocampo, Ambeth R. (August 30, 2012).  "Japanese origins of the Philippine 'halo-halo' " .  Philippine Daily Inquirer . Retrieved  April 23,  2019 . 
 
 ^   "Halo-Halo Graham Float Recipe" .  Pinoy Recipe at Iba Pa . July 24, 2019 . Retrieved  July 24,  2019 . 
 
 ^   Crisol, Christine (2006). "A  Halo-Halo  Menu".  In Zialcita, Fernando N. (ed.).  Quiapo: Heart of Manila . Manila: Quiapo Printing. p. 321.  ISBN   978-971-93673-0-7 .  Today, many non-Quiapense informants in their forties and older associate the Quinta Market with this dessert. Why did this market become important in the invention of this dessert? Aside from its being a Japanese legacy in the area [...] of all the city markets, the Quinta was closest to the ice. 
 
 ^   Sparks, Ph (October 28, 2021).  "Sachiko's Little Kyoto makes you feel like you're in Japan" . {{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: url-status ( link ) 
 
 ^   "Sachiko's Little Kyoto: A Little Slice of Japan in Cebu" . November 7, 2021. 
 
 ^   Polistico, Edgie (2017).  Philippine Food, Cooking, & Dining Dictionary . Anvil Publishing, Inc.  ISBN   9786214200870 . 
 
 ^   Polistico, Edgie.  "Odong" .  Philippine Food Illustrated . Retrieved  January 18,  2022 . 
 
 ^  a   b   Ramos, Ige (November 18, 2013).  "Kumain at tumulong" .  Bandera . Retrieved  January 18,  2022 . 
 
 ^   "Odong, Sardinas at Patola a la MaiMai" .  Market Manila . Retrieved  January 18,  2022 . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   "Odong Recipe" .  Panlasang Pinoy . Retrieved  January 18,  2022 . 
 
 ^   Ong, Kenneth Irvin (October 18, 2018).  "For the love of Ligo Sardines" .  Edge Davao . Retrieved  January 18,  2022 . 
 
 ^  a   b   "Sardines with Odong Noodles" .  Kusina ni Teds . Retrieved  January 18,  2022 . 
 
 ^  a   b   Figueroa, Antonio V. (September 12, 2016).  "US, Japan linguistic legacies" .  Edge Davao . No. 142. p. 9 . Retrieved  January 18,  2022 . 
 
 ^   Goodman, Grant K. (1967). "Japanese Percentage of Participation in Davao Province Industries".  Davao: A Case Study in Japanese-Philippine Relations .  University of Kansas , Center for East Asian Studies. p. 26.  hdl : 1808/1195 .  Archived  from the original on August 7, 2022. 
 
 ^   Katakura, Yoshifumi   [in Japanese]  (2016).  "片倉佳史の台湾歴史紀行 第一回 港湾都市・基隆を訪ねる"   (PDF) .  Japan–Taiwan Exchange Association . p. 9 . Retrieved  March 23,  2020 . 
 
 ^   Ishige, Naomichi   [in Japanese]  (2014).  The History and Culture of Japanese Food . Routledge. p. 246.  ISBN   978-1136602559 . 
 
 ^   "「さつま揚げ」の各都道府県での呼び名を調査 関西は「天ぷら」" . J-TOWN.NET. June 16, 2017 . Retrieved  March 23,  2020 . 
 
 ^   "Burgeoning growth of Japanese cuisine in Thailand" .  The Nation . September 24, 2012. Archived from  the original  on February 4, 2018 . Retrieved  April 12,  2016 . 
 
 ^  a   b   Renton, Alex (February 26, 2006).  "How Sushi ate the World" .  The Guardian . Retrieved  August 20,  2006 . 
 
 ^  a   b   Ji-Song Ku, Robert (2013).  Dubious Gastronomy: The Cultural Politics of Eating Asian in the USA .  University of Hawaii Press . pp. 43–48.  ISBN   978-0-824-83920-8 . 
 
 ^   Passy, Charles (August 26, 2015).  "Meet the Pilot Who Doubles as Block Island's Chinese-Food Delivery Guy" .  The Wall Street Journal . pp. A1 . Retrieved  August 26,  2015 . 
 
 ^   Ji-Song Ku (2013) , p. 263. 
 
 ^   Claiborne, Craig (November 11, 1963).  "Restaurants on Review; Variety of Japanese Dishes Offered, But Raw Fish Is Specialty on Menu" .  The New York Times . Retrieved  August 3,  2018 . 
 
 ^   "The chef, obsessed: Nobuyoshi Kuraoka established his own local buckwheat farm to achieve the perfect soba noodle" .  Politico PRO . Retrieved  August 3,  2018 . 
 
 ^   Fabricant, Florence (October 6, 1982).  "Adapting American Foods to Japanese Cuisine" .  The New York Times . Retrieved  August 3,  2018 . 
 
 ^   Johnson, Eric (August 30, 2001),  "American-style peace redefines Japanese palate" ,  Japan Times 
 
 ^   "The Kitchenless Restaurant" ,  Kitchen Planning , vol. 6, p. 63, December 1968 
 
 ^   "Why Hibachi Is Complicated"   (Audio Podcast with Notes) .  Sporkful . March 11, 2019. 
 
 ^   "Japanese cuisine to be nominated for UNESCO world heritage list" .  Mainichi Daily News . February 18, 2012. Archived from  the original  on February 19, 2012 . Retrieved  February 19,  2012 . 
 
 ^   UNESCO Culture Sector – Intangible Heritage – 2003 Convention :  UNESCO. Retrieved May 24, 2014. 
 
 ^   "Japanese cuisine added to UNESCO intangible heritage list" .  Mainichi Daily News . December 5, 2013. Archived from  the original  on December 10, 2013 . Retrieved  December 5,  2013 . 
 
 ^   "Ikizukuri: As Fresh As Seafood Can Get" .  US represented . August 19, 2018 . Retrieved  September 12,  2020 . 
 
 ^   "Faostat" . 
 
 ^   McCurry, Justin (November 10, 2016).  "Trouble at Tsukiji: world's biggest fish market caught in controversy" .  The Guardian . 
 
 ^   "Whale meat trade continues in East Asia" .  WWF . Archived from  the original  on December 2, 2016 . Retrieved  December 7,  2016 . 
 
 ^   "Whaling in Japan" .  Whale and Dolphin Conservation . 
 
 
 Works cited [ edit ] 
 
 Andoh, Elizabeth (2010),  Kansha: Celebrating Japan's Vegan and Vegetarian Traditions ,  Random House  Digital,  ISBN   978-1-58008-955-5 
 Andoh, Elizabeth (2012),  Washoku: Recipes from the Japanese Home Kitchen , Random House Digital,  ISBN   978-0-307-81355-8 
 Cawthorn, M. W. (1997).  "Meat consumption from stranded whales and marine mammals in New Zealand: Public health and other issues"   (PDF) .  Conservation Advisory Science Notes . Wellington, New Zealand: Department of Conservation (164).  ISSN   1171-9834 .  Archived   (PDF)  from the original on December 6, 2013. 
 Hepburn, James Curtis  (1888).  A Japanese-English and English-Japanese Dictionary  (4 ed.). Tokyo: Z.P. Maruya & Company. 
 Kiple, Kenneth F.; Ornelas, Kriemhild (2000).  The Cambridge World History of Food . Vol. 2. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.  ISBN   0-521-40216-6 . Archived from  the original  on May 4, 2012. 
 Shimbo, Hiroko (2000),  The Japanese Kitchen: 250 Recipes in a Traditional Spirit , Harvard Common Press,  ISBN   978-1-55832-177-9 
 Tsuji, Shizuo; Fisher, M.F.K.; Reichl, Ruth (2006),  Japanese Cooking: A Simple Art ,  Kodansha International ,  ISBN   978-4-7700-3049-8 
 
 Further reading [ edit ] 
 Cwiertka, Katarzyna Joanna (2006),  Modern Japanese Cuisine: Food, Power And National Identity , Reaktion Books,  ISBN   978-1-86189-298-0 
 Francks, Penelope. "Diet and the comparison of living standards across the Great Divergence: Japanese food history in an English mirror."  Journal of Global History  14.1 (2019): 3-21. 
 Rath, Eric C. (2010),  Food and Fantasy in Early Modern Japan , University of California Press,  ISBN   978-0-520-26227-0 
 External links [ edit ] 
 
 
 
 Wikibooks  Cookbook  has a recipe/module on
 
  Cuisine of Japan 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons has media related to  Cuisine of Japan . 
 
 
 
 
 Wikivoyage has travel information for  Japanese cuisine . 
 
 Japanese cuisine  at  Curlie 
 
 v t e Japan   articles 
 Index 
 Outline 
 History Overviews 
 Lists
 Eras 
 Clans 
 Emperors 
 Shoguns 
 Prime Ministers 
 Wars 
 Economic 
 Education 
 Foreign relations 
 Military 
 Naval 
 Imperial Army 
 Imperial Navy 
 Overseas actions 
 Ancient 
 Paleolithic 
 Jōmon 
 Yayoi 
 Kofun 
 Asuka 
 Taihō Code 
 Asuka Kiyomihara Code 
 Hakuhō period 
 Taika Reform 
 Monmu period 
 Nara 
 Heian 
 Middle Ages 
 Genpei War 
 Kamakura 
 Kamakura shogunate 
 Mongol invasions of Japan 
 Genkō War 
 Kenmu Restoration 
 Muromachi 
 Ashikaga shogunate 
 Nanboku-chō period 
 Ōnin War 
 Sengoku 
 Azuchi–Momoyama 
 Council of Five Elders 
 Japanese invasions of Korea (1592–1598) 
 Early Modern 
 Edo 
 Tokugawa shogunate 
 Bakumatsu 
 Empire of Japan 
 Meiji 
 Constitution (1890-1947) 
 Government 
 Meiji oligarchy 
 Restoration 
 Abolition of the han system 
 Boshin War 
 Satsuma Rebellion 
 Kazoku  (noble) 
 First Sino-Japanese War 
 Russo-Japanese War 
 Late Modern 
 Taishō 
 Japan during World War I 
 1923 Great Kantō earthquake 
 Shōwa 
 Japan during World War II 
 Mukden Incident 
 Second Sino-Japanese War 
 Pacific War 
 Occupation 
 Post-occupation 
 Heisei 
 Great Hanshin earthquake 
 2011 Tōhoku earthquake and tsunami 
 Contemporary 
 Reiwa 
 Geography 
 Addresses 
 Archipelago 
 Cities 
 Districts 
 Earthquakes 
 Environment 
 Extreme points 
 Islands 
 Lakes 
 Prefectures 
 Regions 
 Rivers 
 Towns 
 Villages 
 World Heritage Sites 
 Politics 
 Constitution 
 Elections 
 Emperor 
 Empress 
 Foreign relations 
 Human rights 
 LGBT 
 Judiciary 
 Law 
 Law enforcement 
 National Diet 
 House of Representatives 
 House of Councillors 
 Political parties 
 Self-Defense Forces 
 Ground 
 Maritime 
 Air 
 Government 
 Cabinet 
 Fiscal policy 
 Foreign policy 
 Ministries 
 Prime Minister 
 Deputy Prime Minister 
 Economy 
 Agriculture, forestry, fishing 
 Central bank 
 Labor 
 Manufacturing 
 Energy 
 Science and technology 
 Telecommunications 
 Transport 
 Yen 
 Society 
 Crime 
 Demographics 
 Education 
 Etiquette 
 Gambling 
 Housing 
 Languages 
 Japanese 
 People 
 Prostitution 
 Religion 
 Sex trafficking 
 Sexuality 
 Smoking 
 Women 
 Culture 
 Aesthetics 
 Anime  /  Manga 
 Architecture 
 Art 
 Bonsai 
 Cinema 
 Cuisine 
 Festivals 
 Flag 
 Folklore 
 Gardens 
 Geisha 
 Games 
 Icons 
 Ikebana 
 Kawaii 
 Literature 
 Martial arts 
 Media 
 Music 
 Mythology 
 Names 
 National symbols 
 Onsen  /  Sentō 
 Origami 
 Sport 
 Shinto 
 Tea ceremony 
 Television 
 Theatre 
 Zen 
 
   Japan portal 
   Category 
 
 v t e Asian cuisine Sovereign states 
 Afghanistan 
 Armenia 
 Azerbaijan 
 Bahrain 
 Bangladesh 
 Bhutan 
 Brunei 
 Burma (Myanmar) 
 Cambodia 
 China 
 Cyprus 
 East Timor (Timor-Leste) 
 Egypt 
 Georgia 
 India 
 Indonesia 
 Iran 
 Iraq 
 Israel 
 Japan 
 Jordan 
 Kazakhstan 
 North Korea 
 South Korea 
 Kuwait 
 Kyrgyzstan 
 Laos 
 Lebanon 
 Malaysia 
 Maldives 
 Mongolia 
 Nepal 
 Oman 
 Pakistan 
 Philippines 
 Qatar 
 Russia 
 Saudi Arabia 
 Singapore 
 Sri Lanka 
 Syria 
 Tajikistan 
 Thailand 
 Turkey 
 Turkmenistan 
 United Arab Emirates 
 Uzbekistan 
 Vietnam 
 Yemen 
 States with limited recognition 
 Abkhazia 
 Artsakh 
 Northern Cyprus 
 Palestine 
 South Ossetia 
 Taiwan 
 Dependencies and other territories 
 British Indian Ocean Territory 
 Christmas Island 
 Cocos (Keeling) Islands 
 Hong Kong 
 Macau 
 
 v t e Cuisines Continental 
 African 
 North 
 West 
 list 
 Americas 
 Caribbean 
 North 
 South 
 list 
 Asian 
 Caucasian 
 Central 
 Indian subcontinent 
 Levantine 
 list 
 European 
 Balkan 
 Central 
 Eastern 
 list 
 Oceanic 
 Intercontinental
 Global 
 Latin American 
 Mediterranean 
 Middle Eastern 
 National  and regional 
 Afghan 
 Albanian 
 Algerian 
 American 
 Californian 
 Floribbean 
 Hawaiian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Lowcountry (South Carolina) 
 New England 
 New Mexico 
 Pacific Northwest 
 Pennsylvania Dutch 
 Puerto Rican 
 Southern US 
 Southwest US 
 Texas 
 Angolan 
 Argentine 
 Armenian 
 Australian 
 Austrian 
 Azerbaijani 
 Bahraini 
 Bangladeshi 
 Barbadian 
 Belarusian 
 Belgian 
 Belizean 
 Beninese 
 Bhutanese 
 Bolivian 
 Bosnian-Herzegovinian 
 Botswana 
 Brazilian 
 British 
 Channel Islands 
 English 
 Gibraltarian 
 Northern Irish 
 Saint Helena 
 Scottish 
 Welsh 
 Bruneian 
 Bulgarian 
 Burkinabé 
 Burmese 
 Burundian 
 Cambodian 
 Cameroonian 
 Canadian 
 Acadian 
 Québécois 
 Central African Republic 
 Chadian 
 Chilean 
 Chinese 
 Cantonese 
 Hong Kong 
 Macanese 
 Tibetan 
 Xinjiang 
 Colombian 
 Congolese 
 Corsican 
 Croatian 
 Cuban 
 Cypriot 
 Czech 
 Danish 
 Faroese 
 Greenlandic 
 Djiboutian 
 Dominican 
 Dominican Republic 
 Dutch 
 East Timorese 
 Ecuadorian 
 Egyptian 
 Emirati 
 Equatorial Guinean 
 Eritrean 
 Estonian 
 Ethiopian 
 Fijian 
 Filipino 
 Finnish 
 French 
 Occitan 
 French Guianan 
 Gabonese 
 Gambian 
 Georgian 
 German 
 Ghanaian 
 Greek 
 Cretan 
 Epirotic 
 Greek Macedonian 
 Heptanesean 
 Guatemalan 
 Guinea-Bissauan 
 Guinean 
 Haitian 
 Honduran 
 Hungarian 
 Icelandic 
 Indian 
 Arunachalese 
 Assamese 
 Bengali 
 Bihari 
 Goan 
 Gujarati 
 Himachal Pradesh 
 Kashmiri 
 Jharkhandi 
 Karnataka 
 Kerala 
 Maharashtrian 
 Manipuri 
 Meghalayan 
 Mizo 
 Naga 
 Odia 
 Punjabi 
 Rajasthani 
 Sikkimese 
 Sindhi 
 Tamil 
 Telangana 
 Telugu 
 Indonesian 
 Acehnese 
 Balinese 
 Banjar 
 Batak 
 Betawi 
 Indo 
 Javanese 
 Madurese 
 Makassar 
 Minahasan 
 Minangkabau 
 Palembangese 
 Sundanese 
 Iranian 
 Iraqi 
 Irish 
 Israeli 
 Italian 
 Abruzzese 
 Ligurian 
 Lombard 
 Lucanian 
 Neapolitan 
 Roman 
 Sardinian 
 Sicilian 
 Venetian 
 Ivorian 
 Jamaican 
 Japanese 
 Okinawan 
 Jordanian 
 Kazakh 
 Kenyan 
 Korean 
 North Korean 
 South Korean 
 Kosovan 
 Kuwaiti 
 Kyrgyz 
 Lao 
 Latvian 
 Lebanese 
 Lesotho 
 Liberian 
 Libyan 
 Liechtensteiner 
 Lithuanian 
 Luxembourg 
 Macedonian 
 Malagasy 
 Malawian 
 Malaysian 
 Sabahan 
 Sarawakian 
 Maldivian 
 Malian 
 Maltese 
 Mauritanian 
 Mauritian 
 Mexican 
 Moldovan 
 Monégasque 
 Mongolian 
 Montenegrin 
 Moroccan 
 Mozambican 
 Namibian 
 Nauruan 
 Nepalese 
 New Zealand 
 Nicaraguan 
 Niger 
 Nigerian 
 Niuean 
 Norwegian 
 Omani 
 Pakistani 
 Palestinian 
 Panamanian 
 Peruvian 
 Polish 
 Portuguese 
 Qatari 
 Romanian  (incl.  Transylvanian Saxon ) 
 Russian 
 Bashkir 
 Chechen 
 Circassian 
 Komi 
 Mordovian 
 Sakha 
 Tatar 
 Udmurt 
 Yamal 
 Rwandan 
 Saint Lucian 
 Salvadoran 
 Sammarinese 
 São Tomé and Príncipe 
 Saudi Arabian 
 Senegalese 
 Serbian 
 Seychellois 
 Sierra Leonean 
 Singaporean 
 Slovak 
 Slovenian 
 Somali 
 South African 
 Spanish 
 Andalusian 
 Asturian 
 Balearic 
 Basque 
 Canarian 
 Cantabrian 
 Catalan 
 Extremaduran 
 Galician 
 Manchegan 
 Valencian 
 Sri Lankan 
 Sudanese 
 Swazi 
 Swedish 
 Swiss 
 Syrian 
 Taiwanese 
 Tajik 
 Tanzanian 
 Zanzibari 
 Thai 
 Togolese 
 Tunisian 
 Turkish 
 Turkmen 
 Trinidadian and Tobagonian 
 Ugandan 
 Ukrainian 
 Uruguayan 
 Uzbek 
 Venezuelan 
 Vietnamese 
 Western Saharan 
 Yemeni 
 Zambian 
 Zimbabwean 
 Ethnic 
 Ainu 
 Arab 
 Indonesian 
 Aromanian 
 Assyrian 
 Balochi 
 Berber 
 Cajun 
 Chinese 
 American 
 Canadian 
 Chifa 
 Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Crimean Tatar 
 Greek American 
 Hazaragi 
 Indian 
 Anglo-Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Indigenous American 
 Inuit 
 Italian American 
 Kurdish 
 Livonian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Malay 
 Ossetian 
 Parsi 
 Pashtun 
 Peranakan 
 Romani 
 Sámi 
 Soul food 
 Sylheti 
 Transylvanian Saxon 
 Yup'ik 
 Religious 
 Buddhist 
 Christian 
 Goan Catholic 
 Mangalorean Catholic 
 Mennonite 
 Hindu 
 Islamic 
 Chinese 
 Ital 
 Jain 
 Jewish 
 American 
 Ashkenazi 
 Bukharan 
 Ethiopian 
 Mizrahi 
 Sephardic 
 Syrian 
 Ritual slaughter 
 Sikh 
 Historical 
 Ancient Egyptian 
 Ancient Greek 
 Ancient Israelite 
 Ancient Roman 
 Antebellum America 
 Aztec 
 Byzantine 
 Early modern European 
 Historical Chinese 
 Historical Indian subcontinent 
 Historical North Indian and Pakistani 
 History of agriculture 
 History of alcoholic drinks 
 History of bread 
 History of seafood 
 History of vegetarianism 
 Historical Argentine 
 Historical Japanese 
 Inca 
 Mayan 
 Muisca 
 Mughal 
 Medieval 
 Ottoman 
 Peasant 
 Soviet 
 Thirteen Colonies 
 Styles 
 Classique 
 Fast food 
 Fusion 
 New American 
 Eurasian 
 Haute 
 Molecular gastronomy 
 Note by Note 
 Nouvelle 
 Lists 
 List of cuisines 
 List of historical cuisines 
 Lists of prepared foods 
 Related 
 Cookbook 
 Cooking 
 Culinary arts 
 Drink 
 Food 
 history 
 Diet 
 Meal preparation 
 
   Food portal 
   Drink portal 
   Category 
   Commons 
   Cookbook 
   WikiProject 
   Outline 
 
 Authority control   National libraries 
 France 
 BnF data 
 Israel 
 United States 
 Latvia 
 Japan 
 Other 
 IdRef 
 
  
NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw2375
Cached time: 20230311133036
Cache expiry: 1814400
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc, no‐toc‐conversion]
CPU time usage: 2.149 seconds
Real time usage: 2.470 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 29262/1000000
Post‐expand include size: 454814/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 35664/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 16/100
Expensive parser function count: 74/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 387449/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.179/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 25405367/52428800 bytes
Lua Profile:
    ?                                                                320 ms       23.5%
    MediaWiki\Extension\Scribunto\Engines\LuaSandbox\LuaSandboxCallback::callParserFunction      160 ms       11.8%
    recursiveClone <mwInit.lua:41>                                   100 ms        7.4%
    MediaWiki\Extension\Scribunto\Engines\LuaSandbox\LuaSandboxCallback::find      100 ms        7.4%
    dataWrapper <mw.lua:672>                                          80 ms        5.9%
    <mw.title.lua:50>                                                 80 ms        5.9%
    type                                                              40 ms        2.9%
    <Module:Citation/CS1:811>                                         40 ms        2.9%
    MediaWiki\Extension\Scribunto\Engines\LuaSandbox\LuaSandboxCallback::fetchLanguageNames       40 ms        2.9%
    <mw.lua:694>                                                      40 ms        2.9%
    [others]                                                         360 ms       26.5%
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/400
 
 
Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1984.460      1 -total
 35.05%  695.594      1 Template:Reflist
 11.99%  237.920     43 Template:Cite_web
  8.84%  175.366      4 Template:Navbox
  7.61%  151.026     37 Template:Transliteration
  7.36%  145.992      1 Template:Asian_topic
  6.97%  138.349     28 Template:Cite_news
  6.71%  133.202      1 Template:Culture_of_Japan
  6.59%  130.752      1 Template:Culture_of_region
  6.41%  127.293      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 
  Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:idhash:15976-0!canonical and timestamp 20230311133033 and revision id 1143640279. Rendering was triggered because: page-view
  
 esi <esi:include src="/esitest-fa8a495983347898/content" />  
 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Japanese_cuisine&oldid=1143640279 " 
 Categories :  Japanese cuisine Buddhist cuisine Hidden categories:  CS1 uses Japanese-language script (ja) Webarchive template wayback links CS1 Japanese-language sources (ja) Articles with Japanese-language sources (ja) CS1 Indonesian-language sources (id) CS1 maint: url-status Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use British English from January 2022 Use mdy dates from December 2022 Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2018 All articles containing potentially dated statements Articles containing Japanese-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2019 Articles with unsourced statements from December 2012 Articles with unsourced statements from October 2021 Interlanguage link template existing link Articles containing Cebuano-language text Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2015 Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with Curlie links Region topic template using suffix Articles with BNF identifiers Articles with J9U identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers Articles with LNB identifiers Articles with NDL identifiers Articles with SUDOC identifiers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  This page was last edited on 9 March 2023, at 00:31  (UTC) . 
 Text is available under the  Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0 ;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the  Terms of Use  and  Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the  Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. 
 
 
 Privacy policy 
 About Wikipedia 
 Disclaimers 
 Contact Wikipedia 
 Mobile view 
 Developers 
 Statistics 
 Cookie statement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
