
 
 
 Jump to content 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle sidebar 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Create account Log in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Personal tools 
 
 
 
 
   Create account   Log in 
 
 
 
 
		Pages for logged out editors  learn more 
 
 
 Contributions Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Navigation 
 
 
 Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate 
 
 
 
 
 Contribute 
 
 
 Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file 
 
 
 
 
 Tools 
 
 
 What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item 
 
 
 
 
 Print/export 
 
 
 Download as PDF Printable version 
 
 
 
 
 In other projects 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons 
 
 
 
 
 Languages 
 
 On this Wikipedia the language links are at the top of the page across from the article title.  Go to top . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CentralNotice  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Contents 
 move to sidebar 
 hide 
 
 
 
 
 (Top) 
 
 
 
 
 
 1 Definition 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 History 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 Ingredients 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4 Outlets 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5 Central Javanese cuisine 
 
 
				Toggle Central Javanese cuisine subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 5.1 Semarang 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5.2 Jepara 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5.3 Kudus 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5.4 Pati 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5.5 Yogyakarta 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5.6 Solo 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5.7 Banyumas 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5.8 Other Central Javanese cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6 East Javanese cuisine 
 
 
				Toggle East Javanese cuisine subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 6.1 Madiun 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6.2 Lamongan 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6.3 Surabaya 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6.4 Madura 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6.5 Malang 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6.6 Banyuwangi 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6.7 Other East Javanese cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 7 Common Javanese dishes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8 See also 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 9 Notes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
						Toggle the table of contents
					 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle the table of contents 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Javanese cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 7 languages 
 
 
 
 Español Français Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Jawa Bahasa Melayu Русский 
 Edit links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Article Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 English 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 More 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
 
 
 Cuisine of the Javanese people, Indonesia 
 
 
   Tumpeng  cone shaped rice surrounded with chicken, omelette eggs,  sambel goreng ati  (beef liver in  sambal ), potato  perkedel , and  tempeh   orek .  Tumpeng  is one of the most famous Javanese dishes. 
 This article is part of the series on Indonesian cuisine Masakan Indonesia 
 National dishes 
 Gado-gado 
 Nasi goreng 
 Rendang 
 Satay 
 Soto 
 Tumpeng 
 
 Regional and cultural cuisines 
 Acehnese 
 Arab 
 Balinese 
 Banjarese 
 Batak 
 Betawi 
 Chinese 
 Indian 
 Indo 
 Javanese 
 Madurese 
 Makassarese 
 Malay 
 Minahasan 
 Minangkabau 
 Palembangese 
 Peranakan 
 Sundanese 
 
 Ingredients 
 Bumbu 
 Condiments 
 Peanut sauce 
 Sambal 
 Santan 
 
 Types of food 
 Foods 
 Dishes 
 Noodles 
 Soups 
 Desserts 
 Snacks 
 Kue 
 Krupuk 
 Kripik 
 Drinks 
 Beverages 
 Alcohol 
 Coffee 
 
 Preparation and cooking 
 Main 
 Frying 
 Stir frying 
 Grilling 
 Roasting 
 Dry roasting 
 Sautéing 
 Boiling 
 Steaming 
 Other 
 Pepes 
 Pindang 
 Rendang 
 Semur 
 
 Styles 
 Nasi campur 
 Nasi padang 
 Rijsttafel 
 Tumpeng 
 Street food 
 
 Holidays and festivals 
 Kenduri 
 Lebaran  (Eid al-Fitr) 
 Naloni Mitoni 
 Natal  (Christmas) 
 Serak Gulo 
 Slametan 
 
 Related cuisines 
 Bruneian 
 Chinese 
 Dutch 
 East Timorese 
 Egyptian 
 Filipino 
 Indian 
 Malaysian 
 Portuguese 
 Singaporean 
 Sri Lankan 
 South African 
 Surinamese 
 Thai 
 Yemeni 
 
 See also 
 History 
 Etiquette 
 Cookbook: Cuisine of Indonesia 
 
   Indonesia portal   Food portal v t e 
 Nasi lemak on banana leaf.jpg This article is part of the series on Malaysian cuisine Masakan Malaysia 
 Regional and cultural cuisines 
 Chinese 
 Eurasian 
 Indian 
 Javanese 
 Malay 
 Peranakan 
 Sabah 
 Sarawak 
 
 Ingredients 
 Belacan 
 Budu 
 Gula Melaka 
 Kerisik 
 Kicap Manis 
 Pandan 
 Sambal 
 Santan 
 Tapai 
 Tempoyak 
 
 Types of food 
 Foods 
 Dishes 
 Soups 
 Kuih 
 Keropok 
 Kerepek 
 Drinks 
 Alcohol 
 
 Holidays and festivals 
 Chinese New Year 
 Hari Raya Puasa 
 Hari Raya Qurban 
 Deepavali 
 Christmas 
 Tadau Kaamatan 
 Gawai 
 
 Related cuisines 
 Bruneian 
 Chinese 
 Filipino 
 Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Singaporean 
 Thai 
 
 See also 
 History 
 Cookbook: Cuisine of Malaysia 
 
   Malaysia portal   Food portal v t e 
 Javanese cuisine  ( Indonesian :  Masakan Jawa ) is the cuisine of  Javanese people , a major  ethnic group  in  Indonesia , more precisely the province of  Central Java ,  Yogyakarta  and  East Java .
 
 
 Definition [ edit ] 
 Javanese cuisine refers exclusively to the cuisine of Javanese people, which is often brought to other regions and countries by Javanese diaspora or foreign descents who have lived in Java.
 There are several native ethnic groups who live on the island of Java (Sundanese, Madurese, Betawi, etc.) as well as other peoples of foreign descents. In Indonesian language, Javanese refers to people of Javanese ethnic background.
 Javanese cuisine is thought to be sweet, since this is the taste traditionally preferred in Yogyakarta. However, Javanese regions do not only include Yogyakarta.
 On the northern and northeastern of Central Java, for instance, the taste tend to be salty and spicy. In East Java, the level of spiciness increases. Today, as Javanese people become more mobile and may move to different regions, this typical stereotype of preferred regional tastes is outdated.
 
   Nasi kuning  with  urap , fried beef, anchovy and peanuts, potato and shrimp in  sambal . 
 History [ edit ] 
   Selamatan  traditional Javanese ceremony usually involved a communal feast of eating together. 
 Ancient dishes and recipes were mentioned in numbers of Javanese  prasasti  (inscription) and modern historians have succeeded in deciphering some of them. The inscriptions from  Medang Mataram  era circa 8th to 10th century mentioned several ancient dishes, among others are  Hadangan Harang  (water buffalo minced meat satay, similar with today Balinese  sate lilit ),  Hadangan Madura  (water buffalo meat with sweet palm sugar), and  Dundu Puyengan  (eel seasoned with lemon basil). Ancient beverages include  Nalaka Rasa  ( sugarcane juice ),  Jati Wangi  (jasmine beverage), and  Kinca  (tamarind juice). Also various  Kuluban  (boiled vegetables served in spices, similar with today  urab ) and  Phalamula  (boiled yams and tubers served with liquid palm sugar). [1] 
 In  Javanese culture , food is an integral part of traditional ceremonies. For example  selamatan  ceremony often performed as a symbol of gratitude, are usually involving a communal feast where participants, guests and attendances are invited to eat together. Food are usually prepared, cooked and served together. It also symbolizes  gotong-royong  (working together),  guyub  (harmonious communal spirit), abundance and gratitude.
 Most of Javanese cuisine is natively developed. Many of the foods have been absorbed to modern Indonesian culture as "national dishes". Some of them have inspired many other regional dishes, such as, lontong (Jav. Lonthong), tumpeng, krupuk, jajan pasar, and many more.
 Foreign influences on Javanese food can be seen in some food, such as bakmi and fried rice (Chinese), sate (Arab) and kari (Indian).
 
 Ingredients [ edit ] 
   Fresh produce including vegetables on sale in  pasar pagi  (morning wet market) in  Surabaya . 
 Rice  is an important food crop in Java, dating back to ancient times. The Javanese are known to revere  Dewi Sri  as the Rice Goddess.  Steamed rice  is the common staple food, and is served at every meal.  Tumpeng , a cone-shaped yellow rice is essential in  slametan , Javanese traditional ceremonies. Rice can be processed into  lontong  or  ketupat , or cooked in coconut milk as  nasi liwet  or colored with  turmeric  as  nasi kuning  (yellow rice). Other sources of  carbohydrate  such as  gaplek  (dried  cassava ) is sometimes mixed into rice or replaces rice.  Gaplek  is usually consumed by poor commoners during hard times when rice is scarce.  Tubers  such as  yam ,  taro , and  sweet potato  are consumed as snacks in between meals.  Bread  and  grains  other than rice are uncommon, although  noodles  and  potatoes  are often served as accompaniments to rice. Potatoes are often boiled then mashed, shaped into discs, spiced, coated in beaten  eggs  and fried into  perkedel .  Wheat noodles,  bihun  ( rice vermicelli ), and  kwetiau  are influences of  Chinese cuisine . The Javanese adopted these ingredients and made them their own by adding  kecap manis  (sweet soy sauce) and local spices to create  bakmi Jawa ,  bakmi rebus , and  bihun  goreng . Vegetables feature heavily in Javanese cuisine, notably in vegetable-heavy dishes such as  pecel ,  lotek , and  urap .
 
   Javanese complete  nasi gudeg , which consist of (from top clockwise):  krechek  (spiced buffalo skin cracker),  ayam goreng  (fried chicken),  opor  telur pindang  (spiced egg in coconut milk), and  gudeg  (unripe  jackfruit  cooked in  coconut milk ). 
 Coconut milk ,  peanut sauce ,  gula jawa  ( palm sugar ),  asem jawa  ( tamarind ),  petis ,  terasi  (shrimp paste),  shallot ,  garlic ,  turmeric ,  galangal ,  ginger , and chili  sambal  are common ingredients and spices that can be found in Javanese cuisine. Freshwater fishes such as  carp ,  tilapia ,  gourami  and  catfish  are popular, while seafood such as  tuna ,  red snapper ,  wahoo ,  ray ,  anchovy ,  shrimp ,  squid , and various  salted fish  are popular in coastal Javanese cities.  Chicken ,  goat meat ,  beef ,  lamb and mutton  are popular meats in Javanese cuisine. Next to common farmed chicken, the  ayam kampung  or  free-range  chicken, is popular and valued for its leaner, more natural flavors. Almost 90% of Javanese are  Muslim , and consequently, much of Javanese cuisine omits  pork . However, in small enclaves of  Catholic  Javanese population around  Muntilan ,  Magelang ,  Yogyakarta , and  Klaten , pork might be consumed. Few ethnic groups in Indonesia use pork and other sources of protein considered  haram  under Muslim dietary laws in their cuisine, most prominently  Balinese cuisine ,  Indonesian Chinese cuisine ,  Batak cuisine , and  Manado cuisine .
 
 Outlets [ edit ] 
 Javanese households usually purchase fresh ingredients from the local market every morning, cook and serve them in the late morning to be mainly consumed for lunch. The leftovers are stored to be heated again for family dinner. Other than homemade family dishes, Javanese cuisine are served from humble street-side carts and  warung s, to fancy restaurants in five-star hotels. Small family-run  warung s are the budget options for street food, serving everything from family dishes for full meals, or snack foods. The popular simple Javanese cuisine establishments are the budget food of  Warung Tegal,  which are mainly established by Javanese from  Tegal  city, and the  Angkringan  street-side carts in Yogyakarta and Solo that sold cheap  sego kucing  and various  wedang  (hot beverages).
 In Javanese tradition, it is common to dine in  lesehan  style, which is sitting cross-legged on the mat while dining in front of a short-legged table. It was started as a  warung  lesehan street food dining popular among tourists along  Malioboro  street in Yogyakarta. Today, Javanese  lesehan  food stalls can be found in several cities, including Surakarta, Semarang and Jakarta.
 
 
 Javanese cuisine outlets 
 
 
 
 Food display in  warung Tegal .
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Street-side Javanese chicken satay vendor near  Borobudur .
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lesehan  sit on the mat dining at Malioboro street, Yogyakarta.
 
 
 
 
 Central Javanese cuisine [ edit ] 
 The food in  Central Java  is influenced by the two ancient kingdoms of  Yogyakarta  and  Surakarta  (also commonly known as Solo). Most of Central Javanese dishes are indigenously developed, however in coastal cities such as  Semarang  and  Pekalongan , notable  Chinese  influences can be seen, such as  lumpia  (spring roll) and  bakmi Jawa . While in the royal court of Surakarta, the European influences can be seen, such as  bistik Jawa  and  selat Solo . Many of Central Java-specific dishes contain the names of the area where the food first became popular, for example:
 
 Semarang [ edit ] 
   Soto  Semarang, a variant of  soto  from Semarang. It is a  chicken  soup with rice  vermicelli  and  tomato , served with potato  perkedel , fried  tempeh , and  satay  of  cockles  and chicken intestines, with  lime  and  krupuk  (crackers). 
 Bandeng  Juwana : processed tender boned  milkfish  originated from the fishing town of  Juwana , east of Semarang. Although originated, produced and processed in Juwana, it is largely sold in Semarang. 
 Lumpia   Semarang : fried or steamed spring rolls. The filling varies, but consists mainly of meat and  bamboo  shoots. It is served with sweet fermented soybean sauce ( tauco ) or sweet  garlic  sauce. Another accompaniment is  acar  (Indonesian-style sweet and sour  cucumber  pickle) and chili. 
 Nasi ayam : a dish composed of rice, chicken, egg,  tofu , and served with a sweet-salty  coconut milk  gravy. 
 Roti ganjel rel , rectangular shaped brown bread with sesame seeds, flavored with cinnamon and palm sugar. Usually served during Dugderan and  Ramadan . 
 Soto  Semarang : a chicken soup in a small personal serving; mixed with rice,  perkedel , and satay of cockles, chicken intestines, and  quail  eggs. Named after Bangkong crossroad in Semarang. 
 Wingko  Babat : a cake made largely of  glutinous rice  and desiccated coconut, toasted and sold warm. Although it originated from Babat, East Java, it is popular in Semarang. Care should be taken to differentiate between Babat and  babat . Babat is a city in East Java, part of the North Coast Road and where  wingko  Babat came from, while  babat  is  tripe , an ingredient often used for Indonesian cuisine in general. 
 Jepara [ edit ] 
   Sate sapi Jepara , Jepara beef satay. 
 Soto   Jepara :  soto  is a common Indonesian soup, usually infused with  turmeric , and can be made with chicken, beef, or mutton. The version from Jepara, a Central Javanese town, is made of chicken. 
 Opor panggang :  a typical  opor  from Jepara. It is a kind of  opor ayam  but with distinctive flavor, since the chicken used in this dish is first roasted in a clay cauldron. 
 Kuluban : traditional salad from  Jepara Regency . 
 Kelap antep : dish made from lean meat, ginger, bay leaves, red onion, garlic, red chili, tamarind, sugar, and others. 
 Horok-horok : steamed corn starch. After being cooked, corn starch is then poured into jars and stirred with a comb. So although chewy and tough, it is shaped in small granules resembling  Styrofoam . To add flavor, a pinch of salt can be added. This dish can be served as an accompaniment to meatballs,  gado-gado ,  pecel , or satay  kikil  (beef tendon). 
 Hoyok-hoyok : also called  oyol-oyol , is a dish made from tapioca flour mixed with water and oil, then served with extra grated coconut.  Hoyok-hoyok  is a sweet version of  horok-horok . 
 Jepara shrimp soup : similar to shrimp soup in general. This version of soup use shrimp broth and fried shrimp, also raw crushed chili. This soup is delicious eaten while still hot or warm. 
 Jepara  pangsit  soup : considered as a fusion cuisine, this dish is a blend of local and foreign cuisines, i.e. Javanese, Dutch, and Chinese. The  pangsit  (dumpling) in this soup is not like the dumpling we know, but rather in the form of a clear soup with shrimp egg rolls. This is one of the favorite dishes of  R.A. Kartini . 
 Bongko mento : originated in Jepara palace, it is a snack wrapped in a banana leaf. Consists of omelet filled with sauteed shredded chicken breast mixed with oyster mushrooms, glass noodles, and coconut milk. 
 Lontong krubyuk : similar to  lontong  dishes in general, this dish consists of rice cake served with shredded chicken meat stews doused in  bakso  soup and garnished with a mixture of half-cooked bean sprouts and sliced celery. What distinguishes this from other  lontong  dishes, this dish is served with a lot of soup. 
 Singit : beef shank cooked in coconut milk, soy sauce, salt, red chili, garlic, onion, and brown sugar, over low heat until the sauce thickens. 
 Semur  Jepara : made of meat, salt, pepper, nutmeg powder, soy sauce, cooking oil, and others. 
 Sayur pepaya  Jepara : a vegetable stew usually served in the afternoon. The main ingredients are young papaya, coconut milk, beef stew, and others. 
 Sayur asem  Jepara : similar to  sayur asem  Jakarta. 
 Sayur betik : a vegetable stew, using young unripe papaya and beef trimming as the main ingredients. 
 Gule petih  Jepara : made of tender goat meat and spice mixture. Usually served during  Eid al-Fitr  and  Eid al-Adha . 
 Laksa  Jepara : made of chicken fillet, banana shrimp, chicken stock, coconut milk, lemongrass, kaffir lime leaves, salt, sugar, oil, and other ingredients. 
 Sayur keluak ayam : made of vegetables,  keluak  and chicken. 
 Kagape kambing : a dish made of goat meat. Easily found during  Eid al-Adha . 
 Bakso  Karimunjawa : meatballs soup made from fish, instead of beef or chicken. 
 Tongseng  cumi :  tongseng  made of calamari or squid, instead of goat or chicken. 
 Rempah  Jepara : a dish made from grated coconut, fish, and others. 
 Bontosan : a dish of mashed grouper or mackerel mixed with rice powder and shaped into spindles, wrapped in banana leaves or plastic, steamed, then thickly sliced, and served with sauce or gravy.  Bontosan  is actually the pre-dried form of fish crackers. It can also be served after being shallow-fried until the outside is crisp and golden brown. Similar in taste to  pempek . 
 Sate sapi  Jepara : satay made of cow meat mixed with spices typical of Jepara. 
 Sate kikil : a satay dish made of  kikil  (beef tendon), also called satay  cecek.  Usually served with  horok-horok . 
 Pecel ikan laut panggang : roasted saltwater fish served with coconut milk sauce. 
 Tempong : uncooked dried anchovy, shaped like fritter. 
 Kudus [ edit ] 
   Indonesian stamp displaying  soto Kudus . 
 Jenang  Kudus : A sweetmeat made from rice flour, palm sugar, and coconut milk. 
 Opor bakar 
 Soto   Kudus :  soto  is a common Indonesian soup usually infused with  turmeric , and can be made with chicken, beef, or mutton. The version from Kudus, a Central Javanese town, is made of chicken. 
 Pati [ edit ] 
   Nasi Gandul 
 Bandeng presto : is a  pressure cooked  milkfish that soften the finer fish bones. The pressure cooking also help the spices to seep into the flesh of milkfish perfectly. 
 Nasi gandul : is beef served on white steamed rice poured with spicy savoury soup, served on banana leaf. 
 Petis runting : is a kind of gulai typical culinary of Pati. Soupy but somewhat viscous, made from a rather coarse rice flour roasted with goat meat and  balungan  or goat bones, including bone marrows, and usually enjoyed while it hot to avoid the fatty bone marrow coagulating. 
 Sayur mangut : is a hot and spicy Ariid catfish head cooked in coconut milk. 
 Sayur tempe bosok : is a kind of curry-soup made from stinky over-ripe (almost rotten) tempeh. Popularly consumed during the rainy season against the cold. 
 Soto kemiri : is a common Javanese chicken soup spiced with candlenut. 
 Yogyakarta [ edit ] 
   Ayam goreng  Kalasan with  kremes , seasoned fried chicken with crispy fried flour granules. 
   Nasi brongkos , spicy meat and beans stew. 
 Ayam geprek : crispy  battered   fried chicken  crushed and mixed with hot and spicy  sambal . [2] 
 Ayam goreng   Kalasan : chicken stewed in  coriander ,  garlic ,  candlenut , and coconut water, then deep-fried until crispy. Served with  sambal  and raw vegetables. 
 Bakpia  and  bakpia pathok : a sweet pastry filled with sugared mung bean paste, derived from the Chinese pastry. A well-known bakpia-producing area is Pathok near  Jalan Malioboro , where  bakpia Pathok  is sold. 
 Belalang goreng : fried  grasshopper  dish. 
 Brongkos : spicy meat and  tolo  beans (black-eyed peas) stew in coconut milk and  kluwek  soup with othert spices. 
 Gudeg : a traditional food from Yogyakarta [3]  and  Central Java  made from young unripe  nangka  ( jack fruit ) boiled for several hours with  palm sugar  and  coconut milk . This is usually accompanied by  opor ayam  (chicken in coconut milk),  telur pindang  (hard boiled egg stew), and  krechek  (spicy beef skin and tofu stew).  Gudeg  from Yogyakarta has a unique sweet and savory taste, and is drier and more reddish than other regional variants because of the addition of Javanese  teak  leaf. 
 Kipo : derived from the  Javanese  question  Iki opo?  ("What is this?"), a small sweet snack from  Kotagede  made of glutinous rice flour and coconut milk dough filled with grated coconut and palm sugar. 
 Krechek  (also known as  krecek  or  sambal goreng krechek ): a traditional spicy beef skin dish made from seasoned  krupuk kulit  (beef skin crackers).  Krechek  is usually served as a side dish together with  gudeg . 
 Nasi kucing : rice with small side dishes. 
 Wedhang ronde  ( ronde ): a hot Javanese dessert of glutinous rice balls stuffed with peanut paste, floating in a hot and sweet ginger and lemongrass tea. 
 Wedhang angsle  ( angsle ): a hot soupy dessert of sago pearls, pre-cooked glutinous rice and mung beans,  putu mayang  (brightly colored, noodle-shaped flour cakes), and fried peanuts, covered in hot and sweet coconut milk. 
 Wedhang uwuh  ( uwuh ) ( id ): a hot Javanese  clove  drink. 
 Solo [ edit ] 
   Nasi liwet warung  in Solo. 
 Bakso  Solo : bakso literally means meatballs, made of  beef , and served in boiling hot soup with  mung bean -thread noodles, green vegetables, shredded  cabbage , and various sauces (chili, tomato). This version from Solo has super-sized meatballs, the size of tennis balls. Also known as  Bakso Tenis .  Bakso  is a Chinese-influenced dish, but has become a popular snack throughout Indonesia. 
 Bistik  Jawa : Javanese  beef   steak , a European-influenced dish from  Solo. 
 Nasi liwet : a rice dish cooked in  coconut milk  and  chicken  broth, served with meat and vegetable side dishes. 
 Sate buntel  (lit: wrapped satay): Minced fatty beef or goat meat, encased in  caul fat  and wrapped around a bamboo skewer then grilled. The size of this satay is quite large, very similar to a Middle Eastern  kebab . After being grilled on  charcoal , the meat is separated from the skewer, cut into bite-size chunks, then served in sweet soy sauce and  merica  ( pepper ). 
 Selat  Solo : a  salad  consisting of stewed  beef ,  lettuce ,  carrot , green bean, and potato chips or  French fries  in sweet spiced dressing. 
 Sosis  solo , Javanese sausages made from beef or chicken and coated by egg. 
 Srabi  Solo : a pancake made of coconut milk, mixed with a little rice flour as thickener.  Srabi  can be served plain or with toppings, such as sliced  banana , chopped  jackfruit , chocolate sprinkle ( muisjes ), or  cheese . 
 Tongseng : a strongly spiced curry of bone-in mutton, which is quickly stir-fried at the point of sale with vegetables added. 
 Tengkleng :  goat  ribs and  offal  in a curry-like soup, similar to  gule kambing , but with a lighter and thinner soup. 
 Timlo  Solo : a beef and vegetable soup. Some versions also have noodles. [4] 
 Banyumas [ edit ] 
   Frying tempeh  mendoan . 
 Refers to Javanese cultural region of Western Central Java bordering West Java, including  Banyumas ,  Tegal ,  Brebes ,  Cilacap ,  Kebumen ,  Purbalingga , and  Banjarnegara .
 
 Nasi bogana   Tegal : a steamed rice dish wrapped in banana leaves and served with a variety of side dishes. 
 Sate  Tegal  or  Sate Balibul : juvenile (five-month-old) goat  satay  from Tegal, noted for its tender meat. 
 Sate  Ambal : a satay variant from Ambal, Kebumen, Central Java. This satay uses  ayam kampung ( free-range chicken). The sauce is not made from peanuts, but rather ground tempeh, chili, and spices. The chicken is marinated for about two hours to make the meat tastier. This satay is served with  ketupat . 
 Sroto  Sokaraja : a variant of  soto  from Sokaraja, Banyumas. 
 Teh poci   Tegal : tea brewed in a clay teapot, served with  rock sugar . Tegal, a Central Java town, is a major producer of high-quality tea. 
 Tempeh  mendoan : fried battered  tempeh  from Banyumas. 
 Other Central Javanese cuisine [ edit ] 
 Bakmoy : small cubes of fried tofu, chicken, and boiled egg served with chicken broth and relish made from sweet soy sauce. 
 Kamir : round-shaped bread that almost similar to  apem , consisting of flour, butter, and egg mixture. 
 Krechek : spicy stew made from  skin cracker , potato and soy beans. 
 Mie kopyok  (lit. shaked noodles): a noodle soup made of garlic broth, rice cake, fried tofu, and rice cracker. 
 Mie ongklok : boiled noodles were made using cabbage, chunks of chopped leaves, and starchy thick soup called  loh . Usually served with  satay  and  tempeh . 
 Nasi megono , rice dish with chopped young  jackfruit  mixed with coconut and other spices. 
 Sate   Blora : chicken satay from Blora area. 
 Sop senerek , traditional soup from Magelang with beef, red bean, carrot, tomato, celery, and  fried shallots . 
 Swikee   Purwodadi : frogs' legs cooked in fermented soybean ( tauco ) soup. 
 East Javanese cuisine [ edit ] 
 The East Javanese cuisine is largely influenced by  Madurese  cuisine - Madura being a major producer of  salt , hence the omission of  sugar  in many dishes. Many of the East Javanese dishes are also typically Madurese, such as  soto  Madura and  sate  Madura, usually sold by Madurese settlers. Notable Arabic and Indian cuisine influence also can be found such in the coastal cities of  Tuban ,  Gresik ,  Surabaya ,  Lamongan , and  Sidoarjo , due to the large number of  Arabic  descendants in these cities. Although there are many dishes with town names attached to them, local versions of these are available in every town. The most popular town-associated dishes are:
 
 Madiun [ edit ] 
   Pecel , boiled vegetables served with peanut sauce. 
 Brem  Madiun : fermented sugar and  cassava  cakes. 
 Pecel   Madiun : a salad of boiled vegetables, dressed in a  peanut -based spicy sauce. It is usually served as an accompaniment to rice. A peanut or dried fish/ shrimp  cracker ( rempeyek ) is served on the side. Not to be confused with  pecel lele , which is deep-fried local  catfish  served with  sambal . 
 Lamongan [ edit ] 
 Ayam penyet : fried chicken (see  ayam goreng ), lightly smashed using a pestle in a mortar laced with  sambal . 
 Bebek goreng : deep fried  duck , similar to  duck confit . 
 Pecel lele : deep fried  catfish  with  sambal , vegetables, and  rice . 
 Soto   Lamongan : chicken soup originated from the town of Lamongan. 
 Tahu campur : fried  tofu , served in  petis -based beef stew. 
 Surabaya [ edit ] 
   Rujak cingur , specialty of Surabaya. 
 Ayam penyet : "smashed chicken", fried chicken that is smashed with the pestle against mortar to make it softer, served with sambal, slices of cucumbers, fried tofu and tempeh. 
 Lontong kupang :  lontong  with small cockles in  petis sauce . 
 Rawon  Surabaya : a dark beef soup, served with  mung bean  sprouts and the ubiquitous  sambal . The dark (almost black) color comes from the kluwak ( Pangium edule ) nuts. 
 Rujak cingur : [5]  a marinated  cow  snout or lips and noses ( cingur ), served with boiled vegetables and shrimp crackers. It is then dressed in a sauce made of caramelized fermented shrimp paste ( petis ), peanuts,  chili , and spices. It is usually served with  lontong , a boiled rice cake.  Rujak cingur  is considered traditional food of  Surabaya  in  East Java . 
 Semanggi : a salad made of boiled  semanggi  ( M. crenata ) leaves that grow in paddy fields. It is dressed in a spicy peanut sauce. 
 Madura [ edit ] 
 Sate   Madura : originating on the island of Madura, near Java, is a famous variant among Indonesians. Most often made from  mutton  or chicken, the recipe's main characteristic is the black sauce made from Indonesian sweet soy sauce ( kecap manis ) mixed with  palm sugar  (called  gula jawa  or "Javanese sugar" in Indonesia),  garlic , deep fried  shallots , peanut paste,  petis  (a kind of shrimp paste),  candlenut , and salt. Chicken Madura satay is usually served in peanut sauce, while the mutton Madura satay is usually served in sweet soy sauce. Sate Madura uses smaller chunks of meat than other variants. It is eaten with rice or rice cakes wrapped in  banana /coconut leaves ( lontong/ketupat ). Raw thinly sliced shallots and plain  sambal  are often served as condiments. 
 Soto   Madura : a  turmeric -based beef and  offal  soup, served with boiled egg slices, and  sambal . 
 Malang [ edit ] 
   Bakso  Malang, meatball and fried wonton soup from Malang, East Java. Sometimes also called  bakwan  Malang. 
 Bakso  Malang :  bakso  literally means meatball.  Bakso  Malang has more accompaniments, beside the meatball (mostly beef) itself. For example, offal,  siomay  dumplings (fried or steamed),  tahu  (tofu, fried or steamed, filled with meat),  soun  (mung bean threads), and yellow egg noodles. All of these are served in hot beef stock. 
 Cwie mi : a Chinese-influenced noodle dish, containing boiled and seasoned noodles, topped with pre-cooked minced meat (usually  pork  or chicken) and boiled  wonton . Similar to the Chinese  zhajiang mian . 
 Banyuwangi [ edit ] 
 Bolu klemben : cake with tortoise-like shape, made of mixture of flour, eggs, and sugar. 
 Botok tawon : a type of  botok  that made from  bee  larvae. 
 Pelasan , Osing-style of  pepes  food. The popular Osing pepes are  pelasan teri ,  pelasan tahu  and  pelasan ayam . 
 Pindang  koyong : a fish cooked in yellow gravy-like  soto  with various spices. 
 Rawon   Banyuwangi : Banyuwangi-style of beef soup in dark gravy, served with mung bean sprouts and the ubiquitous sambal. The dark (almost black) color comes from the  keluak  nuts. 
 Rujak soto : a unique blend of vegetable salad with  soto , it can be  soto daging  (beef) or  soto babat . 
 Sale pisang :  chips -like snack that made of  bananas  which are combed thin and then dried in the sun. After dried in the sun, it can be directly eaten or fried first. 
 Other East Javanese cuisine [ edit ] 
   Sate Ponorogo 
 Kare rajungan :  curry  dish cooked using  portunidae . 
 Lontong balap : literally means "racing rice cake", which is a dish of rice cakes, fried tofu, and beansprouts, doused in  kecap manis  and  sambal  sauce. In the past,  lontong balap  hawkers carried their wares in a large, heavy metal urn. The heaviness caused them to have to walk really quickly while carrying it, so they looked like they were "racing". 
 Madumongso : a sweetmeat made from fermented black glutinous rice, cooked in coconut milk and sugar. It is sticky and very sweet, and comes wrapped in corn husk. 
 Roti konde : a type of roti canai. Their recipes are quite similar and influenced by  Indian   paratha . 
 Sate  Ponorogo : a variant of  satay  originating in  Ponorogo , a town in East Java. It is made from sliced marinated chicken, served with a sauce made of peanuts and chili, and garnished with shredded shallots,  sambal , and  lime  juice. This variant is unique for the fact that each skewer contains one large piece of chicken, rather than several small cubes. The meat is marinated in spices and sweet soy sauce, in a process called " bacem " and is served with rice or  lontong  (rice cake). The grill is made from  terracotta  earthenware with a hole on one side to allow ventilation for the coals. After three months of use, the earthenware grill disintegrates and must be replaced. 
 Tahu campur : a beef and offal soup, mixed with fresh vegetables,  potatoes , rice cake, and tofu. The secret ingredient is the caramelized fermented shrimp paste ( petis ) which is mixed in just before serving. 
 Tahu tek-tek : a dish containing cut-up fried  tofu , boiled vegetables (mostly beansprouts), potatoes, drenched in a peanut-based sauce. The sauce has caramelized fermented shrimp paste ( petis ), chili, and  garlic . 
 Common Javanese dishes [ edit ] 
 Common Javanese dishes Ayam kecap Botok Donat jawa Gorengan Iga penyet Keripik   tempe Lumpia Mie rebus Nasi ambeng Nasi kari Sayur bening Sayur lodeh Telur pindang Tempeh bacem Tiwul Urap sayur 
 These are the common Javanese dishes, which can be found throughout Java regardless of the location.
 
 Apem , traditional cake of steamed dough made of  rice flour , coconut milk, yeast and palm sugar, usually served with grated coconut. [6] 
 Ayam bumbu rujak , chicken dish made from chicken meat which is still young and uses a red basic spice then grilled. A red base is a spice made from salt, garlic, onion, and red chili. 
 Ayam goreng ,  fried chicken  dish consisting of chicken deep fried in oil with various spices. [7] 
 Ayam kecap , chicken simmered or braised in  sweet soy sauce . 
 Bakmi jawa , wheat based noodle, generally prepared and topped with minced chicken seasoned in soy sauce, green vegetables and a bowl of  broth . 
 Bakso ,  bakso  literally means  meatball . Beef or chicken meatballs, usually served in a bowl of  broth  with yellow noodles,  rice vermicelli , vegetables, tofu, green cabbage, bean sprout, sprinkled with  fried shallots  and celery. 
 Bakwan , fried meal consisting of vegetables and batter. [8]  Bakwan usually refers to a vegetable fritter snack, commonly sold with  gorengan . 
 Bergedel , fried patties, made of ground potatoes, minced meat, peeled and ground corn or  tofu , or minced fish. 
 Bergedel jagung , corn fritters. 
 Botok , a dish made from shredded coconut flesh which has been squeezed of its coconut milk, often mixed with other ingredients such as vegetable or fish, and wrapped in banana leaf and steamed. 
 Brengkesan , fish, meat, tofu, anchovy or mushroom ingredients cooked inside a banana-leaf package. 
 Bubur ayam , rice  congee  with shredded chicken meat served with some  condiments  and cake. 
 Bubur kacang hijau , sweet dessert made from  mung beans   porridge  with coconut milk and palm sugar or cane sugar. The beans are boiled till soft, and sugar and coconut milk are added. 
 Bubur ketan hitam , sweet dessert made from black  glutinous rice  porridge with coconut milk and palm sugar or cane sugar. The black glutinous rice are boiled until soft, and sugar and coconut milk are added. 
 Bubur sumsum , white  congee  made from rice flour and eaten with brown sugar sauce. 
 Buntil , a traditional Javanese dish of scraped coconut meat mixed with  anchovies  and spices, wrapped in a papaya leaf, then boiled in coconut milk. 
 Cah kangkung , stir fried  water spinach . 
 Dawet , an iced sweet  dessert  that contains droplets of green rice flour jelly,  coconut milk  and palm sugar syrup. 
 Donat jawa , Javanese-style of ring-shaped fritter made from cassava with savoury taste. 
 Garang asem , chicken dish cooked using banana leaves and dominated by sour and spicy flavor. 
 Gorengan , assorted fritters such as tempeh, tofu, yam, sweet potato, cassava, and chopped vegetables. 
 Gule , a type of soupy curry-like dishes that could be made from various ingredients; meats, fish or vegetables. The gule that popular in Javanese cuisine both are  gule kambing  (made of goat or mutton) and  gule ayam  (made of chicken).
 Gule ayam , chicken cooked in a curry-like coconut milk soup. 
 Gule kambing , mutton cooked in a curry-like coconut milk soup. 
 Iga penyet  (lit. squeeze ribs), fried beef spare ribs served with spicy sambal terasi. The fried beef ribs is squeezed against a mortar filled with sambal, and usually served with lalab vegetables and steamed rice. 
 Ikan asin , salted and sun-dried fishes of various species. 
 Jenang , sweet toffee-like sugar palm-based confection, made from coconut milk, jaggery, and rice flour, and is sticky, thick, and sweet. [9] [10] 
 Kare , the Javanese adaptation of  curry  dishes. Just like gulai, it could be made from various ingredients; meats or vegetables. 
 Klepon , glutinous rice balls stuffed with palm sugar, colored green using  pandanus  leaf, and rolled in fresh grated coconut. 
 Keripik   tempe ,  tempeh  chips, made from thinly sliced, lightly battered, then deep fried tempeh (soybean cake). 
 Kupat , rice  dumpling  made from rice packed inside a diamond-shaped container of woven palm leaf pouch. 
 Kwetiau ayam , boiled  flat noodle  with diced chicken. 
 Kwetiau goreng , stir fried flat noodle dish. 
 Lepet , sticky rice  dumpling  mixed with peanuts cooked with coconut milk and packed inside a  janur  (young coconut leaf) or  palm leaf . 
 Lontong , pressed  rice cake  inside banana wrapping. 
 Lumpia ,  spring roll  made of thin paper-like or crepe-like pastry skin called "lumpia wrapper" enveloping savory or sweet fillings. 
 Lotek , almost identical to  gado-gado , but sweeter. It is similar to  pecel , but includes different vegetables as well as boiled egg slices and a garnish of fish or shrimp crackers and  emping  ( Gnetum gnemon L.  nut, flattened, dried, and fried into small thin crackers). 
 Martabak , stuffed pancake or pan-fried bread, sometimes filled with beef and scallions. Usually served with  sambals  and  acar . 
 Mie ayam , chicken  bakmi  dish of seasoned yellow wheat noodles topped with diced chicken meat. 
 Mie bakso ,  bakso  served with yellow noodles and rice vermicelli 
 Mie goreng , spicy fried noodle dish seasoned in  sweet soy sauce . The popular one is  mie goreng jawa . 
 Mie pangsit , noodle soup dish served with soft-boiled  wonton . 
 Mie rebus , famous noodle dish which consists of noodles, salt and egg, served with a tangy, spicy and sweet potato-based sauce. 
 Nasi ambeng , fragrant Javanese rice dish that consists of  steamed white rice , chicken  curry  or chicken stewed in soy sauce, beef or chicken  rendang , fried  sambal ,  urap ,  bergedel , and  serundeng . 
 Nasi goreng  (lit. fried rice), Javanese-style of Indonesian fried rice.
 Nasi goreng jawa , fried rice dish uses  sambal  ulek as seasoning and has a spicy taste. 
 Nasi kare  (lit. curry rice), curry rice dish consists of steamed white rice,  lontong  or  ketupat , curry, acar, fried shallots and sambals. 
 Nasi kuning , similar to  nasi rames  or  nasi campur , but the rice is cooked in coconut milk and colored bright yellow using  turmeric  and scented with lemongrass and kaffir lime leaves. 
 Nasi rames , rice with accompaniments, usually some curried vegetable stew ( sayur lodeh ), a selection of cooked fish or chicken or meat and offal pieces, and a dollop of spicy  sambal . 
 Pangsit , wonton filled with vegetables, chicken or shrimp. It can be dry or wet. 
 Pecel , a type of peanut sauce with chili [11]  is a common ingredients in Javanese cuisine. It is used in various type of  rujak  and  gado-gado . It can also be used as stand alone sauce with rice and prawn, egg and vegetables as  nasi pecel  ( pecel  rice). [12] 
 Petis , black-colored shrimp paste. 
 Putu , traditional cylindrical-shaped and green-colored steamed cake, made of rice flour called suji and colored green with extract acquired from  pandan leaf , filled with  palm sugar , and steamed in  bamboo tubes , hence its name, and served with grated coconut. 
 Puyonghai ,  omelette  dish made from the mixture of vegetables such as carrots, bean sprouts, and cabbages, mixed with meats such as crab meat, shrimp, or minced chicken. 
 Rempeyek , deep-fried savoury Javanese cracker made from  flour  (usually  rice flour ) with other ingredients, bound or coated by crispy flour batter. The most common type of rempeyek is peanut  peyek . 
 Rengginang , thick rice cracker, made from cooked  glutinous sticky rice  and seasoned with spices, made into a flat and rounded shape, and then sun-dried. The sun-dried rengginang is deep fried with ample cooking oil to produce a crispy rice cracker. 
 Roti bakar  (lit. grilled bread), Javanese-style of toast sandwich consisting of two slice of breads and the filling, usually  hagelslag  or  jam . 
 Rujak , traditional fruit and vegetable salad dish. There are many kinds of rujak. 
 Sambal , chili sauce or paste typically made from a mixture of a variety of chili peppers with secondary ingredients such as shrimp paste, garlic, ginger, shallot, scallion, palm sugar, and lime juice. Sambal has many various types. 
 Satay , skewered grilled meat is a common dish in Java. The Javanese variants are  sate  Tegal,  sate  Ambal,  sate  Solo,  sate buntel ,  sate  Madura,  sate  Ponorogo, etc. 
 Sayur bening ,  spinach  and  corn  in clear soup flavoured with  temu kunci . 
 Sayur lodeh , assorted vegetables, stewed in coconut milk. 
 Semur jawa , meat (mainly beef or chicken) or vegetable (mainly potato or eggplant) stew, that is braised in thick brown gravy. The main ingredient used in  semur  gravy is  sweet soy sauce ,  shallots ,  onions ,  garlic ,  ginger ,  candlenut ,  nutmeg  and  cloves , sometimes  pepper ,  coriander ,  cumin  and  cinnamon  might be added. [13] 
 Serabi , rice pancake that is made from rice flour with coconut milk or shredded coconut as an emulsifier. 
 Sop buntut , oxtail soup. 
 Soto , this Indonesian soup dish is also a common dish in Java. The Javanese variants are common  soto ayam  and  soto babat  ( tripe ),  soto  Kudus,  soto  Madura,  soto  Lamongan, etc. 
 Tahu , fermented soy food basically a soy milk cheese. It can be fried, stir fried, stewed, as soup ingredient, even also for sweets. 
 Tahu goreng , deep fried  tofu  prepared with some condiments, such as  shrimp paste ,  sambal ,  fried shallots ,  mayonnaise  or  soy sauce . 
 Tapai , traditional fermented preparation of rice or other starchy foods. 
 Telur pindang , marbled eggs boiled with herbs and spices. 
 Tempeh , a  meat substitute  made from  soy bean  fermented with  mold . It is a staple source of protein in Java and popular in the world as an excellent meat substitute for  vegetarians .
 Tempe bacem ,  tempeh  that  stewed  in coconut sugar and spices, then deep-fried. It has sweet and savoury flavour. 
 Tempeh burger ,  hamburger  with  tempeh  as main ingredient, a Javanese fusion dish. 
 Tempe penyet , fried tempeh mixed with  sambal  chili paste in a mortar and pestle. Usually served in addition to other  penyet  dishes, such as  ayam penyet  (chicken) or  iga penyet  (ribs). 
 Terang bulan , bread like puff with sugar, corn, and coarse nut in the middle. 
 Tiwul , boiled rice substitution made from dried  cassava . 
 Tumis sayuran , stir-fried vegetables, usually mixed with chili and a spice paste. 
 Tumpeng , a rice served in the shape of a  conical volcano , [14]  usually with rice colored yellow using  turmeric . It is an important part of ceremony in Java.  Tumpeng  served in important events such as birthday, moving house, or other ceremonies. [15]  Traditionally,  tumpeng  is served alongside fried chicken, boiled egg, vegetables, and goat meat on a round plate made from  bamboo  called  besek . 
 Untir-untir , dough twist that is fried in peanut oil. It has a shiny and golden look with crispy taste. 
 Urap sayur , vegetables in spiced grated coconut dressing. 
 Jajan pasar , several types of shaped and colored flour, rice flour, and glutinous rice flour cakes, sprinkled with desiccated coconut and drizzled with melted palm sugar.  Jajan  literally means snack, and  pasar  means market, as this snack is usually found in traditional markets. 
 See also [ edit ] 
 
 Food portal Drink portal Indonesia portal 
   Gorengan  ("fried snacks") in a market at  Dieng Plateau ,  Central Java . 
 Indonesian cuisine 
 Sundanese cuisine 
 Madurese cuisine 
 List of Indonesian dishes 
 Notes [ edit ] 
 
 
 ^   "Hanya Ada Di Candi Sojiwan: Menu Hidangan Raja Mataram Kuno" .  TEMPO.CO  (in Indonesian). 22 February 2017. 
 
 ^   "Three places to enjoy fiery hot 'ayam geprek' " .  The Jakarta Post . Retrieved  30 December  2019 . 
 
 ^   Tempat Makan Favorit di 6 Kota . AgroMedia. 2008. p. 136.  ISBN   9789790061668 . 
 
 ^   Planet, L.; Berkmoes, R.V.; Brash, C.; Cohen, M.; Elliott, M.; Mitra, G.; Noble, J.; Skolnick, A.; Stewart, I.; Waters, S. (2010).  Lonely Planet Indonesia . Travel Guide. Lonely Planet Publications.  ISBN   978-1-74220-348-5 . Retrieved  30 January  2015 . 
 
 ^   Tania, Vania (2008).  Djakabaia: Djalan-djalan dan Makan-makan . Gramedia Pustaka Utama.  ISBN   978-979-223923-2 . 
 
 ^   "Kue Apem Kukus"  (in Indonesian). Sajian Sedap. 16 December 2010 . Retrieved  25 June  2015 . 
 
 ^   Lang, Rebecca (26 May 2015).  Fried Chicken: Recipes for the Crispy, Crunchy, Comfort-Food Classic [A Cookbook] . Potter/Ten Speed/Harmony/Rodale.  ISBN   978-1-60774-725-3 . 
 
 ^   No Money, No Honey: A study of street traders and prostitutes in Jakarta by Alison Murray. Oxford University Press, 1992. Glossary page xi 
 
 ^   Bhuwon Sthapit; Hugo A.H. Lamers; V. Ramanatha Rao; Arwen Bailey, eds. (2016).  Tropical Fruit Tree Diversity: Good Practices for in Situ and On-farm Conservation, Issues in Agricultural Biodiversity . Routledge.  ISBN   9781317636229 . 
 
 ^   Wibisono Notodirdjo (7 August 2011).  "Sweet treats from the past" .  The Jakarta Post . Jakarta. 
 
 ^   Witton, Patrick; Mark Elliott; Paul Greenway; Virginia Jealous (2003).  Indonesia . Lonely Planet. p. 108.  ISBN   978-1-74059-154-6 . 
 
 ^   Soebroto, Chris (2004).  Indonesia OK!!: the guide with a gentle twist . Galangpress Group. p. 72.  ISBN   978-979-934179-2 . 
 
 ^   Ganie, Suryatini N. (2009).  27 Resep Hidangan Nasi Khas Indonesia not Only Nasi Goreng  (in Indonesian). Gramedia Pustaka Utama.  ISBN   9789792244519 . 
 
 ^   Kim, Hyung-Jun (2006).  Reformist Muslims in Yogyakarta Village: the Islamic transformation of contemporary socio-religious life . ANU E Press. p. 126.  ISBN   978-1-920942-34-2 . 
 
 ^   Sri Owen, Sri Owen (1999).  Indonesian Regional Food and Cookery . frances lincoln ltd. p. 173.  ISBN   978-0-7112-1273-2 . 
 
 
 v t e   Indonesian cuisine  by  ethnicity Dishes Common Indonesian dishes 
 Abon 
 Acar 
 Ayam bakar 
 Ayam goreng 
 Ayam kecap 
 Ayam kodok 
 Bakmi 
 Bakpau 
 Bakso 
 Bakwan 
 Bihun goreng 
 Bubur ayam 
 Bubur kacang hijau 
 Bubur ketan hitam 
 Bubur sumsum 
 Gado-gado 
 Gorengan 
 Gulai 
 Ikan asin 
 Ikan bakar 
 Ikan goreng 
 Jagung rebus 
 Kacang rebus 
 Kari 
 Kari ayam 
 Kari domba 
 Kari kambing 
 Kari udang 
 Kuaci 
 Ketupat 
 Laksa 
 Lontong 
 Macaroni schotel 
 Martabak 
 Mi bakso 
 Mi goreng 
 Mi kuah 
 Nasi campur 
 Nasi goreng 
 Nasi kari 
 Nasi kuning 
 Nasi bakar 
 Otak-otak 
 Panekuk 
 Pastel tutup 
 Perkedel 
 Perkedel jagung 
 Pindang 
 Rendang 
 Rijsttafel 
 Roti bakar 
 Roti bolen 
 Roti meses 
 Rujak 
 Sambal 
 Sambal goreng udang 
 Satay 
 Sayur bayam 
 Sayur sop 
 Semur 
 Serundeng 
 Sop buntut 
 Soto 
 Soto ayam 
 Soto mi 
 Sup ayam 
 Sup ercis 
 Sup makaroni 
 Sup wortel 
 Tahu 
 Tahu goreng 
 Telur asin 
 Telur pindang 
 Tempeh 
 Tumis kangkung 
 Tumpeng 
 Acehnese 
 Meuseukat 
 Mi aceh 
 Mi caluk 
 Nasi gurih 
 Sate matang 
 Arab 
 Asida 
 Falafel 
 Hummus 
 Kofta 
 Manakish 
 Katayef 
 Nasi kabsah 
 Nasi mandi 
 Maamoul 
 Marak 
 Roti maryam 
 Roti pita 
 Saltah 
 Shawarma 
 Tabbouleh 
 Tharid 
 Balinese 
 Babi guling 
 Betutu 
 Be urutan 
 Iga babi 
 Laklak 
 Lawar 
 Matah 
 Nasi bali 
 Nasi jinggo 
 Pai susu 
 Rawon babi 
 Rujak kuah pindang 
 Sate babi 
 Sate lilit 
 Soto babi 
 Tipat cantok 
 Banjarese 
 Bingka 
 Laksa banjar 
 Pekasam 
 Soto banjar 
 Batak 
 Arsik 
 Babi panggang Karo 
 Dali ni horbo 
 Dengke mas na niura 
 Itak gurgur 
 Lampet 
 Manuk napinadar 
 Mi gomak 
 Na tinombur 
 Ombusombus 
 Pagit-pagit 
 Pohulpohul 
 Saksang 
 Sasagun 
 Sate kerang 
 Tipatipa 
 Tuktuk 
 Betawi 
 Asinan betawi 
 Bubur cha cha 
 Kerak telor 
 Ketoprak 
 Ketupat sayur 
 Laksa betawi 
 Lontong sayur 
 Mi kangkung 
 Nasi goreng kambing 
 Nasi kebuli 
 Nasi uduk 
 Nasi ulam 
 Pindang 
 Roti buaya 
 Roti gambang 
 Rujak juhi 
 Sate taichan 
 Sayur asem 
 Semur jengkol 
 Soto betawi 
 Soto kaki 
 Soto tangkar 
 Sup kambing 
 Buginese  and Makassar 
 Burasa 
 Coto makassar 
 Dangke 
 Jalangkote 
 Kaledo 
 Konro 
 Mi kering 
 Pallubasa 
 Sop saudara 
 Chinese 
 Babi hong 
 Babi kecap 
 Bak kut teh 
 Bakkwa 
 Banmian 
 Bihun goreng 
 Cakwe 
 Cap cai 
 Chai tow kway 
 Char kway teow 
 Cha sio 
 Fu yung hai 
 Fish ball 
 Haisom cah 
 Ifumi 
 Kembang tahu 
 Kepiting saus tiram 
 Kuaci 
 Kwetiau ayam 
 Kwetiau goreng 
 Kwetiau siram sapi 
 Lapchiong 
 Locupan 
 Lontong cap go meh 
 Lumpia 
 Mi ayam 
 Mi lor 
 Mi pangsit 
 Mi tarik 
 Mun tahu 
 Nasi ayam hainan 
 Nasi bebek 
 Nasi campur 
 Nasi tim 
 Ngo hiang 
 Pangsit 
 Popiah 
 Rujak shanghai 
 Sapo tahu 
 Sate babi 
 Sekba 
 Siomay 
 Soto 
 Sup hisit 
 Sup sarang burung 
 Swikee 
 Tahu sumedang 
 Tauge ayam 
 Tee long pan 
 Telur pitan 
 Telur teh 
 Tong sui 
 Yong tau fu 
 Yusheng 
 Cirebonese 
 Empal gentong 
 Docang 
 Kue gapit 
 Mi koclok 
 Nasi jamblang 
 Nasi lengko 
 Tahu gejrot 
 Indian 
 Ayam mentega 
 Ayam tandori 
 Chapati 
 Chutney 
 Dosa 
 Idli 
 Laddu 
 Kari kambing 
 Kari kepala ikan 
 Korma 
 Modak 
 Naan 
 Nasi biryani 
 Raita 
 Roti canai 
 Sambar 
 Samosa 
 Indo 
 Ayam kodok 
 Babi panggang 
 Bitterballen 
 Erwtensoep 
 Hutspot 
 Makaroni schotel 
 Oliebol 
 Ontbijtkoek 
 Pannenkoek 
 Poffertjes 
 Shepherd's pie 
 Spekkoek 
 Javanese 
 Apem 
 Arem-arem 
 Ayam bumbu rujak 
 Ayam geprek 
 Ayam goreng kalasan 
 Ayam penyet 
 Bakso 
 Bakpia 
 Bakpia pathok 
 Botok 
 Brongkos 
 Buntil 
 Gudeg 
 Iga penyet 
 Kamir 
 Kelan antep 
 Krechek 
 Kuluban 
 Lepet 
 Lontong balap 
 Lontong dekem 
 Lontong kupang 
 Lumpia 
 Lumpia goreng 
 Lumpia semarang 
 Sumpia 
 Mendoan 
 Mi bakso 
 Mi goreng 
 Mi jawa 
 Mi rebus 
 Nasi ambeng 
 Nasi bebek 
 Nasi bogana 
 Nasi empal 
 Nasi gandul 
 Nasi goreng 
 Nasi goreng jawa 
 Nasi kare 
 Nasi kucing 
 Nasi liwet 
 Nasi megono 
 Nasi pecel 
 Nasi tempong 
 Opor 
 Opor ayam 
 Pecel 
 Pecel ayam 
 Pecel lele 
 Rambak petis 
 Rawon 
 Roti ganjel rel 
 Roti konde 
 Rujak cingur 
 Rujak soto 
 Sambal ulek 
 Sate ambal 
 Sate blora 
 Sate kambing 
 Sate hati 
 Sate kelinci 
 Sate kikil 
 Sate klatak 
 Sate madura 
 Sate ponorogo 
 Sate tegal 
 Sate udang 
 Sayur lodeh 
 Selat solo 
 Serundeng 
 Soto babat 
 Soto ceker 
 Tahu campur 
 Telur pindang 
 Tempe bacem 
 Tempe goreng 
 Tempe mendoan 
 Tongseng 
 Trancam 
 Tumpeng 
 Urap 
 Madurese 
 Rujak 
 Rujak cingur 
 Sate madura 
 Serundeng 
 Soto madura 
 Malay 
 Amplang 
 Ayam goreng 
 Ayam pansuh 
 Bubur cha cha 
 Bubur pedas 
 Cincalok 
 Epok-epok 
 Gulai 
 Ikan bakar 
 Ikan patin 
 Kangkung belacan 
 Kari 
 Kemplang 
 Laksa 
 Mi kari 
 Mi rebus 
 Nasi berlauk 
 Nasi briyani 
 Nasi dagang 
 Nasi goreng 
 Nasi goreng pattaya 
 Nasi lemak 
 Nasi minyak 
 Otak-otak 
 Pekasam 
 Pulut 
 Roti canai 
 Roti jala 
 Roti john 
 Roti tisu 
 Sayur lodeh 
 Siput gonggong 
 Soto 
 Sup kambing 
 Tahu goreng 
 Tempoyak 
 Ulam 
 Minahasan 
 Ayam rica-rica 
 Brenebon 
 Cakalang fufu 
 Dabu-dabu 
 Klappertaart 
 Mi cakalang 
 Nasi kuning 
 Panada 
 Paniki 
 Rica-rica 
 Rintek wuuk 
 Tinorangsak 
 Tinutuan 
 Woku 
 Minangkabau 
 Asam pedas 
 Ayam pop 
 Balado 
 Daun ubi tumbuk 
 Dendeng 
 Gulai 
 Gulai ayam 
 Gulai kambing 
 Gulai otak 
 Kalio 
 Kepiting saus padang 
 Keripik sanjai 
 Lemang 
 Lontong gulai pakis 
 Nasi kapau 
 Nasi kari 
 Nasi padang 
 Palai bada 
 Rendang 
 Sambal lada muda 
 Sate padang 
 Soto padang 
 Udang balado 
 Moluccan and  Papuan 
 Asida 
 Babi bakar 
 Bibingka 
 Colo-colo 
 Papeda 
 Puding sagu 
 Sagu 
 Soto ambon 
 Palembang 
 Burgo 
 Gulai 
 Kemplang 
 Laksan 
 Lakso 
 Mi celor 
 Nasi minyak 
 Otak-otak 
 Pempek 
 Pindang 
 Tekwan 
 Tempoyak ikan patin 
 Peranakan 
 Bubur cha cha 
 Cincalok 
 Laksa 
 Pai ti 
 Swikee 
 Sasak 
 Ayam taliwang 
 Plecing kangkung 
 Sate ampet 
 Sate belut 
 Sate pusut 
 Sundanese 
 Asinan bogor 
 Batagor 
 Empal gepuk 
 Karedok 
 Kupat tahu 
 Laksa bogor 
 Laksa tangerang 
 Lalab 
 Mi kocok 
 Nasi timbel 
 Nasi tutug oncom 
 Oncom 
 Pepes 
 Rujak tumbuk 
 Sate bandeng 
 Sate maranggi 
 Sayur asem 
 Seblak 
 Soto bandung 
 Tauge goreng 
 Uli bakar 
 Timorese 
 Feijoada 
 Ikan bakar 
 Katemak 
 Pastel de nata 
 Se'i 
 Snacks Krupuk 
 Amplang 
 Emping 
 Kemplang 
 Krupuk 
 Krupuk ikan 
 Krupuk kulit 
 Krupuk udang 
 Kripik 
 Kripik sanjai 
 Rempeyek 
 Rengginang 
 Kue 
 Agar-agar 
 Apam 
 Ape 
 Arem-arem 
 Asida 
 Bagea 
 Bahulu 
 Bakcang 
 Bakpau 
 Bakpia 
 Bakpia pathok 
 Bangkit 
 Bibingka 
 Bika ambon 
 Bingka 
 Bitterballen 
 Bolen 
 Bolu gulung 
 Bolu kukus 
 Bolu pandan 
 Bugis 
 Bulan 
 Busa 
 Cakwe 
 Cilok 
 Clorot 
 Cubit 
 Cucur 
 Dadar gulung 
 Dodol 
 Donat jawa 
 Donat kentang 
 Gapit 
 Geplak 
 Gethuk 
 Jalangkote 
 Jemput-jemput 
 Kaak 
 Kaasstengels 
 Kamir 
 Karipap 
 Kembang goyang 
 Keranjang 
 Klappertaart 
 Klepon 
 Kochi 
 Kroket 
 Ku 
 Kukis jagung 
 Laddu 
 Laklak 
 Lapis 
 Lapis legit 
 Leker 
 Lemper 
 Lidah kucing 
 Lumpia 
 Lumpia goreng 
 Lumpia semarang 
 Sumpia 
 Lupis 
 Madumongso 
 Makmur 
 Martabak 
 Mangkok 
 Mochi 
 Modak 
 Nagasari 
 Nastar 
 Ombusombus 
 Onde-onde 
 Pai susu 
 Pai ti 
 Panada 
 Pancong 
 Pastel 
 Pastel de nata 
 Pinyaram 
 Pisang cokelat 
 Pisang goreng 
 Poffertjes 
 Popiah 
 Pukis 
 Putri salju 
 Putu 
 Putu mangkok 
 Putu mayang 
 Rangi 
 Rempah udang 
 Risoles 
 Samosa 
 Satu 
 Semar mendem 
 Semprit 
 Semprong 
 Serabi 
 Seri muka 
 Sus 
 Spekulaas 
 Stroopwafel 
 Talam 
 Tapai 
 Timphan 
 Terang bulan 
 Untir-untir 
 Wajik 
 Wingko 
 Beverages Alcoholic 
 Arak 
 Beer 
 Brem 
 Cap tikus 
 Ciu 
 Lapen 
 Saguer 
 Sopi 
 Tuak 
 Non-alcoholic 
 Adon-adon coro 
 Angsle 
 Bajigur 
 Bandrek 
 Bir jawa 
 Bir kocok 
 Bir pletok 
 Cendol 
 Chocolate milk 
 Cincau 
 Dadiah 
 Es asam jawa 
 Es buah 
 Es campur 
 Es doger 
 Es durian 
 Es goyobod 
 Es kelapa muda 
 Es kopyor 
 Es selendang mayang 
 Es tebak 
 Es tebu 
 Es teler 
 Hot chocolate 
 Jahe telur 
 Jamu 
 Java coffee 
 Kembang tahu 
 Kopi luwak 
 Kopi susu 
 Kopi tarik 
 Kopi tiam 
 Kopi tubruk 
 Lahang 
 Laksamana mengamuk 
 Legen 
 Milo 
 Moke 
 Ronde 
 Sarsi 
 Badak 
 Indo saparelle 
 Sekoteng 
 Soda gembira 
 Susu kedelai 
 Sweet tea 
 Teh botol 
 Teh krisan 
 Teh liang 
 Teh poci 
 Teh jahe 
 Teh tarik 
 Teh talua 
 Wedang jahe 
 Wedang uwuh 
 Bumbu Spices 
 Adas manis 
 Andaliman 
 Asam jawa 
 Bawang bombai 
 Bawang merah 
 Bawang perei 
 Bawang putih 
 Bunga lawang 
 Bunga pala 
 Cabai rawit 
 Cabai merah 
 Cengkih 
 Daun bawang 
 Daun jeruk 
 Daun kari 
 Daun kemangi 
 Daun pandan 
 Daun salam 
 Jahe 
 Jeruk purut 
 Jeruk nipis 
 Jintan 
 Kapulaga 
 Kayu manis 
 Kecombrang 
 Kencur 
 Kemiri 
 Ketumbar 
 Keluak 
 Kunyit 
 Lengkuas 
 Lada hitam 
 Lada putih 
 Lokio 
 Pala 
 Peterseli 
 Seledri 
 Serai 
 Temu kunci 
 Temu lawak 
 Seasonings and condiments 
 Abon 
 Acar 
 Balado 
 Bawang goreng 
 Budu 
 Coconut jam 
 Cuka 
 Dabu-dabu 
 Hagelslag 
 Kecap asin 
 Kecap ikan 
 Kecap inggris 
 Kecap manis 
 Kerisik 
 Lalab 
 Mayones 
 Minyak samin 
 Minyak wijen 
 Minyak zaitun 
 Moster 
 Muisjes 
 Nata de coco 
 Peanut sauce 
 Petis 
 Petis ikan 
 Rica-rica 
 Sambal 
 Sambal goreng teri 
 Serundeng 
 Saus tiram 
 Saus tomat 
 Tapai 
 Tauco 
 Tempoyak 
 Terasi 
 Tongcai 
 Tuktuk 
 Vlokken 
 Influences  and overseas dishes 
 Achat 
 Asam pedas 
 Ayam penyet 
 Babi pangang 
 Bami 
 Bamischijf 
 Begedil 
 Biryani 
 Bobotie 
 Bobotok 
 Boeber 
 Dendeng 
 Kaassoufflé 
 Kalu dodol 
 Koe'sister 
 Lumpia 
 Martabak 
 Mie goreng 
 Mie rebus 
 Nasi ambeng 
 Nasi goreng 
 Nasi kuning 
 Nasischijf 
 Pechal 
 Pisang goreng 
 Rawon 
 Rendang 
 Rojak 
 Roti canai 
 Satay 
 Sayur lodeh 
 Serundeng 
 Sosatie 
 Soto 
 Telur pindang 
 Tempeh 
 Tomato bredie 
 List articles 
 Indonesian beverages 
 Indonesian condiments 
 Indonesian desserts 
 Indonesian dishes 
 Indonesian noodles 
 Indonesian snacks 
 Indonesian soups 
 Related topics 
 List of Indonesian dishes 
 Alcohol in Indonesia 
 Jamu 
 Bumbu (seasoning) 
 Street food of Indonesia 
 Jajan pasar 
 Sri Owen 
 
   Food portal 
   Category: Indonesian cuisine 
 
 v t e Cuisines Continental 
 African 
 North 
 West 
 list 
 Americas 
 Caribbean 
 North 
 South 
 list 
 Asian 
 Caucasian 
 Central 
 Indian subcontinent 
 Levantine 
 list 
 European 
 Balkan 
 Central 
 Eastern 
 list 
 Oceanic 
 Intercontinental
 Global 
 Latin American 
 Mediterranean 
 Middle Eastern 
 National  and regional 
 Afghan 
 Albanian 
 Algerian 
 American 
 Californian 
 Floribbean 
 Hawaiian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Lowcountry (South Carolina) 
 New England 
 New Mexico 
 Pacific Northwest 
 Pennsylvania Dutch 
 Puerto Rican 
 Southern US 
 Southwest US 
 Texas 
 Angolan 
 Argentine 
 Armenian 
 Australian 
 Austrian 
 Azerbaijani 
 Bahraini 
 Bangladeshi 
 Barbadian 
 Belarusian 
 Belgian 
 Belizean 
 Beninese 
 Bhutanese 
 Bolivian 
 Bosnian-Herzegovinian 
 Botswana 
 Brazilian 
 British 
 Channel Islands 
 English 
 Gibraltarian 
 Northern Irish 
 Saint Helena 
 Scottish 
 Welsh 
 Bruneian 
 Bulgarian 
 Burkinabé 
 Burmese 
 Burundian 
 Cambodian 
 Cameroonian 
 Canadian 
 Acadian 
 Québécois 
 Central African Republic 
 Chadian 
 Chilean 
 Chinese 
 Cantonese 
 Hong Kong 
 Macanese 
 Tibetan 
 Xinjiang 
 Colombian 
 Congolese 
 Corsican 
 Croatian 
 Cuban 
 Cypriot 
 Czech 
 Danish 
 Faroese 
 Greenlandic 
 Djiboutian 
 Dominican 
 Dominican Republic 
 Dutch 
 East Timorese 
 Ecuadorian 
 Egyptian 
 Emirati 
 Equatorial Guinean 
 Eritrean 
 Estonian 
 Ethiopian 
 Fijian 
 Filipino 
 Finnish 
 French 
 Occitan 
 French Guianan 
 Gabonese 
 Gambian 
 Georgian 
 German 
 Ghanaian 
 Greek 
 Cretan 
 Epirotic 
 Greek Macedonian 
 Heptanesean 
 Guatemalan 
 Guinea-Bissauan 
 Guinean 
 Haitian 
 Honduran 
 Hungarian 
 Icelandic 
 Indian 
 Arunachalese 
 Assamese 
 Bengali 
 Bihari 
 Goan 
 Gujarati 
 Himachal Pradesh 
 Kashmiri 
 Jharkhandi 
 Karnataka 
 Kerala 
 Maharashtrian 
 Manipuri 
 Meghalayan 
 Mizo 
 Naga 
 Odia 
 Punjabi 
 Rajasthani 
 Sikkimese 
 Sindhi 
 Tamil 
 Telangana 
 Telugu 
 Indonesian 
 Acehnese 
 Balinese 
 Banjar 
 Batak 
 Betawi 
 Indo 
 Javanese 
 Madurese 
 Makassar 
 Minahasan 
 Minangkabau 
 Palembangese 
 Sundanese 
 Iranian 
 Iraqi 
 Irish 
 Israeli 
 Italian 
 Abruzzese 
 Ligurian 
 Lombard 
 Lucanian 
 Neapolitan 
 Roman 
 Sardinian 
 Sicilian 
 Venetian 
 Ivorian 
 Jamaican 
 Japanese 
 Okinawan 
 Jordanian 
 Kazakh 
 Kenyan 
 Korean 
 North Korean 
 South Korean 
 Kosovan 
 Kuwaiti 
 Kyrgyz 
 Lao 
 Latvian 
 Lebanese 
 Lesotho 
 Liberian 
 Libyan 
 Liechtensteiner 
 Lithuanian 
 Luxembourg 
 Macedonian 
 Malagasy 
 Malawian 
 Malaysian 
 Sabahan 
 Sarawakian 
 Maldivian 
 Malian 
 Maltese 
 Mauritanian 
 Mauritian 
 Mexican 
 Moldovan 
 Monégasque 
 Mongolian 
 Montenegrin 
 Moroccan 
 Mozambican 
 Namibian 
 Nauruan 
 Nepalese 
 New Zealand 
 Nicaraguan 
 Niger 
 Nigerian 
 Niuean 
 Norwegian 
 Omani 
 Pakistani 
 Palestinian 
 Panamanian 
 Peruvian 
 Polish 
 Portuguese 
 Qatari 
 Romanian  (incl.  Transylvanian Saxon ) 
 Russian 
 Bashkir 
 Chechen 
 Circassian 
 Komi 
 Mordovian 
 Sakha 
 Tatar 
 Udmurt 
 Yamal 
 Rwandan 
 Saint Lucian 
 Salvadoran 
 Sammarinese 
 São Tomé and Príncipe 
 Saudi Arabian 
 Senegalese 
 Serbian 
 Seychellois 
 Sierra Leonean 
 Singaporean 
 Slovak 
 Slovenian 
 Somali 
 South African 
 Spanish 
 Andalusian 
 Asturian 
 Balearic 
 Basque 
 Canarian 
 Cantabrian 
 Catalan 
 Extremaduran 
 Galician 
 Manchegan 
 Valencian 
 Sri Lankan 
 Sudanese 
 Swazi 
 Swedish 
 Swiss 
 Syrian 
 Taiwanese 
 Tajik 
 Tanzanian 
 Zanzibari 
 Thai 
 Togolese 
 Tunisian 
 Turkish 
 Turkmen 
 Trinidadian and Tobagonian 
 Ugandan 
 Ukrainian 
 Uruguayan 
 Uzbek 
 Venezuelan 
 Vietnamese 
 Western Saharan 
 Yemeni 
 Zambian 
 Zimbabwean 
 Ethnic 
 Ainu 
 Arab 
 Indonesian 
 Aromanian 
 Assyrian 
 Balochi 
 Berber 
 Cajun 
 Chinese 
 American 
 Canadian 
 Chifa 
 Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Crimean Tatar 
 Greek American 
 Hazaragi 
 Indian 
 Anglo-Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Indigenous American 
 Inuit 
 Italian American 
 Kurdish 
 Livonian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Malay 
 Ossetian 
 Parsi 
 Pashtun 
 Peranakan 
 Romani 
 Sámi 
 Soul food 
 Sylheti 
 Transylvanian Saxon 
 Yup'ik 
 Religious 
 Buddhist 
 Christian 
 Goan Catholic 
 Mangalorean Catholic 
 Mennonite 
 Hindu 
 Islamic 
 Chinese 
 Ital 
 Jain 
 Jewish 
 American 
 Ashkenazi 
 Bukharan 
 Ethiopian 
 Mizrahi 
 Sephardic 
 Syrian 
 Ritual slaughter 
 Sikh 
 Historical 
 Ancient Egyptian 
 Ancient Greek 
 Ancient Israelite 
 Ancient Roman 
 Antebellum America 
 Aztec 
 Byzantine 
 Early modern European 
 Historical Chinese 
 Historical Indian subcontinent 
 Historical North Indian and Pakistani 
 History of agriculture 
 History of alcoholic drinks 
 History of bread 
 History of seafood 
 History of vegetarianism 
 Historical Argentine 
 Historical Japanese 
 Inca 
 Mayan 
 Muisca 
 Mughal 
 Medieval 
 Ottoman 
 Peasant 
 Soviet 
 Thirteen Colonies 
 Styles 
 Classique 
 Fast food 
 Fusion 
 New American 
 Eurasian 
 Haute 
 Molecular gastronomy 
 Note by Note 
 Nouvelle 
 Lists 
 List of cuisines 
 List of historical cuisines 
 Lists of prepared foods 
 Related 
 Cookbook 
 Cooking 
 Culinary arts 
 Drink 
 Food 
 history 
 Diet 
 Meal preparation 
 
   Food portal 
   Drink portal 
   Category 
   Commons 
   Cookbook 
   WikiProject 
   Outline 
 
 Authority control : National libraries  
 Israel 
 United States 
 
  
NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw2336
Cached time: 20230311170746
Cache expiry: 1814400
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc, no‐toc‐conversion]
CPU time usage: 0.811 seconds
Real time usage: 1.026 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2742/1000000
Post‐expand include size: 258808/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1259/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 8/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 82773/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.390/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 23449949/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/400
 
 
Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  600.203      1 -total
 35.16%  211.051      2 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 33.75%  202.567      1 Template:Cuisine_of_Indonesia
 26.72%  160.351      1 Template:Reflist
 17.15%  102.932      2 Template:Lang
 14.99%   89.977      6 Template:Navbox
 12.12%   72.765      1 Template:Indonesian_cuisine
 11.22%   67.370     10 Template:Cite_book
 10.68%   64.091      2 Template:Cite_news
  7.74%   46.480      1 Template:Short_description
 
  Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:idhash:14443478-0!canonical and timestamp 20230311170745 and revision id 1135200956. Rendering was triggered because: page-view
  
 esi <esi:include src="/esitest-fa8a495983347898/content" />  
 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Javanese_cuisine&oldid=1135200956 " 
 Categories :  Javanese cuisine Indonesian cuisine Javanese culture Indonesian cuisine-related lists Hidden categories:  CS1 Indonesian-language sources (id) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use American English from October 2020 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use dmy dates from October 2020 Articles containing Indonesian-language text Articles containing Malay (macrolanguage)-language text Articles with J9U identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  This page was last edited on 23 January 2023, at 06:54  (UTC) . 
 Text is available under the  Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0 ;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the  Terms of Use  and  Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the  Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. 
 
 
 Privacy policy 
 About Wikipedia 
 Disclaimers 
 Contact Wikipedia 
 Mobile view 
 Developers 
 Statistics 
 Cookie statement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
