
 
 
 Jump to content 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle sidebar 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Create account Log in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Personal tools 
 
 
 
 
   Create account   Log in 
 
 
 
 
		Pages for logged out editors  learn more 
 
 
 Contributions Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Navigation 
 
 
 Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate 
 
 
 
 
 Contribute 
 
 
 Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file 
 
 
 
 
 Tools 
 
 
 What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item 
 
 
 
 
 Print/export 
 
 
 Download as PDF Printable version 
 
 
 
 
 In other projects 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons 
 
 
 
 
 Languages 
 
 On this Wikipedia the language links are at the top of the page across from the article title.  Go to top . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CentralNotice  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Contents 
 move to sidebar 
 hide 
 
 
 
 
 (Top) 
 
 
 
 
 
 1 Influences on Jewish cuisine 
 
 
				Toggle Influences on Jewish cuisine subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 1.1 Kashrut —Jewish dietary laws 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.2 Geographical dispersion 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 History of Jewish cuisine 
 
 
				Toggle History of Jewish cuisine subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 2.1 Biblical era 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.2 Talmudic era 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.2.1 Structure of meal 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.3 Middle Ages 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.4 Modern era 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 Jewish cuisine variations 
 
 
				Toggle Jewish cuisine variations subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 3.1 Ashkenazi 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.1.1 Fish 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.1.2 Soups 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.1.3 Bread and cake 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.1.4 Meat and fats 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.1.5 Sweets and confections 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.1.6 Side dishes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.2 Sephardi, Mizrahi and Italian Jewish cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4 Shabbat and holiday dishes 
 
 
				Toggle Shabbat and holiday dishes subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 4.1 Shabbat 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.2 Rosh Hashanah 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.3 Yom Kippur 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.4 Sukkot 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.5 Hanukkah 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.6 Purim 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.7 Passover 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.8 Shavuot 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.9 Tisha B'Av 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5 See also 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6 References 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 7 Bibliography 
 
 
				Toggle Bibliography subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 7.1 Historical 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8 Further reading 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
						Toggle the table of contents
					 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle the table of contents 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Jewish cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 30 languages 
 
 
 
 Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Jawa Kurdî Lietuvių Bahasa Melayu 日本語 Polski Português Русский Slovenčina Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 
 Edit links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Article Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 English 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 More 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
 
 
 Culinary traditions of Jewish communities around the world 
 Part of  a series  on Jewish culture 
 Languages 
 Hebrew 
 
 Modern 
 Ashkenazi 
 Sephardi 
 Mizrahi 
 Yemenite 
 Tiberian 
 Medieval 
 Mishnaic 
 Biblical 
 Samaritan 
 Babylonian 
 Palestinian 
 Judeo-Aramaic 
 
 Hulaulá 
 Lishana Deni 
 Lishán Didán 
 Barzani 
 Betanure 
 Lishanid Noshan 
 Targum 
 Biblical 
 Talmudic 
 Palestinian 
 Galilean 
 Judeo-Arabic 
 
 Yahudic 
 Judeo-Baghdadi 
 Judeo-Moroccan 
 Judeo-Tripolitanian 
 Djerbian 
 Yemenite 
 Other  Jewish diaspora languages 
 
 Yiddish 
 Ladino 
 Haketia 
 Tetuani 
 Yevanic 
 Catalanic 
 Italkian 
 Piedmontese 
 Knaanic 
 Gruzinic 
 Karaim 
 Dzhidi 
 Bukhori 
 Juhuri 
 Zarphatic 
 Golpaygani 
 Shirazi 
 Hamedani 
 Shuadit 
 Judeo-Marathi 
 Judeo-Berber 
 Judeo-Malayalam 
 Krymchak 
 Koiné Greek 
 
 
 Mythology 
 Baal 
 El 
 Genesis 
 Adam and Eve 
 Lilith 
 Garden of Eden 
 Tree of Life 
 Forbidden Fruit 
 Patriarchs 
 Abraham 
 Promised Land 
 Gog and Magog 
 Nimrod 
 Tower of Babel 
 Sodom and Gomorrah 
 Noah's Ark 
 Cain and Abel 
 Moses 
 Burning bush 
 Ten Plagues 
 Crossing the Red Sea 
 The Exodus 
 Mount Sinai 
 Golden calf 
 Ten Commandments 
 Tabernacle 
 Conquest of Canaan 
 Yahweh 
 Moloch 
 Gehenna 
 Gathering of Israel 
 Daniel 
 Gideon 
 Saul 
 David and Goliath 
 Solomon 
 Samson 
 Esther 
 Haman 
 Mordecai 
 Job 
 Ezra 
 Ruth 
 Azrael 
 Michael 
 Gabriel 
 Dobiel 
 Ouza 
 Jewish folklore 
 
 Dybbuk 
 Golem 
 Behemoth 
 Leviathan 
 Shedim 
 Tannin 
 Rahab 
 Bagdana 
 Estries 
 Belial 
 Samael 
 Re'em 
 Baal Berith 
 Lilin 
 Bar Juchne 
 Ziz 
 Naamah 
 Mazzikin 
 Arariel 
 Se'irim 
 Dumah 
 Armilus 
 Broxa 
 Elioud 
 Alukah 
 Rephaite 
 Pardes 
 Yossele 
 Valley of the ants 
 
 
 Literature 
 Biblical 
 Hebrew 
 Israeli 
 American 
 Ladino 
 Judeo-Tat 
 Yiddish 
 English 
 Yemenite 
 Musar 
 Rabbinic 
 Jewish poetry 
 
 Biblical 
 Piyyutim 
 Al-Andalus 
 Yemenite 
 Epic 
 Medieval Hebrew 
 Modern Hebrew 
 Jewish poets 
 
 Shalom Shabazi 
 Abraham Sutzkever 
 Judah Halevi 
 Sergey Izgiyayev 
 Dunash ben Labrat 
 Itzik Feffer 
 Emma Lazarus 
 Solomon ibn Gabirol 
 Abba Kovner 
 Qasmuna 
 Yehuda Amichai 
 
 
 Philosophy 
 Haskalah 
 List of Jewish philosophers 
 
 
 Music 
 Israeli 
 Secular 
 Religious 
 Mizrahi 
 Sephardic 
 Klezmer 
 Niggun 
 Zemirot 
 
 
 Art 
 Israeli 
 Yiddish theatre 
 Judeo-Tat theatre 
 Israeli cinema 
 Jewish dance 
 Israeli dance 
 Humour 
 List of Jews in the visual arts 
 List of Jewish film directors 
 
 
 Science 
 Israeli 
 Medicine 
 Astronomy 
 Biblical cosmology 
 Mathematicians 
 Scientists 
 
 
 Sport 
 Israeli 
 List of Jews in sports 
 Jewish Sports Hall of Fame 
 Maccabiah 
 
 
 Cuisine 
 Ancient Israelite 
 Israeli 
 Sephardi 
 Mizrahi 
 Ashkenazi 
 Syrian 
 Bukharan 
 
 
 Other aspects 
 Symbolism 
 Clothing 
 Architecture 
 
 
 Judaism portal v t e 
   Chopped liver 
 
 Jewish cuisine  refers to the worldwide cooking traditions of the  Jewish people . During its evolution over the course of many centuries, it has been shaped by  Jewish dietary laws  ( kashrut ),  Jewish festivals and holidays , and traditions centred around  Shabbat . Jewish cuisine is influenced by the economics, agriculture, and culinary traditions of the many countries where Jewish communities have settled and varies widely throughout the entire world.
 The history of Jewish cuisine begins with the  cuisine of the ancient Israelites . As the  Jewish diaspora  grew, different styles of Jewish cooking developed. The distinctive styles in Jewish cuisine vary by each community across the  Ashkenazi ,  Sephardi , and  Mizrahi  diaspora groupings; there are also notable dishes within the culinary traditions of the stand-alone significant Jewish diaspora communities from  Greece ,  Iran , and  Yemen .
 Since the establishment of the  State of Israel  in 1948, and particularly since the late 1970s, a nascent Israeli " fusion cuisine " has developed.  Israeli cuisine  has adapted a multitude of elements, overlapping techniques and ingredients from the many culinary traditions of the Jewish diaspora.
 Using agricultural products from the dishes of one Jewish culinary tradition in the elaboration of dishes of others, as well as incorporating and adapting various other  Middle-Eastern  dishes from the local non-Jewish population of the  Land of Israel  (which had not already been introduced via the culinary traditions of Jews which  arrived to Israel from the various Arab countries ), Israeli Jewish cuisine is both authentically Jewish (and most often  kosher ) and distinctively local "Israeli", yet thoroughly hybridized from its multicultural diasporas’ Jewish origins.
 
 
 Influences on Jewish cuisine [ edit ] 
 Kashrut —Jewish dietary laws [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Kashrut 
   Coarse salt for koshering meat 
 The laws of keeping  kosher  ( kashrut ) have influenced Jewish cooking by prescribing what foods are permitted and how food must be prepared. The word kosher is usually translated as "proper".
 Certain foods, notably  pork ,  shellfish  and almost all  insects  are forbidden; meat and dairy may not be combined and meat must be  ritually slaughtered  and  salted  to remove all traces of blood.
 Observant Jews will eat only meat or poultry that is certified  kosher . The meat must have been slaughtered by a  shochet  (ritual slaughterer) in accordance with Jewish law and is entirely drained of blood. Before it is cooked, it is soaked in water for half an hour, then placed on a perforated board, sprinkled with coarse  salt  (which draws out the blood) and left to sit for one hour. At the end of this time, the salt is washed off and the meat is ready for cooking. 
 Today, kosher meats purchased from a butcher or supermarket are usually already  koshered  as described above and no additional soaking or salting is required.
 According to  kashrut , meat and poultry may not be combined with dairy products, nor may they touch plates or utensils that have been touched by dairy products. Therefore, Jews who strictly observe  kashrut  divide their kitchens into different sections for meat and for dairy, with separate ovens, plates and utensils (or as much as is reasonable, given financial and space constraints; there are procedures to  kasher  utensils that have touched dairy to allow their use for meat). [1] [2] 
 As a result, butter, milk and cream are not used in preparing dishes made with meat or intended to be served together with meat. Oil,  pareve  margarine, rendered  chicken fat  (often called  schmaltz  in the Ashkenazi tradition), or non-dairy cream substitutes are used instead.
 Despite religious prohibitions, some foods not generally considered kosher have made their way into traditional Jewish cuisine;  sturgeon , which was consumed by European Jews at least as far back as the 19th century, is one example. [3] 
 
 Geographical dispersion [ edit ] 
   Pescaíto frito , originating from the 16th-century Andalusian Jews of Spain and Portugal 
 The hearty cuisine of  Ashkenazi Jews  was based on centuries of living in the cold climate of Central and  Eastern Europe , whereas the lighter, "sunnier" cuisine of  Sephardi Jews  was affected by life in the Mediterranean region.
 Each Jewish community has its traditional dishes, often revolving around specialties from their home country. In  Spain  and  Portugal ,  olives  are a common ingredient and many foods are fried in oil. The idea of frying fish in the stereotypically  British   fish and chips , for example, was introduced to Britain by Sephardic Jewish immigrants. [4]  In  Germany , stews were popular. The Jews of  Netherlands  specialized in pickles,  herring ,  butter cakes  and  bolas  (jamrolls). In  Poland , Jews made various kinds of stuffed and stewed fish along with  matza ball  soup or  lokshen  noodles . In  North Africa , Jews ate  couscous  and  tagine .
 Thus, a traditional  Shabbat  meal for Ashkenazi Jews might include stuffed vine leaves, roast beef, pot roast, or chicken, carrots  tzimmes  and potatoes. A traditional Shabbat meal for Sephardi Jews would focus more on salads,  couscous  and other Middle-Eastern specialties.
 
 History of Jewish cuisine [ edit ] 
 Biblical era [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Ancient Israelite cuisine 
   Emmer  wheat, cultivated in biblical times 
 The daily diet of the ordinary ancient Israelite was mainly one of bread, cooked grains and legumes. Bread was eaten with every meal. The bread eaten until the end of the Israelite monarchy was mostly made from barley flour. 
 During the  Second Temple era  bread made from wheat flour became predominant. [5]  A variety of breads were produced. Probably most common were unleavened flat loaves called  ugah  or  kikkar.  Another type was a thin wafer, known as a  rakik.  A thicker loaf, known as  hallah,  was made with the best-quality flour, usually for ritual purposes. Bread was sometimes enriched by the addition of flour from legumes (Ezekiel 4:9). 
 The Mishna ( Hallah  2:2) mentions bread dough made with fruit juice instead of water to sweeten the bread. The Israelites also sometimes added fennel and cumin to bread dough for flavor and dipped their bread in vinegar (Ruth 2:14), olive oil, or sesame oil for extra flavor. 
 Vegetables played a smaller, but significant role in the diet. Legumes and vegetables were typically eaten in  stews . Stews made of lentils or beans were common and they were cooked with onion, garlic, and leeks for flavor. Fresh legumes were also roasted, or dried and stored for extended periods, then cooked in a soup or a stew. Vegetables were also eaten uncooked with bread. Lentils were the most important of the legumes and were used to make pottages and soups, as well as fried lentil cakes called  ashishim .
 The Israelites drank  goat  and  sheep's milk  when it was available in the spring and summer and ate butter and cheese. They also ate honey, both from bees and  date honey . 
 Figs and grapes were the fruits most commonly eaten, while dates, pomegranates, almonds, and other fruits and nuts were eaten more occasionally. 
 Wine was the most popular beverage and sometimes other fermented beverages were produced. 
 Meat, usually goat and mutton, was eaten rarely by most Israelites and reserved for special occasions, such as celebrations, festival meals, or sacrificial feasts. The wealthy ate meat more frequently and had  beef ,  venison , and  veal  available to them. 
 Olives were used primarily for their oil, which was used raw and to cook meat and stews.  Game  (usually deer and gazelle), birds, eggs, and fish were also eaten, depending on availability. [6] [7] [8] [9] [10] [11] [12] [13]  Meat was typically prepared in broths or stews, and sometimes roasted. For long-term storage, meat was smoked, dried, or salted.
 
   Figs , one of the most frequently mentioned fruits in the Bible. 
 Porridge  and  gruel  were made from ground grain, water, salt, and butter. This mixture also formed the basis for cakes, to which oil, called  shemen , and fruits were sometimes added before baking.
 Most food was eaten fresh and in season. Fruits and vegetables had to be eaten as they ripened and before they spoiled. 
 People had to contend with periodic episodes of hunger and famine. Producing enough food required hard and well-timed labor and the  climatic conditions  resulted in unpredictable harvests and the need to store as much food as possible. Thus, grapes were made into raisins and wine, olives were made into oil, figs, beans and lentils were dried and grains were stored for use throughout the year. [14] 
 As fresh milk tended to spoil quickly, the Israelites stored milk in skin containers that caused it to curdle quickly and drank it as thick sour milk which they called  laban. 
 Descriptions of typical Israelite meals appear in the Bible. The  Book of Samuel  described the rations  Abigail  brought to  David 's group: bread loaves, wine, butchered sheep, parched grain, raisins, and fig cakes. [15]  The  Book of Ruth  described a typical light breakfast: bread dipped in vinegar and parched or roasted grain. [16] 
 The cuisine maintained many consistent traits based on the main products available from the early Israelite period until the  Roman period , even though new foods became available during this extended time. For example,  rice  was introduced during the  Persian era . 
 During the  Hellenistic period , as trade with the  Nabateans  increased, more spices became available, at least for those who could afford them and more Mediterranean fish were imported into the cities. During the Roman period,  sugar cane  was introduced. [17] 
 The symbolic food of the ancient Israelites continued to be important among  Jews  after the destruction of the  Second Temple  in 70 CE and the beginning of the  Jewish diaspora . 
 Bread, wine and olive oil were seen as direct links to the three main crops of ancient Israel—wheat, grapes and olives. In the Bible, this trio is described as representing the  divine  response to human needs ( Hosea 2:23–24 ) and, particularly, the need for the seasonal rains vital for the successful cultivation of these three crops. ( Deuteronomy 11:13–14 ). [18] 
 The significance of wine, bread and oil is indicated by their incorporation into  Jewish religious   ritual , with the blessings over wine and bread for  Shabbat  and holiday meals and at religious ceremonies such as  weddings  and the lighting of Shabbat and festival lights with olive oil. [6] [19] [20] 
 Modern Jewish cooking originated in the various communities of the  Jewish diaspora , and modern Jewish cuisine bears little resemblance to what the ancient Israelites ate. However, a few dishes that originated in ancient Israel survive to the present day. Notably among them is  cholent , or  hamin , a stew traditionally eaten on Shabbat that is  simmered  for 12 hours in a way that conforms with Shabbat restrictions. It dates to at least the  Second Temple period . Various diaspora communities created their own variations of the dish based on their local climate and available ingredients, which are eaten today. 
 Other foods dating to the ancient Israelites include  pastels , or Shabbat meat pies, and  charoset , a sweet fruit and nut paste eaten at the  Passover Seder . [21] 
 
 Talmudic era [ edit ] 
 Bread was a staple food and as in the Bible, the meal is designated by the simple term "to eat bread", so the rabbinical law ordains that the blessing pronounced upon bread covers everything else except wine and dessert. Bread was made not only from wheat, but also from barley, rice, millet, lentils, etc. 
 Many kinds of fruit were eaten. There was a custom to eat apples during  Shavuot , [22]  while specific fruit and herbs were eaten on holidays and special occasions such as  Rosh Hashana . Children received nuts and roasted ears of grain especially on the evening of Passover. Olives were so common that they were used as a measure ( zayit ).
 Meat was eaten only on special occasions, on  Shabbat  and at feasts. The pious kept fine cattle for Shabbat (Beẓah 16a), but various other kinds of dishes, relishes and spices were also on the table. Deer, also, furnished meat, as did pheasant, chickens and pigeons. 
 Fermented fish sauce was an important article of commerce, being called " garum " among the Jews, as among the Greeks and Romans. Pliny [23]  says expressly of a " garum castimoniale " (i.e.,  kosher  garum) that it was prepared according to Jewish law. A specific type of locust was eaten. Eggs were so commonly eaten that the quantity of an egg was used as a measure. [24] 
 The devastation of the  Bar-Kokhba revolt  greatly reduced the variety of the local diet. In its aftermath, the amount of imported goods declined and vegetables became a luxury. The typical meal consisted of a slice of bread dipped in olive oil, a soup or  gruel  of legumes, and fruits, especially figs. On  Shabbat , a small amount of fish and vegetables were eaten. [10] 
 While pork was prohibited by Jewish laws as described under  kashrut , the refusal to eat pork only became central to Jewish identity while under Roman rule. Pork consumption during the Roman period increased and became closely affiliated with Romans not only as a common cuisine but also as a frequently sacrificed animal. Jordan Rosenblum has argued that by not consuming pork, Jews maintained their sense of particularity and even held a silent revolt against the Roman Empire. [25] 
 
 Structure of meal [ edit ] 
 The first dish was a pickled starter to stimulate the appetite, [26]  followed by the main meal, which ended with a dessert, called in Greek  θάργημα .  Afiḳomen  is used in the same sense. Tidbits ( parperet ) were eaten before and after the meal (Ber. vi. 6). 
 Wine was flavored with myrrh [27]  or with honey and pepper, the mixture being called  conditum . There was vinegar wine, [28]  wine from Amanus and Cilicia, [29]  red wine from Saron, Ethiopian wine, [30]  and black wine. [31]  Certain wines were considered good for the stomach, others not. [32]  There was beer from Egypt called  zythos [33]  (Pes. iii. 1) and beer made from a thorn  Spina regia . [34] [35] 
 Emphasis was placed on drinking with the meal as eating without drinking (any liquid) causes stomach trouble. [36] 
 
 Middle Ages [ edit ] 
   Lokshen  kugel 
 The Jews were so widely scattered in the  Middle Ages  that it is difficult to give a connected account of their mode of living as to food. In Arabic countries the author of the  Halakhot Gedolot  knew some dishes that appear to have been specific Jewish foods, e.g.,  paspag , [37]  which was, perhaps, biscuit.
 According to the  Siddur Amram , [38]  the well-known " ḥaroset " is made in those countries from a mixture of herbs, flour and honey (Arabic," ḥalikah "). 
 Maimonides , in his "Sefer Refu'ot", [39]  mentions dishes that are good for health. He recommends bread baked from wheat that is not too new, nor too old, nor too fine, [40]  further, the meat of the kid, sheep and chicken and the yolks of eggs. Goats' and cows' milk is good, nor are cheese and butter harmful. Honey is good for old people; fish with solid white flesh meat is wholesome; so also are wine and  dried fruits . Fresh fruits, however, are unwholesome, and he does not recommend garlic or onions. [41] 
 There is detailed information about Italian Jewish cookery in the book  Massechet Purim . It discusses pies, chestnuts, turtledoves, pancakes, small tarts, gingerbread, ragouts, venison, roast goose, chicken, stuffed pigeons, ducks, pheasants, partridges, quails, macaroons and salad. These were considered luxuries. [42] 
 The oppressed medieval Jews enjoyed large meals only on Shabbat, festivals, circumcisions and weddings. For example, the Jews of  Rhodes , according to a letter of Ovadiah Bartinura, 1488, lived on herbs and vegetables only, never tasting meat or wine. [43]  In  Egypt , however, meat, fish and cheese were obtainable, [44]  in  Gaza , grapes, fruit and wine. [45]  Cold dishes are still relished in the East. Generally, only one dish was eaten, with fresh bread daily. [46] 
 Some Jewish dishes frequently mentioned in  Yiddish literature  from the 12th century onward are  brätzel , [47]   lokshen , [48]   pasteten , [49] [50]   fladen , [51]   beleg . [52] 
 Barscht  or  borscht  is a  Ukrainian  beet soup, [53]  best known are the  berkes  or  barches  (challah) eaten on Shabbat, [54]  and  shalet  (cholent), [55]  which Heine commemorates, [56]  and which the Spanish Jews called  ani  (hamin). Shabbat pudding,  kigl  or  kugel  in Yiddish, is also well known.
 
 Modern era [ edit ] 
 In the United States, in particular, Jewish cooking (and the cookbooks that recorded and guided it) evolved in ways that illuminate changes in the role of Jewish women and the Jewish home. [57] 
 Jewish cuisine has also played a big part in shaping the restaurant scene in the West, in particular in the UK and US. [58]   Israeli cuisine  in particular has become a leading food trend in the UK, with many Israeli restaurants now opening up sister restaurants in London and beyond. [59] 
 In the 1930s there were four Jewish bakeries in  Minneapolis  within a few blocks of each other baking  bagels  and other fresh breads. Jewish families purchased  challah  loaves for their Sabbath meal at one North Side bakery. There were two kosher meat markets and four  Jewish delicatessens , one of which began distribution for what would become  Sara Lee  frozen  cheesecakes . The delis sold sandwiches like  corned beef  and  salami . [60] 
 In  Chicago  Jewish immigrants from eastern Europe ate a type of  oatmeal  cereal called  krupnik  that sometimes had barley, potatoes and fat added, and milk when it was available.  Orthodox Jews  continued to observe  kashrut . Sweatshop laborers carried  bagels ,  knish  and  herring  to work. [ citation needed ] 
 
 Jewish cuisine variations [ edit ] 
   Fried  Jewish artichokes 
 Jewish cuisines vary widely depending on their regions of origin, but they tend to be broadly categorized into  Sephardi  (Iberian and North African),  Mizrahi  (Middle Eastern and Central Asian) and  Ashkenazi  (Eastern and Central European) families. 
 Still, there is significant overlap between the different cuisines, as Jews have often migrated great distances and as different regions where Jews have settled (e.g. Southeastern Europe) have been influenced by different cultures over time. For example, Balkan Jewish cuisine contains both Ashkenazi/European and Sephardic-Turkish influences, as this part of Europe (up to the borders of present-day Austria and Poland) was for a time part of the Ottoman Empire. 
 Since the rise of Ashkenazi Jewish migration to 19th-century Palestine and the establishment of the State of Israel, increased contact between Ashkenazi, Sephardi and Mizrahi Jews has led to a rising importance of Middle-Eastern and Mediterranean cuisine amongst Jews of all ethnicities.
 
 Ashkenazi [ edit ] 
 See also:  Ashkenazi Jewish cuisine 
 While Ashkenazi cuisine as it is known today is largely based within the context of  American-Jewish  and Ashkenazi-Israeli food, much of the culinary tradition of Ashkenazi Jews springs from Central and Eastern Europe, and a good part of that from China. Jordan Paper writes:-
 
 For many Americans, Baltic and Eastern European food is the epitome of Jewish cuisine, although any ordinary restaurant in Poland, the Ukraine, or northwestern Russia, aside from offering pork and mixing meat and dairy, would by that criterion be Jewish. Some of these foods have become part of festival rituals, such as latkes (potato pancakes) during Hanukkah. But unless the Maccabees were in Peru nearly two thousand years before the Spanish arrived, latkes are a relatively recent northeastern European addition to the festivities. The influence of modern Israel on contemporary North American Jewish consciousness has meant that the typical foods of the southern and eastern Mediterranean shores are now also considered Jewish. By that logic, the cuisine of central China should be understood as Jewish also... Actually many so-called Ashkenazi Jewish dishes – such as knishes (Chinese:  baozi ), kreplach ( hundun ), blintzes ( chunjuian ), piroshki ( zhengjaio ), and many noodle preparations-are northern Chinese. They were brought to Poland and the Ukraine in the thirteenth century by the invading Mongol army, which had chefs, as well as military technicians, from northern China.'  [61] 
 After having been expelled from Western Europe in the Middle Ages, Jews were forced to live in poverty and thus were limited in terms of ingredients. Dishes were made with fewer components; they were not heavily spiced and ingredients that were more flavorful had to be used sparingly. This is often why some dishes in Ashkenazic cuisine are known for being blander than dishes in Sephardic or Mizrahi cuisine.
 The cuisine is based largely on ingredients that were affordable for the historically poor Ashkenazi Jewish communities of Europe, often composed of ingredients that were readily available in Europe and affordable and which were perceived to be less desirable and rarely used by their gentile neighbors, such as brisket, chicken liver, and artichokes, among other ingredients. 
 As Ashkenazi Jews were typically forbidden to grow crops in their home countries in Europe, their cuisine reflects that and there are less vegetable-focused dishes in their cuisine compared to their Sephardi and Mizrahi counterparts. 
 Meat is ritually slaughtered in the  shechita  process, and is soaked and salted. Meat dishes are a prominent feature of  Shabbat , festival, and celebratory meals. Braised meats such as brisket feature heavily, as do root vegetables such as potatoes, carrots, and parsnips which are used in such dishes as  latkes ,  matzo ball soup , and  tzimmes . 
 Cooked, stuffed and baked vegetables such as stuffed cabbage are central to the cuisine. Due to the lack of availability of olive oil and other fats traditionally used in Jewish cooking, fat from leftover chicken and goose skins ( gribenes ) called  schmaltz  is traditionally used in  fleishig  (meat) dishes, while butter is traditionally used in  milchig  (dairy) dishes.
 
 Fish [ edit ] 
   Gefilte fish  with carrot slices and  chrain 
 With kosher meat not always available, fish became an important staple of the Jewish diet. In Eastern Europe it was sometimes especially reserved for  Shabbat . As fish is not considered meat by the culinary definition nor in the Judaic context, it is consumed by many observant Jews who consider to be permissible to eat fish with milk and other dairy products. However, within various Jewish communities there are different rules regarding fish and dairy. [62]  For instance, many  Sephardim  do not mix fish with milk or any other kind of dairy product. [63] [64]  Similarly, the  Chabad - Hasidic  custom is not to consume fish together with specifically  milk ; however, it is permissible to eat fish and other  dairy products   (ex; butter, cheese, cream)  at the same time. [65] 
 Even though fish is  parve , when they are served at the same meal,  Orthodox Jews  will eat them during separate courses and wash (or replace) the dishes in between.  Gefilte fish  and  lox  are popular in  Ashkenazi  cuisine.
 Though the combination of dairy and fish is generally acceptable, fish is the only parve food that the Talmud places restrictions on when it is being baked/eaten alongside meat. Talmudic reasoning for not eating meat and fish together originates from health and sanitary concerns rather than holy obligations. [65] [66]  Unlike with milk and meat, it is kosher to eat fish and meat at the same meal as long as; they're baked separately, they're served on separate plates as separate courses, the same utensils aren't shared, and between courses the mouth is thoroughly cleansed with a beverage & the palate is neutralized with a different food. [62] [66] 
 Gefilte fish  (from Yiddish געפֿילטע פֿיש  gefilte fish , "stuffed fish") was traditionally made by skinning the fish steaks, usually  German carp , de-boning the flesh, mincing it and sometimes mixing with finely chopped browned onions (3:1), eggs, salt or pepper and vegetable oil. The fish skin and head were then stuffed with the mixture and poached. [67]  The religious reason for a boneless fish dish for the Sabbath is the prohibition of separating bones from food while eating [the prohibition of   borer , separating]
 
   Vorschmack / gehakte   herring  spread on rye bread 
 A more common commercially packaged product found today is the "Polish" gefilte fish patties or balls, similar to  quenelles , where sugar is added to the broth, resulting in a slightly sweet taste. [68]  Strictly speaking they are the fish filling, rather than the complete filled fish. [69]  This method of serving evolved from the tradition of removing the stuffing from the skin, [70]  rather than portioning the entire fish into slices before serving.
 While traditionally made with  carp  or  whitefish  and sometimes pike, gefilte fish may also be made from any large fish:  cod ,  haddock , or  hake  in the United Kingdom.
 The combination of  smoked salmon , or whitefish with  bagels  and  cream cheese  is a traditional breakfast or brunch in  American Jewish cuisine , made famous at  New York City   delicatessens .
 Vorschmack  or  gehakte hering  (chopped herring), a popular appetizer on Shabbat, is made by chopping skinned, boned  herrings  with hard-boiled  eggs , sometimes  onions ,  apples ,  sugar  or  pepper  and a dash of  vinegar .
 
 Soups [ edit ] 
   Borscht  with sour cream 
 A number of soups are characteristically  Ashkenazi , one of the most common of which is  chicken soup  traditionally served on Shabbat, holidays and special occasions. 
 The soup may be served with noodles ( lokshen  in Yiddish). It is often served with  shkedei marak  (lit. "soup almonds", croutons popular in Israel), called  mandlen  or  mandlach  in Yiddish. Other popular ingredients are  kreplach  (dumplings) and matza balls  ( kneidlach )  – a mixture of matza meal, eggs, water, and pepper or salt. Some reserve  kneidlach  for  Passover  and  kreplach  for other special occasions.
 In the preparation of a number of soups, neither meat nor fat is used. Such soups formed the food of the poor classes. An expression among Jews of Eastern Europe,  soup mit nisht  (soup with nothing), owes its origin to soups of this kind. 
 Soups such as  borsht  were considered a staple in  Russia . Soups like  krupnik  were made of barley, potatoes and fat. This was the staple food of the poor students of the  yeshivot ; in richer families, meat was added to this soup.
 At weddings, "golden" chicken soup was often served. The reason for its name is probably the yellow circles of molten  chicken fat  floating on its surface. Today, chicken soup is widely referred to (not just among Jews) in jest as "Jewish penicillin", and hailed as a cure for the common cold. [71] 
 There are a number of sour soups in the borscht category. One is  kraut  or cabbage borscht, made by cooking together cabbage, meat, bones, onions, raisins, sour salt (citric acid), sugar and sometimes tomatoes. 
 Beet borsht is served hot or cold. In the cold version, a beaten egg yolk may be added before serving and each bowl topped with a dollop of sour cream. This last process is called  farweissen  (to make white).
 
 Bread and cake [ edit ] 
   Challah  bread 
 The dough of  challah  (called  barkhes  in Western Yiddish) is often shaped into forms having symbolical meanings; thus on  Rosh Hashanah  rings and coins are imitated, indicating "May the new year be as round and complete as these"; for Hosha'na Rabbah, bread is baked in the form of a key, meaning "May the door of heaven open to admit our prayers." Challah bread is most commonly braided or made in round roll shapes.  [72] 
 The  hamentash , a triangular cookie or turnover filled with fruit preserves ( lekvar ) or honey and black  poppy seed  paste, is eaten on the  Feast of Purim . It is said to be shaped like the ears of  Haman  the tyrant. The  mohn kihel  is a circular or rectangular wafer sprinkled with poppy seed.  Pirushkes , or turnovers, are little cakes fried in honey or dipped in molasses after they are baked.  Strudel  is served for dessert.  Kugels  are prepared from rice, noodles or mashed potatoes.
 In Eastern Europe, the Jews baked black ( proster , or "ordinary") bread, white bread and  challah . The most common form is the twist ( koilitch  or  kidke  from the  Romanian  word  încolăci  which means "to twist"). The  koilitch  is oval in form and about one and a half feet in length. On special occasions, such as weddings, the  koilitch  is increased to a length of about two and a half feet. 
 The  bagel , which originated in  Poland , is a popular  Ashkenazi  food and became widespread in the  United States . [73] [74] 
 
 Meat and fats [ edit ] 
 Gebratenes  (roasted meat), chopped meat and  essig-fleisch  (vinegar meat) are favorite meat recipes. The  essig  or, as it is sometimes called,  honig  or  sauerbraten , is made by adding to meat which has been partially roasted with some sugar, bay leaves, pepper, raisins, salt and a little vinegar.  Knish  is a snack food consisting of a meat or potato filling covered with dough that is either baked or grilled.
 A popular dish among  Ashkenazim , as amongst most Eastern-Europeans, is  pierogi  (which are related to but distinct from  kreplach ), often filled with minced beef.  Kishka  is a popular Ashkenazi dish traditionally made of stuffing of flour or matza meal,  schmaltz  and spices.
 The rendered fat of chickens, known as  schmaltz , is sometimes kept in readiness for cooking use when needed.  Gribenes  or "scraps", also called  griven,  the cracklings left from the rendering process were one of the favorite foods in Eastern Europe.  Schmaltz  is eaten spread on bread.
 A spread of  chopped liver , prepared with onions and often including  gribenes , is a popular appetizer, side dish, or snack, especially among Jews on the eastern coast of North America. It is usually served with rye bread or crackers.  Brisket  is also a popular Ashkenazi dish of braised beef brisket.
 Holishkes , stuffed cabbage, also known as the  cabbage roll , is also a European Jewish dish that emerged from more impoverished times for Jews. Because having a live cow was more valuable than to eat meat in the Middle Ages, Jews used fillers such as breadcrumbs and vegetables to mix with ground beef. This gave the effect of more meat being stuffed into the cabbage leaves.
 
 Sweets and confections [ edit ] 
   Teiglach 
 Teiglach , traditionally served on  Rosh Hashanah , the Jewish New Year, consists of little balls of dough (about the size of a marble) drenched in a honey syrup.  Ingberlach  are ginger candies shaped into small sticks or rectangles.
 In Europe, jellies and preserves made from fruit juice were used as pastry filling or served with tea. Among the poor, jelly was reserved for invalids, hence the practice of reciting the Yiddish saying  Alevay zol men dos nit darfn  (May we not have occasion to use it) before storing it away.
 Flodni , a layered sweet pastry consisting of apples, walnuts, currants and poppy seeds, were a staple of  Hungarian Jewish  bakeries prior to  World War II .
 Because it was easy to prepare, made from inexpensive ingredients and contained no dairy products,  compote  became a staple dessert in Jewish households throughout Europe and was considered part of Jewish cuisine. [75] 
 
 Side dishes [ edit ] 
   Carrot  tzimmes 
 Tzimmes  consists generally of cooked vegetables or fruits, sometimes with meat added. The most popular vegetable is the carrot ( mehren tzimmes ), which is sliced. Turnips were also used for  tzimmes , particularly in Lithuania. In southern Russia, Galicia and Romania  tzimmes  was made of pears, apples, figs, prunes or plums ( floymn tzimmes ).
 Kreplach , similar to Russian  pelmeni , are  ravioli -like dumplings made from flour and eggs mixed into a dough, rolled into sheets, cut into squares and then filled with finely chopped, seasoned meat or cheese. They are most often served in soup, but may be fried.  Kreplech  are eaten on various holidays, among them  Purim  and  Hosha'na Rabbah .
 
 Sephardi, Mizrahi and Italian Jewish cuisine [ edit ] 
 See also:  Cuisine of the Mizrahi Jews  and  Cuisine of the Sephardic Jews 
   Stuffed Peppers 
 The exact distinction between traditional  Sephardic  and  Mizrahi cuisines  can be difficult to make, due to the intermingling of the Sephardi diaspora and the Mizrahi Jews who they came in contact with. 
 As a general rule, however, both types reflect the food of the local non-Jewish population that each group lived amongst. The need to preserve  kashrut  does lead to a few significant changes (most notably, the use of  olive oil  instead of animal fat is often considered to be a legacy of Jewish residency in an area, due to the fact that olive oil may be eaten with milk, unlike animal fat). 
 Despite this, Sephardic and Ashkenazic concepts of kosher differ; perhaps the most notable difference being that  rice , a major staple of the Sephardic diet, is considered kosher for  Passover  among Sephardim but it is forbidden as  kitniyot  by most Ashkenazim.
 Sephardi cuisine emphasizes salads, stuffed vegetables and vine leaves, olive oil, lentils, fresh and dried fruits, herbs and nuts, and chickpeas. Meat dishes often make use of lamb or ground beef. Fresh lemon juice is added to many soups and sauces. 
 Many meat and rice dishes incorporate dried fruits such as apricots, prunes and raisins. Pine nuts are used as a garnish. Mizrahi cuisine is based largely on fresh ingredients, as marketing was done in the local souq. 
 Meat is ritually slaughtered in the  shechita  process, and is soaked and salted. Meat dishes are a prominent feature of  Shabbat , festival, and celebratory meals. 
 Cooked, stuffed and baked vegetables are central to the cuisine, as are various kinds of beans, chickpeas, lentils and burghul (cracked wheat). Rice takes the place of potatoes. 
 Coming from the Mediterranean and "sunny" climes,  Mizrahi  cuisine is often light, with an emphasis on salads, stuffed vegetables and vine leaves, olive oil, lentils, fresh and dried fruits, herbs and nuts, and chickpeas. Meat dishes often make use of lamb or ground beef. Fresh lemon juice is added to many soups and sauces. 
 Many meat and rice dishes incorporate dried fruits such as apricots, prunes and raisins. Pine nuts are used as a garnish. Pomegranate juice is a staple of Persian Jewish cooking.  Kubbeh , a meat-stuffed bulgur dumpling, features in the cooking of many Mizrahi communities. It is served in the cooking broth, as a kind of soup.
 
   Potato  bourekas 
 Sephardic  cuisine in particular is known for its considerable use of vegetables unavailable to the  Ashkenazim  of Europe, including  spinach ,  artichokes ,  pine nuts  and (in more modern times)  squash . 
 The cooking style is largely Middle Eastern, with significant admixtures of Spanish, Italian and North African flavors. The most popular Sephardic and Mizrahi dishes include  malawach ,  jachnun ,  sabich ,  mofletta ,  meorav yerushalmi ,  kubaneh ,  skhug  and  amba .  Mizrahi  Jewish cuisine has many unique dishes that were eaten by Jews in Iraq, Eastern Turkey, Kurdistan, Iran and Yemen.
 
 Shabbat and holiday dishes [ edit ] 
 Shabbat [ edit ] 
   Chamin / Cholent 
 Good food is an important part of the  mitzvah  of  oneg Shabbat  ("enjoying Shabbat"), hence much of Jewish cuisine revolves around  Shabbat .
 As observant Jews do not cook on Shabbat, various techniques were developed to provide for a hot meal on Shabbat day. 
 One such dish is  cholent  or  chamin , a slow-cooked meat stew with many variations. The ingredients are placed in a pot and put up to boil before lighting the candles on Friday evening. Then the pot is placed on a hotplate, traditional  blech  (thin tin sheet used to cover the flames and on which the pot is placed), or in a slow oven and left to simmer until the following day. [76] 
 Cholent  emerged in ancient Judea, possibly as far back as the  Second Temple period . Over the centuries, as Jewish diaspora communities developed, they created variations of the dish based on the local climate and available ingredients.
 A prominent feature of Shabbat cookery is the preparation of twists of bread, known as  challot  or (in southern Germany,  Austria  and  Hungary ) "barches". They are often covered with seeds to represent  manna , which fell in a double portion on the sixth day. [ citation needed ] 
 Another Shabbat dish is  calf's foot jelly , called  p'tsha  or  šaltiena  in Lithuania and  galarita ,  galer ,  galleh , or  fisnoge  in Poland. Beef or calf bones are put up to boil with water, seasonings, garlic and onions for a long time. It is then allowed to cool. The broth then jells into a semi-solid mass, which is served in cubes. 
 Drelies ,  a similar dish originating in south Russia and Galicia is mixed with  soft-boiled eggs  and vinegar when removed from the oven and served hot. In Romania it is called  piftie , in Serbia  pihtije ; it is served cold, with garlic, hard-boiled eggs and vinegar sauce or mustard creme and considered a traditional dish in the winter season.
 Kugel  is another Shabbat favorite, particularly  lokshen kugel,  a sweet baked noodle pudding, often with raisins and spices. Non-sweet kugels may be made of potatoes, carrots or a combination of vegetables.
 Traditional noodles— lokshen —are made from a dough of flour and eggs rolled into sheets and then cut into long strips. If the dough is cut into small squares, it becomes  farfel .  Both  lokshen  and  farfel  are usually boiled and served with soup.
 
 Rosh Hashanah [ edit ] 
 On  Rosh Hashanah , the  Jewish  New Year, several symbolic foods called  simanim  are prepared and eaten for a variety of different reasons, each unique to the dish. All of the ingredients within the dishes are  kosher , which means they follow the laws of  kashrut , the Hebrew word for correct. [77] 
 The majority of the dishes are sweetened to represent a prayer for a sweet (pleasant) new year. Such sweet dishes include  apples  that are either baked or covered in  honey ,  lekach [78]  (honey cake) and  makroudh  (a pastry that is filled with dates and covered with honey).
 Dates , symbolizing the end, [79]  can also be eaten by themselves to encourage the enemies to meet their end. The value of the date can be traced back to biblical times, when the  palm date  is mentioned multiple times within the  Bible  itself, but also with how valuable dates were as an  export . [80] 
 Pomegranate  seeds are eaten for a year of many blessings, because there are many seeds inside of a single pomegranate. Specifically, there are thought to be 613 seeds inside of a pomegranate, each one representing one of the  Torah's  613 commandments. [81] 
 The traditional value placed on pomegranates and their consumption is derived from their mention in the  Bible  when its discovery by one of Moses's spies concluded that there was fertility in the land of the unknown. [82] 
 Challah  bread is baked into a round, circular shape that is meant to represent the cyclical nature of life and the crown. [83]  It is also sweetened with either honey or a combination of cinnamon and sugar instead of being dipped into the usual  kosher  salt. [84] 
 Tzimmes , a side dish composed traditionally of sweetened carrots or yams, are served to symbolize prosperity, because of the double meaning of  Yiddish  word  meren , which represents "to multiply" and "carrot". [85] 
 Additional symbolic foods include:
 
 Teiglach , knotted pastries boiled in a honeyed syrup (for  Ashkenazi  Jews). 
 Head of a  fish  or a  ram , for a successful year in which we are the "head", not the "tail" (because Rosh Hashanah begins the year, it is referred to as the head). [86] 
 Fried  leek   cutlets , called  karteh  (for  Sephardic  Jews). 
 Fried  chard   cutlets , called  salkeh  (for Sephardic Jews). 
 Local type of  zucchini  called  qara'a , made into sweet  confiture  (for Sephardic Jews). 
 Algerian Jews  serve a honey-dipped date pastry called  makroudh . [87] 
 Yom Kippur [ edit ] 
 Yom Kippur  is a fast day. The pre-fast meal, called  seuda hamafseket , usually consists of foods that are digested slowly and are not highly spiced, to make fasting easier and prevent thirst.
 
 Sukkot [ edit ] 
   Latkes  with  smetana 
 On  Sukkot  meals are eaten outside in the  sukkah , a thatched hut built specially for the holiday. Often fresh fruits are eaten also, which are woven into the roof of the thatched hut.
 
 Hanukkah [ edit ] 
   Sufganiyot 
 It is customary to eat foods fried in oil to celebrate  Hanukkah . Eating dairy products was a custom in medieval times.
 
 Latkes —potato pancakes, may be topped with sour cream or applesauce  ( Ashkenazi  food) 
 Sufganiyot —jam doughnuts (Ashkenazi, popular in  Israel ) 
 Fried  doughnuts  with grounded  sugar  sprinkled on top, called  sfinge  (mainly by  North African Jews ) or  zalabiyeh . 
 Rugelach —filled pastry. 
 Purim [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Purim 
   Purim  hamantaschen 
 Hamantaschen —triangular pastries traditionally filled with poppy seeds or prunes 
 Couscous —a  Berber  dish of small steamed balls of crushed  durum wheat   semolina  traditionally served with a stew spooned on top 
 Fazuelos — Sephardic  pastries of thin fried dough 
 Ma'amoul —shortbread pastries filled with dates or nuts 
 Passover [ edit ] 
 Passover  celebrates  The Exodus  from Egypt where it is said the Jewish people left so quickly, there was no time for their  bread  to rise. [88]  Commemorating this event, Jews eat  matza  and abstain from bread, cakes and other foods made with yeast and leavening agents. In modern times, rabbinical authorities permit the use of chemical leavening, such as baking powder. 
 Matza is a staple food during the holiday and used as an ingredient of many Passover dishes.  Kneidlach  ( matza ball ) soup is traditional. Fish is coated with matza meal before frying and cakes and puddings are made with potato starch and matza meal. 
 Jewish cooks use both matza meal and  potato starch  for pastries during Passover. Whisked whole eggs or egg whites are frequently used to make pastries without leavening agents, such as angel and sponge cakes (potato starch replacing cake flour) and coconut and almond  macaroons . [89] 
 
   Handmade  matsa shmura 
 Passover foods vary distinctly between  Sephardic  and  Ashkenazic  communities. Ashkenazim exclude rice, while it is served by Sephardim. Matza is traditionally prepared from water and flour only, but there are other varieties, such as egg matza, which may also contain fruit juice. 
 At the  seder , it is customary in some communities, particularly among strictly Orthodox Jews, to use handmade  shmura matza , which has undergone particularly strict  kashrut  supervision.
 The exclusion of leaven from the home has forced Jewish cooks to be creative, producing a wide variety of Passover dishes that use matza meal and  potato  as thickeners.  Potato flour  is largely used in cakes along with finely ground matza meal and nuts.
 
   Soup with  matza balls 
 Popular Ashkenazi dishes are  matza brei  (crumbled matza with grated onion, fried with scrambled egg),  matza latkes  ( pancakes ) and  chremslach  (also called  crimsel  or  gresjelies,  matza meal fritters). Wined  matza kugels  ( pudding ) have been introduced into modern Jewish cooking. 
 For thickening soups and sauces at Passover fine matza meal or potato flour is used instead of flour, for frying fish or cutlets a coating of matza meal and egg, and for stuffing potatoes instead of soaked bread.
 " Noodles " may be made by making pancakes with beaten eggs and matza meal which, when cooked, are rolled up and cut into strips. They may be dropped into  soup  before serving.  Matza kleys  (dumplings) are small balls made from suet mixed with chopped fried onions, chopped parsley, beaten egg and seasonings, dropped into soup and cooked.
 Wine is also an important part of Passover meals. Traditionally, a Passover seder is served with four cups of wine or grape juice, to be consumed along with various parts of the seder.  Kosher wine  is typically consumed for Passover.
 
 Shavuot [ edit ] 
 Dairy foods are traditionally eaten on  Shavuot .
 
 Blintzes 
 Cheesecake 
 Tisha B'Av [ edit ] 
 Tisha B'av  is a fast day, preceded by nine days when Jews traditionally do not eat meat, except on  Shabbat . Thus dairy and vegetarian dishes are prepared during this time of year. 
 The meal before the fast (the  seudat mafseket ) also consists of dairy foods and usually contains dishes made from lentils and eggs, both ancient Jewish symbols of mourning. [90]  Some  Ashkenazi  Jews eat hard-boiled eggs sprinkled with ashes to symbolize mourning.
 
 See also [ edit ] 
 
 Food portal Judaism portal 
 
 American Jewish cuisine 
 Appetizing store 
 Cuisine of Israel 
 Cuisine of the Sephardic Jews 
 Cuisine of the Mizrahi Jews 
 Delicatessen 
 Jewish deli 
 Hechsher 
 Jewish vegetarianism 
 Kosher restaurant 
 Kosher wine 
 List of Jewish cuisine dishes 
 List of kosher restaurants 
 
 References [ edit ] 
  This article incorporates text from a publication now in the  public domain :  Singer, Isidore ;  et al., eds. (1901–1906).  The Jewish Encyclopedia . New York: Funk & Wagnalls.   {{ cite encyclopedia }} :  Missing or empty  |title=  ( help ) 
 
 
 ^   "BCK Kosher Certification Agency—Kosher Kitchen" . Bckosher.org . Retrieved  1 May  2012 . 
 
 ^   "cRc: Kosher in the Kitchen" .  Consumer Kosher . Chicago Rabbinical Council . Retrieved  12 July  2012 . 
 
 ^   Lupovich, Howard (2010). "7".  Jews and Judaism in World History . p. 258.  ISBN   978-0-203-86197-4 . 
 
 ^   Jay Rayner (19 January 2003).  "Enduring love | Food monthly | The Observer" . Observer.guardian.co.uk . Retrieved  1 May  2012 . 
 
 ^   Hareuveni, Nogah; Frenkley, Helen (1980).  Nature in our biblical heritage  (in English and Hebrew). Internet Archive. Kiryat Ono, Israel: Neot Kedumim.  ISBN   978-965-233-002-4 . 
 
 ^  a   b   Roden, Claudia (1997).  The Book of Jewish Food . pp. 22–24. 
 
 ^   Cooper, John (1993).  Eat and Be Satisfied . pp. 15–16. 
 
 ^   "The Daily Stew? Everyday Meals in Ancient Israel" . 
 
 ^   Rubin, Shira.  "Israel's millennia-old 'biblical diet' " .  www.bbc.com . 
 
 ^  a   b   "Eating in Historical Jerusalem" .  www.jewishvirtuallibrary.org . 
 
 ^   Macdonald, Nathan (2008).  What Did the Ancient Israelites Eat? . pp. 19–21. 
 
 ^   "Food in the Bible". Neot Kedumim News. Summer–Fall 2002. 
 
 ^   Cooper, John (1993).  Eat and Be Satisfied . pp. 4–9. 
 
 ^   Miller, J. Maxwell ; Hayes, John H (1986).  A History of Ancient Israel and Judah . Louisville, KY: Westminster John Knox Press. pp.  51–53 .  ISBN   0-664-21262-X . 
 
 ^   1 Samuel 25.18 
 
 ^   Ruth 2:14 
 
 ^   Vamosh, Miriam Feinberg (16 December 2007).  Food at the time of the Bible : from Adam's apple to the last supper . Herzlia, Israel: Palphot, Ltd. p. 12–13.  ISBN   978-9652801159 . 
 
 ^   Hareuveni, Nogah (1980).  Nature in Our Biblical Heritage . Israel: Neot Kedumim.  ISBN   965-233-002-7 . 
 
 ^   Cooper, John (1993).  Eat and Be Satisfied . pp. 4–9. 
 
 ^   Marks, Gil  (2010).  Encyclopedia of Jewish Food . pp. 70–71. 
 
 ^   Marks, Gil:  The: World of Jewish Cooking , P. 3 (1999). Shimon and Schuster 
 
 ^   Targ. Sheni to Esth. iii. 8 
 
 ^   "Hist. Naturalis," xxxi. 95 
 
 ^   "Food—In Talmudic Times" , The Jewish Encyclopedia (1901-1906), pg 432  [1] 
 
 ^   Rosenblum, Jordan (2010). "Why Do You Refuse to Eat Pork? Jews, Food, And Identity in Roman Palestine".  The Jewish Quarterly Review .  100  (1): 95–110.  doi : 10.1353/jqr.0.0076 .  S2CID   162338333 . 
 
 ^   Ber. vi. 7 
 
 ^   Mark xv. 23 
 
 ^   'Ab. Zarah 30a 
 
 ^   Tosef., Sheb. v. 223 
 
 ^   B. Ḳ. 97b 
 
 ^   Abba Gorion i. 9 
 
 ^   Yer. Sheḳ. 48d. 
 
 ^   Sometimes translated as purgative 
 
 ^   Löw, "Aramäische Pflanzennamen," p. 231 
 
 ^   Ket. 77b 
 
 ^   Shab. 41a. 
 
 ^   p. 60, ed. Hildesheimer 
 
 ^   i. 38 
 
 ^   Maimonides, "Sefer Refu'ot", ed. Goldberg, London, 1900 
 
 ^   Maimonides, "Sefer Refu'ot", ed. Goldberg, London, 1900 p. 8 
 
 ^   Maimonides, "Sefer Refu'ot", ed. Goldberg, London, 1900 p. 9 
 
 ^   Abrahams, "Jewish Life in the Middle Ages," p. 151 
 
 ^   "Jahrb. für die Gesch. der Juden," iii. 201 
 
 ^   ib. 208 
 
 ^   ib. 211 
 
 ^   Jacob Safir, in "Eben Sappir," p. 58a, Lyck, 1866 
 
 ^   Glassberg, "Zikron Berit," p. 122, Berlin, 1892 
 
 ^   Abrahams, l.c. p. 152 
 
 ^   ib. p. 151 
 
 ^   Yoreh De'ah, Bet Yosef, § 97 
 
 ^   Yoreh De'ah, ib. 
 
 ^   Yoreh De'ah, Ṭure Zahab, § 101, 11 
 
 ^   ib. § 96 
 
 ^   Grünbaum, l.c. p. 229 
 
 ^   Abrahams, l.c. p. 151 
 
 ^   "Werke," i. 436 
 
 ^   Barbara Kirshenblatt-Gimblett,  "Kitchen Judaism,"  in  Getting Comfortable in New York: The American Jewish Home, 1880-1950 , edited by Susan L. Braunstein and Jenna Weisman Joselit (New York:  The Jewish Museum , 1990), pp.75-105.  (This article is also available, in pdf format, here  [2] .) 
 
 ^   Hancock, Alice (17 July 2017).  "Jewish food: the most comforting trend of 2017" . Retrieved  20 October  2017 . 
 
 ^   Cameron, Rebecca (3 October 2017).  "The Best 5 Restaurants in Jerusalem" . Retrieved  20 October  2017 . 
 
 ^   Lewin, Rhonda (2001).  Jewish Community of North Minneapolis .  ISBN   9780738508177 . 
 
 ^   Jordan Paper,  The Theology of the Chinese Jews, 1000–1850,   Wilfrid Laurier University Press  2012    ISBN   978-1-554-58404-8  p.13. 
 
 ^  a   b   "Fish with meat or dairy" .  Chabad . {{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: url-status ( link ) 
 
 ^   Jachter, Rabbi Haim.  "A Sephardi Refusing Bagels, Lox and Cream Cheese? Why?" .  jewishlinknj.com . Retrieved  9 September  2021 . 
 
 ^   "Beit Yosef, Yoreh Deah 87:5:1" .  Sefaria  (in Hebrew) . Retrieved  26 January  2023 .  ["Fish and locust are permissible to eat with dairy... In any case, one shouldn't eat them [fish or locust] with dairy because it is dangerous.] 
 
 ^  a   b   Posner, Menachem.  "May Fish be Consumed with Dairy? Is Lox and Cream Cheese Kosher?" .  Chabad . {{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: url-status ( link ) 
 
 ^  a   b   "Separating Fish and Meat | Kosher.com" .  www.kosher.com . Retrieved  9 September  2021 . 
 
 ^   Попова, М. Ф.,  Секреты Одесской кухни , Друк, Одесса, 2004, p.163 (Russian); Popova M.F.,  Secrets of  Odessa  kitchen , Druk, Odessa, 2004, p.163 
 
 ^   Satz, Miriam,  Heirloom cookbook: recipes handed down by Jewish mothers and modern recipes from daughters and friends , Kar-Ben, 2003, p.14 
 
 ^   Goodman, Hanna,  Jewish cooking around the World: gourmet and holiday recipes , Varda Books
Skokie, Illinois, 2002, p.147 
 
 ^   Garfunkel, Trudy,  Kosher for everybody: the complete guide to understanding, shopping, cooking, and eating the kosher way , John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 2004, p.11 
 
 ^   "Jewish penicillin definition" .  Medterms.Com . Medicine Net.Com, a WebMD Company. Archived from  the original  on 1 August 2012 . Retrieved  12 July  2012 . 
 
 ^   "Talk of the Table | Timeless Jewish Foods" . 17 June 2020. 
 
 ^   Filippone, Peggy Trowbridge.  “Bagel History: Bagels date back to the 1600s” , About.com website, retrieved 27 March 2013. 
 
 ^   Altschuler, Glenn C. (2008).  ”Three Centuries of Bagels” , a book review of:  'The Bagel: The Surprising History of a Modest Bread', by Balinska, Maria, Yale University Press, 2008 , Jewish Daily Press website, published on-line 5 November 2008 in the issue of 14 November 2008 
 
 ^   Be Merry / A taste of Poland ,  Haaretz 
 
 ^   The Complete & Illustrated Guide by Rabbi Fishel Jacobs  Sabbath 
 
 ^   "Overview of Jewish Dietary Laws & Regulations" .  www.jewishvirtuallibrary.org . Retrieved  24 October  2018 . 
 
 ^   " "Lekach"—Honey Cake" .  www.chabad.org . Retrieved  5 October  2018 . 
 
 ^   "Serve Up A Sweet New Year: 10 Symbolic Foods for Rosh Hashanah" .  The Spruce Eats . Retrieved  5 October  2018 . 
 
 ^   "Palm" .  www.jewishvirtuallibrary.org . Retrieved  24 October  2018 . 
 
 ^   Museum, The Jewish (19 September 2017).  "Pomegranates for Rosh Hashanah" .  The Jewish Museum . Retrieved  5 October  2018 . 
 
 ^   "Pomegranate" .  www.jewishvirtuallibrary.org . Retrieved  24 October  2018 . 
 
 ^   Kuruvilla, Carol (24 September 2014).  "The Spiritual Meaning Of The Food On Your Rosh Hashanah Table" .  Huffington Post . Retrieved  5 October  2018 . 
 
 ^   "Round (Spelt & Vegan) Cinnamon-Sugar Challah for Rosh Hashanah" .  www.chabad.org . Retrieved  5 October  2018 . 
 
 ^   "Traditional Rosh Hashanah Tzimmes" .  www.chabad.org . Retrieved  5 October  2018 . 
 
 ^   "A Fishy Tradition" . 29 August 2007. 
 
 ^   Nathan, Joan (31 August 2010).  "Rosh Hashana Recipes Routed Through Africa (Published 2010)" .  The New York Times . 
 
 ^   Exodus  12:34. 
 
 ^   "The Nibble: Macaroons" .  www.thenibble.com . 
 
 ^   See Marks,  The World of Jewish Cooking , pg 209 
 
 
 Bibliography [ edit ] 
 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons has media related to  Jewish cuisine . 
 
 
 
 
 Wikibooks  Cookbook  has a recipe/module on
 
  Cuisine of Israel 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wikibooks  Cookbook  has a recipe/module on
 
  Kosher 
 
 
 Bellin, Mildred Grosberg ,  The Original Jewish Cook Book , New York,  Bloch Publishing , 1983,  ISBN   0-8197-0058-4 
 Cooper, John,  Eat and Be Satisfied: A Social History of Jewish Food , New Jersey, Jason Aronson Inc., 1993,  ISBN   0-87668-316-2 
 Goldstein, Joyce and Da Costa, Beatriz,  Sephardic Flavors: Jewish Cooking of the Mediterranean , Chronicle Books, 2000,  ISBN   0-8118-2662-7 
 Feinberg Vamosh, Miriam (2007).  Food at the Time of the Bible: From Adam's Apple to the Last Supper . Israel: Palphot.  ISBN   978-965-280-115-9 . 
 Hareuveni, Nogah (1980).  Nature in Our Biblical Heritage . Israel: Neot Kedumim.  ISBN   965-233-002-7 . 
 Gur, Jana (2008).  The Book of New Israeli Food: A Culinary Journey . New York: Schocken.  ISBN   978-0-8052-1224-2 . 
 Kraemer, David (2007).  Jewish eating and identity throughout the ages . New York: Routledge advances in sociology vol.29.  ISBN   978-0-415-95797-7 . 
 Marks, Gil (2010).  Encyclopedia of Jewish Food . New Jersey: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.  ISBN   978-0-470-39130-3 . 
 Marks, Gil ,  The World of Jewish Cooking: More than 500 Traditional Recipes from Alsace to Yemen , New York, Simon & Schuster, 1996,  ISBN   0-684-83559-2 
 Macdonald, Nathan (2008).  What Did the Ancient Israelites Eat? Diet in Biblical Times . W. B. Eerdmans Publishing Company.  ISBN   978-0-8028-6298-3 . 
 Roden, Claudia ,  The Book of Jewish Food: An Odyssey from Samarkand to New York , New York, Knopf, 1997,  ISBN   0-394-53258-9 
 Schwartz, Oded,  In Search of Plenty: A History of Jewish Food , London, Kyle Cathie Ltd., 1992,  ISBN   1-85626-025-9 
 Sternberg, Robert,  The Sephardic Kitchen: The Healthful Food and Rich Culture of the Mediterranean Jews , Harper Collins, 1996,  ISBN   0-06-017691-1 
 Historical [ edit ] 
 Atrutel, J.,  Book of Jewish Cookery , London, 1874 
 Greenbaum, Florence Kreisler,  The International Jewish Cookbook , New York,  Bloch Publishing , 1919 
 Kander, Mrs. Simon ( Lizzie Black Kander ),  The Settlement Cookbook , Milwaukee, The Settlement, 1901 
 Kramer, Bertha M. ("Aunt Babette"),  Aunt Babette's Cook Book  Cincinnati,  Bloch Publishing , 1889 
 Montefiore, Lady Judith (attr),  The Jewish Manual , London, 1846 
 Aunt Sarah's Cookery Book for a Jewish Kitchen , Liverpool, 1872; 2d ed., 1889 
 Further reading [ edit ] 
 Jackson, Judy (1998)  Classic Jewish . London: Hermes House  ISBN   1-84038-065-9 
 v t e Jews  and  Judaism 
 Outline of Judaism 
 Index of Jewish history-related articles 
 History 
 Timeline 
 Israelites 
 Origins of Judaism 
 Ancient Israel and Judah 
 Second Temple period 
 Rabbinic Judaism 
 Middle Ages 
 Haskalah 
 Zionism 
 Population 
 Assimilation 
 Atheists 
 Buddhists 
 Karaites 
 Samaritans 
 Lists of Jews 
 Persecution 
 Antisemitism 
 Diaspora 
 Ashkenazi 
 Chuts 
 Yekke 
 Bene Israel 
 Beta Israel 
 Beta Abraham 
 Bene Ephraim 
 Bnei Menashe 
 Cochini 
 Gruzinim 
 Italkim 
 Kaifeng Jews 
 Karaites 
 Crimean Karaites 
 Krymchaks 
 Maghrebi 
 Berber Jews 
 Mizrahi 
 Baghdadi 
 Bukharim 
 Mountain Jews 
 Romaniote 
 Sephardi 
 Musta'arabi 
 Paradesi 
 Teimanim 
 
 Languages ( Diasporic ) 
 Hebrew 
 Modern 
 Ashkenazi 
 Sephardi 
 Mizrahi 
 Yemenite 
 Tiberian 
 Samaritan 
 Signed 
 Medieval 
 Mishnaic 
 Biblical 
 Babylonian 
 Palestinian 
 Catalanic 
 Judeo-Amazigh 
 Judeo-Arabic 
 Yahudic 
 Judeo-Baghdadi 
 Judeo-Moroccan 
 Judeo-Tripolitanian 
 Judeo-Tunisian 
 Judeo-Yemeni 
 Judaeo-Aramaic 
 Targum 
 Barzani 
 Betanure 
 Hulaulá 
 Lishana Deni 
 Lishán Didán 
 Lishanid Noshan 
 Biblical 
 Talmudic 
 Palestinian 
 Galilean 
 Judeo-Aragonese 
 Judeo-Italian 
 Judaeo-Piedmontese 
 Judeo-Gascon 
 Judaeo-Greek 
 Judeo-Latin 
 Judeo-Malayalam 
 Judeo-Marathi 
 Judaeo-Occitan 
 Judeo-Persian 
 Bukhori 
 Judeo-Borujerdi 
 Judeo-Golpaygani 
 Judeo-Hamedani 
 Judeo-Shirazi 
 Juhuri 
 Judaeo-Portuguese 
 Judeo-Urdu 
 Karaim 
 Kayliñña 
 Kivruli 
 Knaanic 
 Koiné Greek 
 Krymchak 
 Lachoudisch 
 Ladino 
 Haketia 
 Tetuani 
 Lotegorisch 
 Qwareña 
 Shassagh 
 Shassi 
 Shuadit 
 Yiddish 
 Zarphatic 
 Philosophy 
 Beliefs 
 Mitzvah 
 Rabbinic authority 
 Chosen people 
 Conversion 
 Eschatology 
 Messiah 
 Ethics 
 Holiness 
 God 
 Halakha 
 Kabbalah 
 Land of Israel 
 Who is a Jew? 
 Branches 
 Religious movements 
 Orthodox 
 Haredi 
 Hasidic 
 Litvaks 
 Modern 
 Conservative 
 Reform 
 Reconstructionist 
 Humanistic 
 Neo-Hasidism 
 Renewal 
 relations 
 Haymanot 
 Hellenistic 
 Karaitism 
 Samaritanism 
 Science 
 Secularism 
 Schisms 
 Literature 
 Sifrei Kodesh 
 Tanakh 
 Torah 
 Nevi'im 
 Ketuvim 
 Rabbinic 
 Mishnah 
 Talmud 
 Tosefta 
 Midrash 
 Kabbalah texts 
 Hekhalot literature 
 Pardes Rimonim 
 Sefer HaBahir 
 Sefer HaEtz Chaim 
 Sefer Raziel HaMalakh 
 Sefer Yetzirah 
 Zohar 
 Shulchan Aruch 
 Siddur 
 Hebrew literature 
 Culture 
 Astrology 
 perspectives 
 Monen 
 Astronomy 
 Calendar 
 Holidays 
 Cuisine 
 Kashrut 
 Education 
 Leadership 
 Rabbi 
 Rebbe 
 Marriage 
 Music 
 Names 
 Politics 
 Prayer 
 Synagogue 
 Hazzan 
 Symbolism 
 Studies 
 Center for Jewish History 
 American Jewish Historical Society 
 American Sephardi Federation 
 Leo Baeck Institute New York 
 Yeshiva University Museum 
 YIVO Institute for Jewish Research 
 Center of Contemporary Jewish Documentation 
 Encyclopaedia Judaica 
 Genetics 
 Jew (word) 
 Jewish Encyclopedia 
 Jewish Virtual Library 
 National Library of Israel 
 YIVO Encyclopedia 
 United States Holocaust Memorial Museum 
 Encyclopedia of the Holocaust 
 Holocaust Encyclopedia 
 Relations with other religions 
 Christian 
 Anabaptism 
 Catholicism 
 Mormonism 
 Protestantism 
 Jews and Christmas 
 non-Christian
 Buddhism 
 Islam 
 Hinduism 
 Italics  indicate  extinct languages 
   Category 
   Judaism portal 
 v t e Jewish cuisine History 
 Ancient Israelite cuisine 
 1902 kosher meat boycott 
 Jewish-American patronage of Chinese restaurants 
 Types 
 American Jewish 
 Ashkenazi 
 Bukharan 
 Ethiopian 
 Israeli 
 Mizrahi 
 Sephardi 
 Syrian Jewish 
 Yemenite 
 Religious dietary laws and related terms 
 Fleishig 
 Kashrut 
 Kitniyot 
 Kosher 
 Kosher airline meal 
 Kosher for Passover 
 Kosher restaurant 
 Kosher-style 
 Mashgiach 
 Milchig 
 Pareve 
 Shechita 
 Treif 
 Chefs 
 Ron Ben-Israel 
 Laura Frankel 
 Ina Garten 
 Gil Marks 
 Joan Nathan 
 Ruth Reichl 
 Eyal Shani 
 Michael Solomonov 
 Yotam Ottolenghi 
 Molly Yeh 
 Religious foods 
 Apples and honey 
 Brisket 
 Challah 
 Charoset 
 Dabo kolo 
 Etrog 
 Hanukkah gelt 
 Maror 
 Matzo 
 Mishloach manot 
 Mouna 
 Pain petri 
 Pekalach 
 Showbread 
 Teiglach 
 Zeroa 
 Ashkenazi breads 
 Babka 
 Challah 
 Onion roll 
 Pletzel 
 Pumpernickel 
 Rye Bread 
 Sephardi and Mizrahi breads 
 Bolo 
 Challah 
 Jachnun 
 Kubaneh 
 Lachooh 
 Laffa 
 Lahmacun 
 Lavash 
 Malawach 
 Manakish 
 Markook 
 Mouna 
 Pain petri 
 Pita 
 Pitot 
 Taboon bread 
 Water challah 
 Ethiopian Jewish breads 
 Injera 
 Bagels and similar breads 
 Bagel 
 Bagel Bites 
 Bagel toast 
 Bagel with cream cheese 
 Bialy 
 Everything bagel 
 Montreal-style bagel 
 New York-style bagel 
 Pizza bagel 
 Pancakes 
 Pesaha Appam 
 Atayef 
 Blintz 
 Chremslach 
 Keftes 
 Keftes de prasa 
 Latke 
 Mofletta 
 Noodle latkes 
 Cakes and other desserts 
 Apple strudel 
 Ashure 
 Atayef 
 Babka 
 Bambalouni 
 Basbousa 
 Bolo 
 Carrot pudding 
 Cheesecake 
 Coffee cake 
 Crumb cake 
 Dobosh 
 Flourless chocolate cake 
 Halva 
 Halvah 
 Halvah ice cream 
 Jewish apple cake 
 Jordan almonds 
 Kogel mogel 
 Krantz cake 
 Krembo 
 Kugelhopf 
 Lekach 
 Linzer torte 
 Lokum 
 Malabi 
 Marzipan 
 Milky 
 Mofletta 
 New York cheesecake 
 Plum cake 
 Poppy seed roll 
 Sesame seed candy 
 Sfinj 
 Sfinz 
 Sponge cake 
 Sufganiyot 
 Strudel 
 Streuselkuchen 
 Cookies 
 Alfajores 
 Biscochos 
 Black and white cookie 
 Chinese cookie 
 Egg kichel 
 Duvshaniot 
 Hamantaschen 
 Honey buttons 
 Jewish almond cookie 
 Jødekager 
 Kichel 
 Kipfel 
 Linzer cookie 
 Ma'amoul 
 Macaroons 
 Mandelbread 
 Rainbow cookie 
 Rugelach 
 Tahini cookie 
 Pastries 
 Baklava 
 Bichak 
 Bourekas 
 Boyoz 
 Chebureki 
 Hojaldre 
 Knish 
 Nunt 
 Pastelitos de hoja 
 Pastilla 
 Pirozhki 
 Rugelach 
 Sambusak 
 Ziva 
 Fried foods 
 Blintz 
 Buñuelo 
 Brik 
 Carciofi alla giudia 
 Churro 
 Corn schnitzel 
 Falafel 
 Fatoot 
 Fatoot samneh 
 Fazuelos 
 Fish and chips 
 Fried cauliflower 
 Fritas de prasa 
 Gribenes 
 Jelly doughnut 
 Keftes 
 Keftes de prasa 
 Kibbeh 
 Ktzitzot Khubeza 
 Latke 
 Matzah brei 
 Noodle latkes 
 Potatonik 
 Sfinj 
 Sufganiyot 
 Teiglach 
 Torrija 
 Tulumba 
 Dumplings, pastas and grain dishes 
 Bsisa 
 Bulgur 
 Couscous 
 Dampfnudel 
 Egg noodles 
 Dolma 
 Farfel 
 Fideos 
 Freekeh 
 Gefilte fish 
 Germknödel 
 Gondi 
 Kasha 
 Kasha varnishkes 
 Kneidlach 
 Kreplach 
 Kibbeh 
 Kubbeh 
 Lokshen kugel 
 Macaroni hamin 
 Manti 
 Matzo ball 
 Orez Shu'it 
 Pelmeni 
 Pierogi 
 Pilaf 
 Ptitim 
 Shirin polo 
 Shlishkes 
 Soup mandels 
 Tabbouleh 
 Tahdig 
 Vareniki 
 Casseroles and savory baked dishes 
 Almadrote 
 Brisket 
 Cholent 
 Hamin 
 Holishkes 
 Jerusalem kugel 
 Karniyarik 
 Kishka 
 Knish 
 Ktzitzot Khubeza 
 Kugel 
 Lokshen kugel 
 Matzo lasagna 
 Pom 
 Potato kugel 
 Potatonik 
 Sólet 
 Stuffed artichoke 
 Stuffed cabbage 
 Stuffed peppers 
 Tagine 
 Yakhna 
 Yapchik 
 Snacks and other baked goods 
 Bamba 
 Bissli 
 Khachapuri 
 Pitzuchim 
 Pretzel 
 Shkedei marak 
 Stuffed dates 
 Sandwiches 
 Corned beef sandwich 
 Hillel sandwich 
 Pastrami on rye 
 Rachel 
 Reuben 
 Sabich 
 Sailor sandwich 
 Shawarma 
 Tuna sandwich 
 Egg dishes 
 Beitzah 
 Fatoot samneh 
 Haminados 
 Hardboiled egg 
 Matzah brei 
 Matzoquiles 
 Shakshouka 
 Meat dishes 
 Brisket 
 Cholent 
 Chopped liver 
 Corned beef 
 Gribenes 
 Gondi 
 Hamin 
 Helzel 
 Hot dog 
 Jerusalem mixed grill 
 Kebab 
 Kibbeh 
 Kishka 
 Kofta 
 Merguez 
 Miltz 
 Montreal smoked meat 
 Pargiyot 
 Pastilla 
 Pastirma 
 Pastrami 
 Plov 
 Sanbat wat 
 Shawarma 
 Skewered goose liver 
 Schmaltz 
 Shish kebab 
 Shish taouk 
 Sujuk 
 Tagine 
 Fish dishes 
 Abudaraho 
 Chraime 
 Dressed herring 
 Fish and chips 
 Gefilte fish 
 Gravlax 
 Herring 
 Ikra 
 Kipper 
 Lakerda 
 Lox 
 Pescado frito 
 Pickled herring 
 Schmaltz herring 
 Smoked salmon 
 Smoked whitefish 
 Tarama 
 Tunafish 
 Tuna salad 
 Tuna salad sandwich 
 Vorschmack 
 Whitefish salad 
 Salads and pickles 
 Apio 
 Eggplant salad 
 Israeli salad 
 Kosher dill pickle 
 Matbucha 
 Pickled cucumber 
 Tabbouleh 
 Torshi 
 Vegetable dishes 
 Bamia 
 Dolma 
 Stuffed cabbage 
 Tzimmes 
 Soups and stews 
 Adom kubbeh 
 Avgolemono 
 Borscht 
 Chamo kubbe 
 Chicken noodle soup 
 Chamin 
 Chamo kubbeh 
 Cholent 
 Ghormeh sabzi 
 Gondi 
 Hamusta kubbeh 
 Matzo ball soup 
 Msoki 
 Poike 
 Sanbat wat 
 Schav 
 Sofrito 
 Tarator 
 Cheeses and other dairy products 
 Akkawi 
 Ayran 
 Clarified butter 
 Cottage cheese 
 Cream cheese 
 Farmer's cheese 
 Feta 
 Kashkaval 
 Kefir 
 Labneh 
 Quark 
 Sirene 
 Smen 
 Smetana 
 Sour cream 
 Strained yogurt 
 Tzfat cheese 
 Condiments, dips and sauces 
 Applesauce 
 Amba 
 Baba ghanoush 
 Charoset 
 Chrain 
 Filfel chuma 
 Harissa 
 Hilbeh 
 Hummus 
 Horseradish 
 Muhammara 
 Mustard 
 Resek avganiyot 
 Spicy brown mustard 
 Tahini 
 Zhoug 
 Beverages 
 Arak 
 Beer 
 Boukha 
 Boza 
 Cel-Ray 
 Dr. Brown's 
 Egg cream 
 Grape juice 
 Kedem 
 Linden flower tea 
 Mint lemonade 
 Manischewitz 
 Mint tea 
 Pomegranate juice 
 Salep 
 Seltzer 
 Tallah 
 Vodka Perfect 
 Wine 
 Herbs, spices and seasonings 
 Anise 
 Baharat 
 Cardamom 
 Cinnamon 
 Consommé 
 Dried onion 
 Everything bagel seasoning 
 Hawaij 
 Montreal steak seasoning 
 Licorice root 
 Nigella seeds 
 Poppy seed 
 Sesame seeds 
 Za'atar 
 Related lists 
 List of foods with religious symbolism 
 List of Jewish cuisine dishes 
 List of kosher restaurants 
 List of restaurants in Israel 
 
   Category 
     Food portal 
   The Israel Portal 
 
 v t e Cuisines Continental 
 African 
 North 
 West 
 list 
 Americas 
 Caribbean 
 North 
 South 
 list 
 Asian 
 Caucasian 
 Central 
 Indian subcontinent 
 Levantine 
 list 
 European 
 Balkan 
 Central 
 Eastern 
 list 
 Oceanic 
 Intercontinental
 Global 
 Latin American 
 Mediterranean 
 Middle Eastern 
 National  and regional 
 Afghan 
 Albanian 
 Algerian 
 American 
 Californian 
 Floribbean 
 Hawaiian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Lowcountry (South Carolina) 
 New England 
 New Mexico 
 Pacific Northwest 
 Pennsylvania Dutch 
 Puerto Rican 
 Southern US 
 Southwest US 
 Texas 
 Angolan 
 Argentine 
 Armenian 
 Australian 
 Austrian 
 Azerbaijani 
 Bahraini 
 Bangladeshi 
 Barbadian 
 Belarusian 
 Belgian 
 Belizean 
 Beninese 
 Bhutanese 
 Bolivian 
 Bosnian-Herzegovinian 
 Botswana 
 Brazilian 
 British 
 Channel Islands 
 English 
 Gibraltarian 
 Northern Irish 
 Saint Helena 
 Scottish 
 Welsh 
 Bruneian 
 Bulgarian 
 Burkinabé 
 Burmese 
 Burundian 
 Cambodian 
 Cameroonian 
 Canadian 
 Acadian 
 Québécois 
 Central African Republic 
 Chadian 
 Chilean 
 Chinese 
 Cantonese 
 Hong Kong 
 Macanese 
 Tibetan 
 Xinjiang 
 Colombian 
 Congolese 
 Corsican 
 Croatian 
 Cuban 
 Cypriot 
 Czech 
 Danish 
 Faroese 
 Greenlandic 
 Djiboutian 
 Dominican 
 Dominican Republic 
 Dutch 
 East Timorese 
 Ecuadorian 
 Egyptian 
 Emirati 
 Equatorial Guinean 
 Eritrean 
 Estonian 
 Ethiopian 
 Fijian 
 Filipino 
 Finnish 
 French 
 Occitan 
 French Guianan 
 Gabonese 
 Gambian 
 Georgian 
 German 
 Ghanaian 
 Greek 
 Cretan 
 Epirotic 
 Greek Macedonian 
 Heptanesean 
 Guatemalan 
 Guinea-Bissauan 
 Guinean 
 Haitian 
 Honduran 
 Hungarian 
 Icelandic 
 Indian 
 Arunachalese 
 Assamese 
 Bengali 
 Bihari 
 Goan 
 Gujarati 
 Himachal Pradesh 
 Kashmiri 
 Jharkhandi 
 Karnataka 
 Kerala 
 Maharashtrian 
 Manipuri 
 Meghalayan 
 Mizo 
 Naga 
 Odia 
 Punjabi 
 Rajasthani 
 Sikkimese 
 Sindhi 
 Tamil 
 Telangana 
 Telugu 
 Indonesian 
 Acehnese 
 Balinese 
 Banjar 
 Batak 
 Betawi 
 Indo 
 Javanese 
 Madurese 
 Makassar 
 Minahasan 
 Minangkabau 
 Palembangese 
 Sundanese 
 Iranian 
 Iraqi 
 Irish 
 Israeli 
 Italian 
 Abruzzese 
 Ligurian 
 Lombard 
 Lucanian 
 Neapolitan 
 Roman 
 Sardinian 
 Sicilian 
 Venetian 
 Ivorian 
 Jamaican 
 Japanese 
 Okinawan 
 Jordanian 
 Kazakh 
 Kenyan 
 Korean 
 North Korean 
 South Korean 
 Kosovan 
 Kuwaiti 
 Kyrgyz 
 Lao 
 Latvian 
 Lebanese 
 Lesotho 
 Liberian 
 Libyan 
 Liechtensteiner 
 Lithuanian 
 Luxembourg 
 Macedonian 
 Malagasy 
 Malawian 
 Malaysian 
 Sabahan 
 Sarawakian 
 Maldivian 
 Malian 
 Maltese 
 Mauritanian 
 Mauritian 
 Mexican 
 Moldovan 
 Monégasque 
 Mongolian 
 Montenegrin 
 Moroccan 
 Mozambican 
 Namibian 
 Nauruan 
 Nepalese 
 New Zealand 
 Nicaraguan 
 Niger 
 Nigerian 
 Niuean 
 Norwegian 
 Omani 
 Pakistani 
 Palestinian 
 Panamanian 
 Peruvian 
 Polish 
 Portuguese 
 Qatari 
 Romanian  (incl.  Transylvanian Saxon ) 
 Russian 
 Bashkir 
 Chechen 
 Circassian 
 Komi 
 Mordovian 
 Sakha 
 Tatar 
 Udmurt 
 Yamal 
 Rwandan 
 Saint Lucian 
 Salvadoran 
 Sammarinese 
 São Tomé and Príncipe 
 Saudi Arabian 
 Senegalese 
 Serbian 
 Seychellois 
 Sierra Leonean 
 Singaporean 
 Slovak 
 Slovenian 
 Somali 
 South African 
 Spanish 
 Andalusian 
 Asturian 
 Balearic 
 Basque 
 Canarian 
 Cantabrian 
 Catalan 
 Extremaduran 
 Galician 
 Manchegan 
 Valencian 
 Sri Lankan 
 Sudanese 
 Swazi 
 Swedish 
 Swiss 
 Syrian 
 Taiwanese 
 Tajik 
 Tanzanian 
 Zanzibari 
 Thai 
 Togolese 
 Tunisian 
 Turkish 
 Turkmen 
 Trinidadian and Tobagonian 
 Ugandan 
 Ukrainian 
 Uruguayan 
 Uzbek 
 Venezuelan 
 Vietnamese 
 Western Saharan 
 Yemeni 
 Zambian 
 Zimbabwean 
 Ethnic 
 Ainu 
 Arab 
 Indonesian 
 Aromanian 
 Assyrian 
 Balochi 
 Berber 
 Cajun 
 Chinese 
 American 
 Canadian 
 Chifa 
 Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Crimean Tatar 
 Greek American 
 Hazaragi 
 Indian 
 Anglo-Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Indigenous American 
 Inuit 
 Italian American 
 Kurdish 
 Livonian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Malay 
 Ossetian 
 Parsi 
 Pashtun 
 Peranakan 
 Romani 
 Sámi 
 Soul food 
 Sylheti 
 Transylvanian Saxon 
 Yup'ik 
 Religious 
 Buddhist 
 Christian 
 Goan Catholic 
 Mangalorean Catholic 
 Mennonite 
 Hindu 
 Islamic 
 Chinese 
 Ital 
 Jain 
 Jewish 
 American 
 Ashkenazi 
 Bukharan 
 Ethiopian 
 Mizrahi 
 Sephardic 
 Syrian 
 Ritual slaughter 
 Sikh 
 Historical 
 Ancient Egyptian 
 Ancient Greek 
 Ancient Israelite 
 Ancient Roman 
 Antebellum America 
 Aztec 
 Byzantine 
 Early modern European 
 Historical Chinese 
 Historical Indian subcontinent 
 Historical North Indian and Pakistani 
 History of agriculture 
 History of alcoholic drinks 
 History of bread 
 History of seafood 
 History of vegetarianism 
 Historical Argentine 
 Historical Japanese 
 Inca 
 Mayan 
 Muisca 
 Mughal 
 Medieval 
 Ottoman 
 Peasant 
 Soviet 
 Thirteen Colonies 
 Styles 
 Classique 
 Fast food 
 Fusion 
 New American 
 Eurasian 
 Haute 
 Molecular gastronomy 
 Note by Note 
 Nouvelle 
 Lists 
 List of cuisines 
 List of historical cuisines 
 Lists of prepared foods 
 Related 
 Cookbook 
 Cooking 
 Culinary arts 
 Drink 
 Food 
 history 
 Diet 
 Meal preparation 
 
   Food portal 
   Drink portal 
   Category 
   Commons 
   Cookbook 
   WikiProject 
   Outline 
 
 v t e Middle Eastern cuisine Arab 
 Bahraini 
 Egyptian 
 Iraqi 
 Jordanian 
 Kuwaiti 
 Lebanese 
 Omani 
 Palestinian 
 Qatar 
 Saudi Arabian 
 Syrian 
 United Arab Emirates 
 Yemeni 
 Non-Arab 
 Cypriot 
 Iranian 
 Israeli 
 Turkish 
 Ethnic and religious 
 Assyrian 
 Azerbaijani 
 Baloch 
 Caspian cuisine 
 Jewish 
 Kurdish 
 Levantine 
 Related cuisines 
 Afghanistan 
 Armenian 
 Balkan 
 Caucasian 
 Circassian 
 Georgian 
 Greek 
 Indian 
 Pakistani 
 Pashtun 
 
 Authority control   National libraries 
 France 
 BnF data 
 Israel 
 United States 
 Czech Republic 
 Other 
 FAST 
 IdRef 
 
  
NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw2303
Cached time: 20230311123853
Cache expiry: 1814400
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc, no‐toc‐conversion]
CPU time usage: 1.088 seconds
Real time usage: 1.335 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 7096/1000000
Post‐expand include size: 272926/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 5138/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 16/100
Expensive parser function count: 19/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 293158/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.533/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 31854739/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/400
 
 
Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  901.998      1 -total
 23.10%  208.365      1 Template:Reflist
 10.74%   96.878      7 Template:Transl
 10.54%   95.094      1 Template:Jewish_culture
  8.83%   79.672     22 Template:Cite_web
  8.15%   73.544      5 Template:Navbox
  7.88%   71.114      1 Template:JewishEncyclopedia
  6.53%   58.857     16 Template:Cite_book
  5.89%   53.118      3 Template:Sister_project
  5.69%   51.289      3 Template:Side_box
 
  Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:idhash:1290526-0!canonical and timestamp 20230311123852 and revision id 1138576342. Rendering was triggered because: page-view
  
 esi <esi:include src="/esitest-fa8a495983347898/content" />  
 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Jewish_cuisine&oldid=1138576342 " 
 Categories :  Jewish cuisine Cuisine by culture Cuisine by ethnicity Middle Eastern cuisine Hidden categories:  CS1 Hebrew-language sources (he) CS1 maint: url-status Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from December 2020 Use Oxford spelling from February 2022 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2020 Articles with unsourced statements from April 2007 CS1 errors: missing title Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1906 Jewish Encyclopedia Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1906 Jewish Encyclopedia with no article parameter Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1906 Jewish Encyclopedia Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with BNF identifiers Articles with J9U identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers Articles with NKC identifiers Articles with FAST identifiers Articles with SUDOC identifiers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  This page was last edited on 10 February 2023, at 11:55  (UTC) . 
 Text is available under the  Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0 ;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the  Terms of Use  and  Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the  Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. 
 
 
 Privacy policy 
 About Wikipedia 
 Disclaimers 
 Contact Wikipedia 
 Mobile view 
 Developers 
 Statistics 
 Cookie statement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
