
 
 
 Jump to content 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle sidebar 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Create account Log in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Personal tools 
 
 
 
 
   Create account   Log in 
 
 
 
 
		Pages for logged out editors  learn more 
 
 
 Contributions Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Navigation 
 
 
 Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate 
 
 
 
 
 Contribute 
 
 
 Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file 
 
 
 
 
 Tools 
 
 
 What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item 
 
 
 
 
 Print/export 
 
 
 Download as PDF Printable version 
 
 
 
 
 In other projects 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons Wikibooks Wikivoyage 
 
 
 
 
 Languages 
 
 On this Wikipedia the language links are at the top of the page across from the article title.  Go to top . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CentralNotice  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Contents 
 move to sidebar 
 hide 
 
 
 
 
 (Top) 
 
 
 
 
 
 1 History 
 
 
				Toggle History subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 1.1 Prehistoric 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.2 Three Kingdoms period 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.3 Goryeo period 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.4 Joseon period 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.5 Colonial period to modern period 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 Nature’s influence on Korean cuisine 
 
 
				Toggle Nature’s influence on Korean cuisine subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 2.1 Geography 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.2 Climate 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 Food 
 
 
				Toggle Food subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 3.1 Grains 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.2 Fruits 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.3 Legumes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.4 Condiments and seasoning 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.5 Gochujang 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.6 Meat 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.6.1 Beef 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.6.2 Chicken 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.6.3 Pork 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.6.4 Fish and seafood 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.7 Vegetables 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.8 Medicinal foods 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.8.1 Dog meat 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.8.2 Samgyetang (삼계탕)-Ginseng chicken soup 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4 Dishes 
 
 
				Toggle Dishes subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 4.1 Soups and stews 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.2 Kimchi 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.3 Noodles 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.4 Banchan 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.5 Anju  (side dishes accompanying alcoholic beverages) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5 Holiday food 
 
 
				Toggle Holiday food subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 5.1 Songpyeon (송편) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5.2 Ogok-bap (오곡밥) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6 Beverages 
 
 
				Toggle Beverages subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 6.1 Non-alcoholic beverages 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6.2 Alcoholic beverages 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 7 Sweets 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8 Regional and variant cuisines 
 
 
				Toggle Regional and variant cuisines subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 8.1 Buddhist cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8.2 Vegetarian cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8.3 Ceremonial food 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8.4 Street food 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 9 Etiquette 
 
 
				Toggle Etiquette subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 9.1 Dining 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 9.2 Drinking 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 10 Royal court cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 11 See also 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 12 Notes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 13 Bibliography 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 14 External links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
						Toggle the table of contents
					 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle the table of contents 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Korean cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 40 languages 
 
 
 
 العربية Azərbaycanca Български Čeština Deutsch Español Esperanto فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Jawa ქართული Lietuvių Magyar Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål ଓଡ଼ିଆ Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 
 Edit links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Article Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 English 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 More 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
 
 
 Customary cooking traditions and practices of Korea 
 
 
   Hanjeongsik , Korean style delicate and fine dining 
   Bulgogi , Korean Style marinated sliced meat 
   Naengmyeon , Korean Style Cold Noodles with buckwheat 
   Tteokguk , Korean New Year Soup with rice cake 
 
 
 This article is part of a series on Korean cuisine 한국 요리 조선 료리 
 Staples 
 Bap 
 Bibimbap 
 Bokkeum-bap 
 Gukbap 
 Juk 
 Mieum 
 Guksu 
 Naengmyeon 
 Mandu 
 
 Ancillaries Pickled dishes 
 Jangajji 
 Jeotgal 
 Kimchi 
 Baek-kimchi 
 Dongchimi 
 Kkakdugi 
 Nabak-kimchi 
 Soups & stews 
 
 Guk 
 Tang 
 Jeongol 
 Jijimi 
 Jjigae 
 Banchan 
 
 Bokkeum 
 Buchimgae 
 Jeon 
 Bugak 
 Gui 
 Hoe 
 Jjim 
 Jokpyeon 
 Jorim 
 Muk 
 Namul 
 Pyeonyuk 
 Po 
 Seon 
 Ssam 
 
 Desserts Hangwa 
 Dasik 
 Gwapyeon 
 Jeonggwa 
 Kkultarae 
 Suksilgwa 
 Yakbap 
 Yeot 
 Yeotgangjeong 
 Yugwa 
 Gangjeong 
 Hangwa 
 Yumilgwa 
 Mandugwa 
 Taraegwa 
 Yakgwa 
 Tteok 
 
 Baekseolgi 
 Bupyeon 
 Gyeongdan 
 Injeolmi 
 Jeolpyeon 
 Jeungpyeon 
 Mujigae-tteok 
 Siru-tteok 
 Songpyeon 
 
 Drinks List of Korean drinks 
 Cha 
 Hwachae 
 Sikhye 
 Sul (alcoholic drinks) 
 Sujeonggwa 
 
 Condiments 
 Doenjang 
 Ganjang 
 Gukganjang 
 Eoganjang 
 Gochujang 
 Honey 
 Cheong 
 Mustard sauce 
 Oil 
 Perilla oil 
 Sesame oil 
 Ssamjang 
 Vinegar 
 Persimmon vinegar 
 Rice vinegar 
 
 Utensils 
 Dolsot 
 Onggi 
 Siru 
 Sujeo 
 Ttukbaegi 
 
 Other 
 Kimchi Field Museum 
 Kimchi refrigerator 
 List of Korean dishes 
 North Korean cuisine 
 List of Korean beverages 
 Korean regional cuisine 
 Korean Chinese cuisine 
 Korean royal court cuisine 
 Korean barbecue 
 v t e 
 Part of  a series  on the Culture of Korea 
 History 
 People 
 Demographics of South Korea  /  Demographics of North Korea 
 Diaspora 
 South Korean nationality law  /  Nationality Law(DPRK) 
 
 Languages 
 History 
 Dialects 
 North-South differences 
 Phonology 
 Grammar 
 Honorifics 
 Hangul 
 
 Traditions 
 Philosophy 
 Etiquette 
 Marriage 
 Funerals 
 Tea ceremony 
 Masks 
 Kisaeng 
 Hanjeungmak  /  Jjimjilbang 
 Court music 
 Clothing 
 
 Mythology and folklore 
 Mythology 
 folklore 
 
 Cuisine 
 Gimbap 
 Patbingsu 
 Bibimbap 
 Seolleongtang 
 Kimchi 
 Korean fried chicken 
 Tteok 
 Banchan 
 Gochujang 
 Doenjang 
 Anju 
 Makgeolli 
 Soju 
 Soups 
 Stews 
 Noodles 
 Barbecue 
 
 Festivals 
 Korean New Year 
 National Liberation Day 
 Chuseok 
 
 Religion 
 Shamanism 
 Taoism 
 Buddhism 
 Neo-Confucianism 
 Cheondoism 
 Christianity 
 Unification Church 
 
 Art 
 Calligraphy 
 Buddhist art 
 Paintings 
 Flower arrangements 
 Gardens 
 Jade carving 
 Knotting 
 Pottery and porcelain 
 Pagoda 
 Sculpture 
 
 Literature 
 Hyangga 
 Sijo 
 Chinese-language literature 
 Sinsoseol 
 North Korean literature  /  South Korean literature 
 Manhwa 
 Poetry 
 
 Music and performing arts 
 Music 
 Court 
 Performing arts 
 Dancing 
 Fan dancing 
 Traditional oral literature 
 Mass Games 
 Korean revolutionary opera 
 
 Media 
 Animation 
 Cinema 
 Internet censorship  /  Internet censorship in North Korea 
 Cinema of South Korea  /  Cinema of North Korea 
 Music of South Korea  /  Music of North Korea 
 Chosun Ilbo  /  Donga Ilbo  /  JoongAng Ilbo  /  Hankook Ilbo  /  Kyunghyang Shinmun  /  The Hankyoreh 
 KBS1  /  KBS2  /  MBC  /  EBS  /  SBS 
 Nate  /  Naver  /  Daum  /  Cyworld 
 Propaganda 
 K-pop  /  K-drama 
 
 Sport 
 Martial arts 
 Video games  /  Esports 
 
 Monuments 
 Heritage 
 World Heritage 
 Architecture 
 Fortress 
 
 National symbols of Korea 
 Flag 
 National anthem 
 Coat of arms 
 National symbols of North Korea 
 National symbols of South Korea 
 
 Organisations 
 Ministry of Culture, Sports and Tourism 
 List of museums in North Korea 
 v t e 
 Korean cuisine  has evolved through centuries of social and political change. Originating from ancient  agricultural and nomadic traditions  in  Korea  and southern  Manchuria , Korean  cuisine  reflects a complex interaction of the natural environment and different cultural trends. [1] [2] 
 Korean cuisine is largely based on  rice ,  vegetables ,  seafood  and (at least in South Korea)  meats . Dairy is largely absent from the traditional Korean diet. [3]  Traditional Korean meals are named for the number of  side dishes  ( 반찬 ;  飯饌 ;  banchan ) that accompany  steam-cooked  short-grain rice.  Kimchi  is served at nearly every meal. Commonly used ingredients include  sesame oil ,  doenjang  ( fermented bean paste ),  soy sauce , salt, garlic, ginger,  gochugaru  ( pepper  flakes),  gochujang  (fermented red chili paste) and  napa cabbage .
 Ingredients and dishes vary by province. Many regional [ citation needed ]  dishes have become national, and dishes that were once regional have proliferated in different variations across the country.  Korean royal court cuisine  once brought all of the unique regional specialties together for the royal family. Foods are regulated by Korean cultural  etiquette .
 
 
 History [ edit ] 
 Main article:  History of Korea 
 Prehistoric [ edit ] 
 In the  Jeulmun pottery period  (approximately 8000 to 1500 BCE), hunter-gatherer societies engaged in fishing and hunting, and incipient agriculture in the later stages. [1]  Since the beginning of the  Mumun pottery period  (1500 BCE), agricultural traditions began to develop with new migrant groups from the  Liao River  basin of Manchuria. During the Mumun period, people grew  millet ,  barley ,  wheat , legumes and  rice , and continued to hunt and fish. Archaeological remains point to development of fermented beans during this period, and cultural contact with nomadic cultures to the north facilitated domestication of animals.
 
 Three Kingdoms period [ edit ] 
   In a mural of  Gakjeochong  (각저총 "Tombs of  Wrestlers "), [4]  a  Goguryeo  tomb built around the 5th century shows a Goguryeo nobleman having a meal with two ladies. [5] 
 The  Three Kingdoms  period (57 BCE – 668 CE) was one of rapid cultural evolution. The kingdom of  Goguryeo  (37 BCE – 668 CE) was located in the northern part of the peninsula along much of modern-day  Manchuria . The second kingdom,  Baekje  (18 BCE – 660 CE), was in the southwestern portion of the peninsula, and the third,  Silla  (57 BCE – 935 CE), was located at the southeastern portion of the peninsula. Each region had its own distinct set of cultural practices and foods. For example, Baekje was known for cold foods and fermented foods like  kimchi . The spread of  Buddhism  and  Confucianism  through cultural exchanges with China during the fourth century CE began to change the distinct cultures of Korea. [6] 
 
 Goryeo period [ edit ] 
   Silver   spoon  and  chopsticks  entombed with  King Injong  in 1146 
 During the latter Goryeo period, the  Mongols  invaded Goryeo in the 13th century. Some traditional foods found today in Korea have their origins during this period. The dumpling dish,  mandu , grilled meat dishes,  noodle dishes , and the use of seasonings such as black pepper, all have their roots in this period. [7] 
 
 Joseon period [ edit ] 
 Agricultural innovations were significant and widespread during this period, such as the invention of the rain gauge during the 15th century. During 1429, the government began publishing books on agriculture and farming techniques, which included  Nongsa jikseol  (literally "Straight Talk on Farming"), an agricultural book compiled under  King Sejong . [8] [9] [10] 
 A series of invasions in the earlier half of the Joseon caused a dynamic shift in the culture during the second half of the period. Groups of  silhak  ("practical learning") scholars began to emphasize the importance of looking outside the country for innovation and technology to help improve the agricultural systems. Crops traded by Europeans from the  New World  began to appear, acquired through trade with China,  Japan ,  Europe , and the  Philippines ; these crops included  maize ,  sweet potatoes ,  chili peppers ,  tomatoes ,  peanuts , and  squash . Potatoes and sweet potatoes were particularly favored as they grew in soils and on terrains that were previously unused. [11] 
 Government further developed agriculture through technology and lower taxation. Complex  irrigation systems  built by government allowed peasant farmers to produce larger crop volumes and produce crops not only for sustenance but also as  cash crops . Reduced taxation of the peasantry also furthered the expanded commerce through increasing periodic markets, usually held every five days. One thousand such markets existed in the 19th century, and were communal centers for economic trade and entertainment. [12] 
 The end of the Joseon period was marked by consistent encouragement to trade with the Western world, China and Japan. In the 1860s, trade agreements pushed by the Japanese government led the  Joseon Dynasty  to open its trade ports with the west, and to numerous treaties with the United States, Britain, France, and other Western countries. [13] 
 The opening of Korea to the Western world brought further exchange of culture and food. Western missionaries introduced new ingredients and dishes to Korea. Joseon elites were introduced to these new foods by way of foreigners who attended the royal court as advisers or physicians. This period also saw the introduction of various seasonings imported from Japan via western traders and alcoholic drinks from China. [14] 
 
 Colonial period to modern period [ edit ] 
 Main articles:  South Korean cuisine  and  North Korean cuisine 
   Budae jjigae , a spicy stew originated during the Korean War. 
   Korean chicken dish (Jjimdak) in Sydney, Australia 
 Japan occupied the  Korean peninsula  from 1910 to 1945. Many of its agricultural systems were taken over by the Japanese to support Japan's food supply. Land changes resulting from the Japanese occupation included combining small farms into large-scale farms, which led to larger yields. Rice production increased during this period to support the Japanese Empire's war efforts. Many Koreans, in turn, increased the production of other grains for their own consumption. [15] 
 Meals during the Japanese occupation were quite varied. Koreans usually ate two meals a day during the cold seasons, and three during the warm seasons. For the lower classes, satiety, rather than quality, was most important. Those in even lower economic levels were likely to enjoy only a single bowl of white rice  each year , while the remainder of the year was filled with cheaper grains, such as  millet  and  barley . [16]  For the Korean middle and upper classes during the occupation, things were quite different. Western foods began emerging in the Korean diet, such as white bread and commercially produced staples such as precooked noodles. The Japanese occupational period ended after the defeat of Japan during  World War II . [17] 
 The country remained in a state of turmoil through the  Korean War  (1950–1953) and the  Cold War , which separated the country into  North Korea  and  South Korea . Both of these periods continued the limited food provisions for Koreans, [15]  and the stew called  budae jjigae , which makes use of inexpensive meats such as sausage and  Spam , originated during this period.
 At this point, the history of North and South Korea sharply diverged.  In the 1960s under President  Park Chung-hee , industrialization began to give South Korea the economic and cultural power it holds in the global economy today. Agriculture was increased through use of commercial fertilizers and modern farming equipment. In the 1970s, food shortages began to lessen. Consumption of instant and processed foods increased, as did the overall quality of foods.  Livestock  and dairy production was increased during the 1970s through the increase of commercial dairies and mechanized farms. [18]  The consumption of pork and beef increased vastly in the 1970s. Per-capita consumption of meat was 3.6 kg in 1961 and 11 kg by 1979. The result of this increased meat consumption brought about the rise of  bulgogi  restaurants, which gave the middle class of South Korea the ability to enjoy meat regularly. Meat eating continued to rise, reaching 40 kg in 1997, with fish consumption at 49.5 kg in 1998. Rice consumption continually decreased through these years, from 128 kg consumed per person in 1985 to 106 kg in 1995 and 83 kg in 2003. The decrease in rice consumption has been accompanied by an increase in the consumption of bread and noodles. [19] 
 
 Nature’s influence on Korean cuisine [ edit ] 
 Understanding the environmental characteristics of Korea is necessary to see its influence on Korean cuisine and culture. Korea is located between the Chinese Mainland and the islands of Japan, and it therefore shares many cultural characteristics with the two countries. However, its unique climate and geography have also produced many differences.
 
 Geography [ edit ] 
 Korea is located on the Korean Peninsula, which extends southward from the northeastern region of the Asian continental landmass. It shares its border with China and Russia to the north but is otherwise surrounded by water, resulting in a flourishing fishing industry. Forested, mountainous terrain covers 70 percent of the nation, yielding a variety of wild edible greens that are also grown in dry-field farms. Korea’s major rivers, including the Nakdong River, the Han River and the Geum River, tend to flow westward along the mountain ranges, creating well-developed plains in the peninsula’s western region. The conditions in the western and southern regions of the peninsula are therefore favorable to rice farms, while dry-field farms predominate in the northern and eastern regions. Korea’s eastern coast has a smooth coastline, but the southern and western coasts have jagged coastlines with many islands. This provides an ideal environment for exploiting a rich variety of marine products. Due to the varying geographical features and climates of the four regions of Korea, they have resulted in differing regional cuisines. Despite the development of transportation increasing contact between regions, and making local cultures less distinct, many of the unique local specialties and distinct styles of each province still remain.
 
 Climate [ edit ] 
 The climate of Korea is characterized by four distinct seasons–spring, summer, autumn and winter–yielding a diverse array of seasonal foods. Even the same ingredients may have different tastes and nutrients in each season, which produces a variety of flavor variation within recipes. Unlike the abundant food materials available in the hot, humid summers and clear, dry springs and autumns, cold winters see Koreans eating dried vegetables and kimchi instead of fresh vegetables. Jeotgal, a salted fermented fish, was developed by the ancestors in the southern region of Korea as a way to preserve fish for a long period of time during the cold winters and hot summers. However, recent climate changes have introduced a subtropical climate to the peninsula, changing the types of seasonal food materials available.
 
 Food [ edit ] 
 Grains [ edit ] 
   Dolsotbap , cooked rice in a stone pot ( dolsot ) Grains  have been one of the most important staples of the Korean diet. Early myths of the foundations of various kingdoms in Korea center on grains. One foundation myth relates to  Jumong , who received  barley  seeds from two  doves  sent by his mother after establishing the kingdom of  Goguryeo . [20]  Yet another myth speaks of the three founding deities of  Jeju Island , who were to be wed to the three princesses of  Tamna ; the deities brought seeds of five grains which were the first seeds planted, which in turn became the first instance of farming. [21] 
 During the pre-modern era, grains such as barley and millet were the main staples. They were supplemented by wheat,  sorghum , and  buckwheat . Rice is not an indigenous crop to Korea and millet was likely the preferred grain before rice was cultivated. Rice became the grain of choice during the Three Kingdoms period, particularly in the  Silla  and  Baekje  Kingdoms in the southern regions of the peninsula. Rice was such an important commodity in Silla that it was used to pay taxes. The  Sino-Korean  word for "tax" is a compound character that uses the character for the rice plant. The preference for rice escalated into the  Joseon period , when new methods of cultivation and new varieties emerged that would help increase production. [22] 
 As rice was prohibitively expensive when it first came to Korea, the grain was likely mixed with other grains to "stretch" the rice; this is still done in dishes such as  boribap  (rice with barley) and  kongbap  (rice with beans). [23]  White rice, which is rice with the bran removed, has been the preferred form of rice since its introduction into the cuisine. The most traditional method of cooking the rice has been to cook it in an iron pot called a  sot  (솥) or  musoe sot  (무쇠솥). This method of rice cookery dates back to at least the  Goryeo period , and these pots have even been found in tombs from the Silla period. The  sot  is still used today, much in the same manner as it was in the past centuries. [24] 
 Rice is used to make a number of items, outside of the traditional bowl of plain white rice. It is commonly ground into a flour and used to make rice cakes called  tteok  in over two hundred varieties. It is also cooked down into a  congee  ( juk ) or  gruel  ( mieum ) and mixed with other grains, meat, or seafood. Koreans also produce a number of  rice wines , both in filtered and unfiltered versions. And for centuries, grains have also been used to make  misu  and  misu-garu , drinks made from grain powder that are sometimes used as meal supplements. [25] 
 
 Fruits [ edit ] 
 Encompassing a wide range of temperate climates, the Korean peninsula supports the growth of many cultivated and wild fruit species. Asian pears of numerous varieties, apples, melons and berries and more are typical of summer and fall produce.
 
 Legumes [ edit ] 
   Kongguksu , a cold noodle dish with a broth made from ground soy beans 
 Legumes  have been significant crops in Korean history and cuisine, according to the earliest preserved legumes found in  archaeological sites  in Korea. [26] [27]  The excavation at Okbang site,  Jinju ,  South Gyeongsang  province indicates  soybeans  were cultivated as a food crop  circa  1000–900 BCE. [28]  They are still made into dubu ( tofu ), while soybean sprouts are sauteed as a vegetable ( kongnamul ) and whole soybeans are seasoned and served as a side dish. They are also made into  soy milk , which is used as the base for the noodle dish called  kongguksu . A byproduct of soy milk production is  biji  or  kong-biji , which is used to thicken stews and porridges. Soybeans may also be one of the beans in  kongbap , boiled together with several types of beans and other grains, and they are also the primary ingredient in the production of fermented condiments collectively referred to as  jang , such as soybean pastes,  doenjang  and  cheonggukjang , a soy sauce called  ganjang , chili pepper paste or  gochujang  and others. [29] [30] 
 
   Tangpyeongchae , a dish made with  nokdumuk  (a mung bean starch jelly) and vegetables 
 Nokdu  (Mung bean) is commonly used in Korean cuisine.  Sukju  namuls (Mung bean sprouts)  are often served as a side dish,  blanched  and  sautéed  with sesame oil, garlic, and salt. Ground Nokdu is used to make a porridge called  nokdujuk , which is eaten as a nutritional supplement and digestive aid, especially for ill patients. [31]  A popular snack,  bindaetteok  (mung bean pancake), is made with ground nokdu and fresh sukju namul. Starch extracted from ground nokdu is used to make transparent dangmyeon (  cellophane noodles ). The dangmyeons are the main ingredients for  japchae  (a salad-like dish) and  sundae  (a  blood sausage ), and are a subsidiary ingredient for soups and stews. [32]  The starch can be also used to make jelly-like foods, such as  nokdumuk  and  hwangpomuk . The  muk  have a bland flavor, so are served seasoned with soy sauce, sesame oil and crumbled seaweed or other seasonings such as  tangpyeongchae . [33] 
 Cultivation of  azuki beans  dates back to ancient times according to an excavation from Odong-ri,  Hoeryong ,  North Hamgyong Province , which is assumed to be that of  Mumun period  (approximately 1500-300 BCE). Azuki beans are generally eaten as  patbap , which is a bowl of rice mixed with the beans, or as a filling and covering for  tteok  (rice cake) and breads. A porridge made with azuki beans, called  patjuk , is commonly eaten during the winter season. On  Dongjinal , a Korean traditional holiday which falls on December 22, Korean people eat  donji patjuk , which contains  saealsim  (새알심), a ball made from glutinous rice flour. In old Korean tradition,  patjuk  is believed to have the power to drive evil spirits away. [34] [35] 
 
 Condiments and seasoning [ edit ] 
 Condiments  are divided into fermented and nonfermented variants. Fermented condiments include  ganjang ,  doenjang ,  gochujang  and vinegars. Nonfermented condiments or spices include red pepper, black pepper, cordifolia, mustard, chinensis, garlic, onion, ginger, leek, and scallion (spring onion). [36] 
 
 Gochujang [ edit ] 
 Gochujang  can be found in many writings. Some of the writings are the  Mangi Yoram ,  The Three States , the  Nonggawolryeongga , the  Gijaejapgi , and the  Hyangyak-jipsongbang . The  Hyangyak-jipseongbang , which dates back to around 1433 during the Chosun Dynasty, is one of the oldest writings mentioning gochujang.
 Gochujang is a fermented bean paste that has red pepper powder, soybean powder and rice flour added to it to create a spicy paste. It typically can be added to most dishes. Gochujang can be used as a seasoning and sometimes as a dipping sauce.
 Many variations come from  jang , fermented bean paste. Some variations can include  doenjang  (soybean and brine),  kanjang  (soybeans, water, and salt),  chogochujang  (gochujang and vinegar), and  jeotgal  (mixture of other jangs and seafoods).
 Vegetables such as cucumbers, carrots, and cabbage use gochujang as a dip. Gochujang is a common seasoning for foods such as Korean barbecue including pork and beef. One popular snack food that is very commonly eaten with gochujang is bibimbap.  Bibimbap  includes rice, spinach, radish, bean sprouts. Sometimes beef is added to bibimbap. Another popular dish including gochujang is  tteokbokki .
 Gochujang was believed to revitalize people who were sick with colds or exhaustion during the Gio Period. There have been some studies that show that red peppers fight obesity and diabetes. Gochujang is also added to many foods so that there can be additional nutritional value with each meal. [37] [38] 
 
 Meat [ edit ] 
   Koreans enjoying grilled meat and alcohol in the 18th century 
 See also:  List of Korean dishes § Meat-based dishes 
 In antiquity, most meat in Korea was likely obtained through  hunting  and  fishing . Ancient records indicate rearing of  livestock  began on a small scale during the Three Kingdoms period. Meat was consumed roasted or in soups or stews during this period. Those who lived closer to the oceans were able to complement their diet with more fish, while those who lived in the interior had a diet containing more meat. [39] 
 
 Beef [ edit ] 
   Marinated  galbi  before grilling 
 Beef  is the most prized of all, with the cattle holding an important cultural role in the Korean home. Beef is prepared in numerous ways today, including roasting, grilling ( gui ) or boiling in  soups . Beef can also be dried into  yukpo , a type of  po , as with seafood, called  eopo . [40] 
 The cattle were valuable draught animals, often seen as equal to human servants, or in some cases, members of the family. Cattle were also given their own holiday during the first 'cow' day of the  lunar New Year . The importance of cattle does not suggest Koreans ate an abundance of beef, however, as the cattle were valued as  beasts of burden  and slaughtering one would create dire issues in farming the land. Pork and seafood were consumed more regularly for this reason. The Buddhist ruling class of the Goryeo period forbade the consumption of beef. The  Mongols  dispensed with the ban of beef during the 13th century, and they promoted the production of beef cattle. This increased production continued into the Joseon period, when the government encouraged both increased quantities and quality of beef. [41]  Only in the latter part of the 20th century has beef become regular table fare.
 
 Chicken [ edit ] 
 Chicken  has played an important role as a protein in Korean history, evidenced by a number of myths. One myth tells of the birth of  Kim Alji , founder of the  Kim family  of  Gyeongju  being announced by the cry of a white chicken. As the birth of a clan's founder is always announced by an animal with preternatural qualities, this myth speaks to the importance of chicken in Korean culture. Chicken is often served roasted or braised with vegetables or in soups. All parts of the chicken are used in Korean cuisine, including the  gizzard ,  liver , and feet. Young chickens are braised with  ginseng  and other ingredients in medicinal soups eaten during the summer months to combat heat called  samgyetang . The feet of the chicken, called  dakbal  (닭발), are often roasted and covered with hot and spicy  gochujang -based sauce and served as an  anju , or side dish, to accompany  alcoholic beverages , especially  soju . [42] [43] 
 
 Pork [ edit ] 
   Samgyeopsal 
 Pork  has also been another important land-based protein for Korea. Records indicate pork has been a part of the Korean diet back to antiquity, similar to beef. [44] 
 A number of foods have been avoided while eating pork, including  Chinese bellflower  ( doraji , 도라지) and  lotus root  ( yeonn ppuri , 연뿌리), as the combinations have been thought to cause diarrhea. All parts of the pig are used in Korean cuisine, including the head, intestines, liver, kidney and other internal organs. Koreans utilize these parts in a variety of cooking methods including steaming, stewing, boiling and smoking. [42]  Koreans especially like to eat grilled pork belly, which is called  samgyeopsal  (삼겹살, 三--). [42] 
 
 Fish and seafood [ edit ] 
 See also:  List of Korean dishes § Fish-based dishes , and  Jeotgal 
   A bowl of  gejang , marinated crabs in soy sauce and plates of various  banchan  (small side dishes) 
 Fish  and  shellfish  have been a major part of Korean cuisine because of the oceans bordering the peninsula. Evidence from the 12th century illustrates commoners consumed a diet mostly of fish and shellfish, such as  shrimp ,  clams ,  oysters ,  abalone , and  loach , while  sheep  and hogs were reserved for the upper class. [45] 
 Both fresh and saltwater fish are popular, and are served raw, grilled, broiled, dried or served in soups and stews. Common grilled fish include  mackerel ,  hairtail ,  croaker  and  Pacific herring . Smaller fish, shrimp, squid, mollusks and countless other seafood can be salted and fermented as  jeotgal . Fish can also be grilled either whole or in fillets as  banchan . Fish is often dried naturally to prolong storing periods and enable shipping over long distances. Fish commonly dried include  yellow corvina ,  anchovies  ( myeolchi ) and  croaker . [45]  Dried anchovies, along with kelp, form the basis of common soup stocks. [46] 
 Shellfish is widely eaten in all different types of preparation. They can be used to prepare  broth , eaten raw with  chogochujang , which is a mixture of  gochujang  and vinegar, or used as a popular ingredient in countless dishes. [47]  Raw oysters and other seafood can be used in making kimchi to improve and vary the flavor. [48]  Salted baby shrimp are used as a seasoning agent, known as  saeujeot , for the preparation of some types of kimchi. Large shrimp are often grilled as  daeha gui  (대하구이) [49]  or dried, mixed with vegetables and served with rice.  Mollusks  eaten in Korean cuisine include  octopus ,  cuttlefish , and  squid . [50] 
 
 Vegetables [ edit ] 
   Miyeok guk , a soup made from the sea seaweed,  miyeok 
 See also:  List of Korean dishes § Vegetable-based dishes 
 Korean cuisine uses a wide variety of vegetables, which are often served uncooked, either in salads or  pickles , as well as cooked in various stews, stir-fried dishes, and other hot dishes. [51]  Commonly used vegetables include  Korean radish ,  napa cabbage , cucumber, potato, sweet potato, spinach, bean sprouts, scallions, garlic, chili peppers,  seaweed ,  zucchini , mushrooms,  lotus root . Several types of wild greens, known collectively as  chwinamul  (such as  Aster  scaber ), are a popular dish, and other wild vegetables such as  bracken fern  shoots ( gosari ) or  Korean bellflower  root ( doraji ) are also harvested and eaten in season. [52]  Traditional medicinal herbs in Korean cuisine, such as  ginseng ,  lingzhi mushroom ,  wolfberry ,  Codonopsis pilosula , and  Angelica sinensis , are often used as ingredients in cooking, as in  samgyetang .
 
 Medicinal foods [ edit ] 
 Medicinal food ( boyangshik ) is a wide variety of specialty foods prepared and eaten for their purported medicinal purposes, especially during the hottest 30-day period in the lunar calendar, called  sambok . Hot foods consumed are believed to restore  ki , as well as sexual and physical stamina lost in the summer heat. [53] [54]  Commonly eaten  boyangshik  include ginseng, chicken, black goat, abalone, eel, carp, beef bone soups, pig kidneys and  dog . [55] [56] 
 
 Dog meat [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Bosintang 
   Gaegogi Jeongol 
 Dog meat  is less popular today in South Korea than in the past, being viewed largely as a kind of health tonic rather than as a diet staple, [57]  especially amongst the younger generations who view dogs as pets and service animals. That said, historically the consumption of  dog  meat can be traced back to antiquity. Dog bones were excavated in a  neolithic  settlement in  Changnyeong , South Gyeongsang Province. A wall painting in the  Goguryeo tombs  complex in  South Hwanghae Province , a  UNESCO World Heritage site  which dates from 4th century AD, depicts a slaughtered dog in a storehouse. [58] 
 The  Balhae  people enjoyed dog meat, and the Koreans' appetite for canine cuisine seems to have come from that era. [59] 
 Koreans have distinguished Chinese terms for dog ("견; 犬", which refers to pet dogs,  feral dogs , and  wolves ) from the Chinese term ("구; 狗") which is used specifically to indicate dog meat. "Hwangu" has been considered better for consumption than "Baekgu" (White dog) and "Heukgu" (Black dog). [60] 
 Around 1816,  Jeong Hak-yu , the second son of  Jeong Yak-yong , a prominent politician and scholar of the  Joseon  dynasty, wrote a poem called  Nongga Wollyeongga  (농가월령가). This poem, which is an important source of Korean folk history, describes what ordinary Korean farming families did in each month of the year. In the description of the month of August the poem tells of a married woman visiting her birth parents with boiled dog meat, rice cake, and rice wine, thus showing the popularity of dog meat at the time (Ahn, 2000; Seo, 2002).  Dongguk Sesigi  (동국세시기), a book written by Korean scholar Hong Seok-mo in 1849, contains a recipe for  Bosintang  including a boiled dog, green onion, and red chili pepper powder. [58] 
 According to a 2006 survey, dog meat was the fourth most commonly consumed meat in South Korea. [61]  In 2019, a majority (71.9%) of Koreans reported that they do not eat dog meat. [62] 
 
 Samgyetang (삼계탕)-Ginseng chicken soup [ edit ] 
 Samgyetang  is a chicken ginseng soup traditionally consumed during Boknal (복날) days: the hottest days of summer. It is a Korean custom to eat hot food in hot weather called Iyeolchiyeol (이열치열), which means “controlling heat with heat”. Consequently, Samgyetang is Koreans' favorite energizing food and it is common to have it on sambok (삼복) days — Chobok (초복), Jungbok (중복) and Malbok (말복) — which are believed to be the hottest days in Korea.
 As the “Dongui Bogam” says, (Kor. 동의보감, Chin. 東醫寶鑑, Exemplar of Korean Medicine, 1613), “eating the meat from a female chicken with yellow feathers helps to control excessive thirst and urination, vitalizes the five viscera, increases yang energy, and warms the small intestines…. Ginseng complements the five viscera, stabilizes the spirit and soul, and fills what is lacking and weak in our body.”↵It is served with radish kimchi, cabbage kimchi, chicken gizzard, fresh green peppers and ginseng wine ( insamju  -인삼주). Commonly, it uses a chicken before the age of six months before it start to lay eggs. Stew made from a young chicken served with yukgaejang (Kor. 육개장, spicy beef stew), were introduced as part of the (복날) ‘Canicular Days’ cuisine only in the early 20th century.
 Originally, samgyetang was called gyesamtang then it changed because of the increasingly popularity of ginseng in Korea and overseas. That is also because as ginseng is the main ingredient of the soup Korean decided to reverse the first two syllables of the name putting ginseng first.
 
 Dishes [ edit ] 
 See also:  List of Korean dishes  and  List of North Korean dishes 
 Korean foods can be largely categorized into groups of "main  staple foods " (주식), "subsidiary dishes" (부식), and "dessert" (후식). The main dishes are made from grains such as  bap  (a bowl of rice),  juk  (porridge), and  guksu  (noodles).
 Many Korean  banchan  rely on fermentation for flavor and preservation, resulting in a tangy, salty, and spicy taste. Certain regions are especially associated with some dishes (for example, the city of  Jeonju  with  bibimbap ) either as a place of origin or for a famous regional variety. Restaurants will often use these famous names on their signs or menus (e.g. " Suwon  galbi").
 
 Soups and stews [ edit ] 
 See also:  List of Korean dishes § Soups and stews 
   Tteokguk , soup made with  tteok , rice cake 
 Soups  are a common part of any Korean meal. Unlike other cultures, in Korean culture, soup is served as part of the main course rather than at the beginning or the end of the meal, as an accompaniment to rice along with other  banchan . Soups known as  guk  are often made with meats, shellfish and vegetables. Soups can be made into more formal soups known as  tang , often served as the main dish of the meal.  Jjigae  are a thicker, heavier seasoned soups or stews. [63] 
 Some popular types of soups are:
 
 Malgeunguk  (맑은국), are flavored with  ganjang . Small amounts of long boiled meat may be added to the soup, or seafood both fresh and dried may be added, or vegetables may be the main component for the clear soup. 
 Doenjang-guk  (된장국) are seasoned with  doenjang . Common ingredients for  tojang guk  include seafood such as clams, dried anchovies, and shrimp. For a spicier soup,  gochujang  is added. [64] 
 Tteok-guk  is a rice cake soup commonly made with sliced rice cakes and beef broth. White rice cake was called Baekbyeong (백병-白餠) or Geomo (거모-擧摸). Tteok-guk is made with thinly sliced garae-tteok, are long, cylindrical shaped rice cakes made with rice flour. Tteok-guk is boiled in chicken broth, but was originally boiled in pheasant meat soup. It says, “hunting pheasant is not easy, and since they breed chickens, they use chicken instead of pheasant, and if there’s not chicken they even used beef”(꿩 대신 닭). In North Korea, there is a variation of this recipe called joraengi tteokguk where rice cakes are made in the shape of balls. it is eaten on new year’s day because Koreans believe that if you eat a bowl of tteok-guk on the first of the lunar year, you get one year older. There is the belief that rice cakes in oval shape bring fortune since they resemble old Korean coins known as  yeopjeon  (엽전). 
 Gomguk  (곰국) or  gomtang  (곰탕), and they are made from boiling beef bones or  cartilage . Originating as a peasant dish, all parts of beef are used, including tail, leg and rib bones with or without meat attached; these are boiled in water to extract fat,  marrow , and  gelatin  to create a rich soup. Some versions of this soup may also use the beef head and intestines. The only seasoning generally used in the soup is salt. 
 Naengguk  (냉국), which are cold soups generally eaten during the summer months to cool the diner. A light hand is usually used in the seasoning of these soups usually using  ganjang  and  sesame oil . [65] 
 Shin-Son-Ro (or Koo-Ja Tang), the name of it came from its special cook pot with chimney for burning charcoal. The meaning is a hearth or furnace or a pot for fire or incense burning that always contains nineteen fillings. The nineteen fillings were including beef, fish, eggs, carrot, mushrooms, and onion. [66] 
 Stews are referred to as  jjigae , and are often a shared side dish.  Jjigae  is often both cooked and served in the glazed earthenware pot ( ttukbaegi ) in which it is cooked. The most common version of this stew is  doenjang jjigae , which is a stew of  soybean paste , with many variations; common ingredients include vegetables, saltwater or freshwater fish, and tofu. The stew often changes with the seasons and which ingredients are available. Other common varieties of  jjigae  contain  kimchi  ( kimchi jjigae ) or tofu ( sundubu jjigae ). [67] 
 
 Seaweed Soup  (miyeok-guk; 미역국).This soup is made of dried  miyeok  or seaweed according to 조선요리제법, it says it is usually made by frying 미역 with beef pouring water and making the soup. Adding mussel can make it taste better. Also in coastal areas they use fish instead of beef too. It is usually consumed on Koreans birthday, specifically on samchil day (삼칠일: a resting period after giving birth to the newborn);  baek-il  (백일: the 100th day after a baby is born);  doljanchi  (돌잔치: the baby’s first birthday). 
 Kimchi [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Kimchi 
   Baek-kimchi 
 Kimchi  refers to often fermented vegetable dishes usually made with  napa cabbage ,  Korean radish , or sometimes cucumber. There are 4 types of raw materials which are major ones: spices, seasonings, and other additional materials. Red and black pepper, cinnamon, garlic, ginger, onion, and mustard are the example of spices. [68] [69] [70]  There are endless varieties with regional variations, and it is served as a side dish or cooked into soups and rice dishes. In the late 15th century, it depicted Korean's custom that Korean ancestors buried kimchi jars in the ground for storage for the entire winter season, as fermented foods can keep for several years. [71]  These were stored in traditional Korean mud pots known as  jangdokdae , although with the advent of refrigerators, special kimchi freezers and commercially produced kimchi, this practice has become less common. Kimchi is a vegetable-based food which includes low calorie, low fat, and no cholesterol. Also, it is a rich source of various vitamins and minerals. It contains vitamins such as vitamin A, vitamin B, vitamin C, and vitamin K and minerals which are calcium, iron, phosphorus, and selenium. [72]  South Koreans eat an average of 40 pounds of kimchi each year. [73] 
 
 Noodles [ edit ] 
   Japchae, a kind of Korean noodle dish made with marinated beef and vegetables in soy sauce and sesame oil. 
 Main article:  Korean noodles 
 Noodles or noodle dishes in Korean cuisine are collectively referred to as  guksu  in native Korean or  myeon  in  hanja . While noodles were eaten in Korea from ancient times, productions of wheat was less than other crops, so wheat noodles did not become a daily food until 1945. [74] [75]  Wheat noodles ( milguksu ) were specialty foods for birthdays, weddings or auspicious occasions because the long and continued shape were thought to be associated with the bliss for longevity and long-lasting marriage. [74] 
 In Korean traditional noodle dishes are  onmyeon  or  guksu jangguk  (noodles with a hot clear broth),  naengmyeon  (cold buckwheat noodles),  bibim guksu  (cold noodle dish mixed with vegetables),  kalguksu  (knife-cut noodles),  kongguksu  (noodles with a cold soybean broth),  japchae  (cellophane noodles made from sweet potato with various vegetables) and others. In royal court,  baekmyeon  (literally "white noodles") consisting of buckwheat noodles and  pheasant  broth, was regarded as the top quality noodle dish.  Naengmyeon  with a cold soup mixed with  dongchimi  (watery  radish  kimchi) and beef brisket broth was eaten in court during summer. [74] 
 
 Jajangmyeon , a staple Koreanized  Chinese  noodle dish, is extremely popular in Korea as fast, take-out food. It is made with a black bean sauce usually fried with diced pork or seafood and a variety of vegetables, including zucchini and potatoes. It is popularly ordered and delivered, like Chinese take-out food in other parts of the world. 
 Ramyeon  refers to Korean instant noodles similar to  ramen . 
 Japchae  (잡채; 雜菜) is a dish made by inserting in boiling water roasted vegetables, mushrooms and meat, each of them roasted. This is one of the most popular dishes in Korean tradition enjoyed on special occasion like weddings, holidays and birthday. There are two types of Japchae, one that includes glass noodles and another without noodles. According to the Korean cookbook Diminbang  음식디미방 (around 1670), there’s only the recipe without glass noodles. The original recipe without glass noodles is made by boiling vegetables such as cucumbers, pine mushrooms bean, sprouts, bellflowers green onion, then they are sprinkled with ginger, pepper, sesame oil, and flour. The sauce is made by boiling minced pink meat and soybean paste that is lightly filtered with sesame oil and flour. To match the name more than 20 ingredients were used. In Gyongon Yoram [규곤요람閨壼要覽 (1896)] is also recorded japchae seasoned with mustard sauce without glass noodles.  However, since the 1930’s, appears the japchae recipe with glass noodles alongside the original recipe. Also, during the Joseon dynasty [조선요리법朝鮮料理法] the recipe of japchae, with and without  glass noodles, was added to the cookbook. Also, there is also a variant of japchae with meat, or one with abalone or other seafood in 1930s.It is a local food that shows the traditional recipe. In the Jinju region, Jamung-sam, Yokimun, is a local dish with soy sauce and sesame oil, and the seafood, such as octopus, skates, and mixed several vegetables stained in oil. Because it uses various ingredients, it has high calorie, protein, fat, vitamin, mineral, and sufficient nutritional. It is the first item to choose when you want a feast table. 
 Banchan [ edit ] 
 Banchan  is a term referring collectively to side dishes in Korean cuisine. Soups and stews are not considered  banchan . 
 
   Bulgogi , a grilled Korean dish; the meat and vegetables shown here have not yet been grilled. 
 Gui  are grilled dishes, which most commonly have meat or fish as their primary ingredient, but may in some cases also comprise grilled vegetables or other vegetable ingredients. At traditional restaurants, meats are cooked at the center of the table over a charcoal grill, surrounded by various  banchan  and individual rice bowls. The cooked meat is then cut into small pieces and wrapped with fresh lettuce leaves, with rice, thinly sliced garlic,  ssamjang  (a mixture of  gochujang  and  dwenjang ), and other seasonings. The suffix  gui  is often omitted in the names of meat-based  gui  such as  galbi , the name of which was originally  galbi gui .
 
 List of grilled dishes commonly found in Korean cuisine 
 Jjim  and  seon  (steamed dishes) are generic terms referring to steamed or boiled dishes in Korean cuisine. However, the former is made with meat or seafood-based ingredients marinated in  gochujang  or  ganjang  while  seon  is made with vegetable stuffed with fillings.
 
 List of steamed dishes commonly found in Korean cuisine 
 Hoe  (raw dishes): although the term originally referred to any kind of raw dish, it is generally used to refer to  saengseonhweh  (생선회, raw fish dishes). It is dipped in  gochujang , or soy sauce with  wasabi , and served with lettuce or  perilla  leaves.
 
 list of raw dishes commonly found in Korean cuisine 
   Bindaeddeok 
 Jeon  (전, 煎) (or  buchimgae ) is a Korean savory pancake made from various ingredients. Chopped kimchi or seafood is mixed into a wheat flour-based batter, and then pan fried. This dish is typically dipped in a mixture of soy sauce, vinegar, and red pepper powder. It can be served as an appetizer, side dish ( banchan  - 반찬) or accompanied by alcohol ( anju  - 안주).
 There are some sweet varieties called  Hwajeon  (화전) which means flower pancakes.
 There are different types of jeon: jeon-yu [전유어(煎油魚)] and jeon-hwa [ 전유화(煎油花)], the former has recently developed to only refer to fish pancakes. The previous ingredients can be used in various ways, such as meat, fish, and vegetables. The meat used can be quail, beef and pork. Seafood is mainly white sea fish such as croaker, cod, and Pollack. Vegetables used are: pumpkins, pepper,sesame leaves etc. In the summer potatoes are harvested, and the mung beans are made in the winter. According to the regional cases many buckwheat production are in Pyeongchang and Bongpyeong area, first set the small green onions or cabbage leaves and turn the thin buckwheat dough on it. There is no special taste, but the hands are still in the hand of buckwheat.
 Cooking oils such as soy and corn are used today, though technology required for producing these oils was not available during the Joseon Dynasty.
 
 List of  jeon  dishes commonly found in Korean cuisine 
   Namul 
 Namul  may refer to either  saengchae  (생채, literally "fresh vegetables") or  sukchae  (숙채, literally "heated vegetables"), although the term generally indicates the latter.  Saengchae  is mostly seasoned with vinegar,  chili pepper  powder and salt to give a tangy and refreshing taste. On the other hand,  sukchae  (숙채) is blanched and seasoned with soy sauce,  sesame oil , chopped garlic, or sometimes chili pepper powder.
 
 List of  namul  dishes commonly found in Korean cuisine 
 
 Anju  (side dishes accompanying alcoholic beverages) [ edit ] 
   Jokbal  : pig's feet, a type of Anju. 
 Anju  is a general term for a Korean side dish consumed with alcohol. It matches well with Korean traditional alcohol such as Soju or Makgeolli and helps people to enjoy their drinking more. Some examples of  anju  include steamed squid with  gochujang , assorted fruit,  dubu kimchi  (tofu with kimchi), peanuts,  odeng / ohmuk ,  sora  (소라) (a kind of shellfish popular in street food tents), and  nakji  (small octopus) and  Jokbal  (pig's leg served with salted shrimp sauce). Samgyupsal (pork belly) is also considered as Anju with Soju. Most Korean foods can be considered as 'anju', as the food consumed alongside the alcohol depends on the diner's taste and preferences.
 
 Holiday food [ edit ] 
 Songpyeon (송편) [ edit ] 
 Songpyeon  (송편, 松䭏) is a Korean dish made of rice powder mostly eaten during  Chuseok / Korean thanksgiving (추석) to express gratitude towards ancestors. Songpyeon recordings appear from the 17th century. It is said in 『Yorok 要 錄』, "Make rice cakes with white rice flour, steam them with pine and pine needles and wash them off with water." At the beginning of Songpyeon, rice cakes were made simply with white rice powder, pine needles were steamed and then washed in water. It is said that "red beans, pine nuts, walnuts, ginger and cinnamon" were added in the "Buyin Pilji 婦人 必 知". In 『Korean Rice Cakes, Hangwa, Eumcheongryu』, “In mountainous regions such as Gangwon-do and Chungcheong-do, potato songpyeon, acorn songpyeon and songgisongpyeon have been prepared and eaten. In the coastal areas of Hamgyeong-do, Pyeongan-do and Gyeonggi-do, shellfish songpyeon as produced and eaten, and in the southern regions of Jeolla-do and Gyeongsang-do, songpyeon with moss leaves was produced and eaten.
 Songpyeon represents the moon and hope, which is why while eating this Koreans make wishes.
 There is a proverb that says, "When virgins make a nice songpyeon, they will meet a good spouse, and when a pregnant woman makes a nice songpyeon, they have beautiful daughters."  Songpyeon served on the Baekilsang and the stone table is described in Yorok, "I cooked it so that the convex shaped part of songpyeon came out without adding any filling, but it looks like it is full. It has the meaning of wishing good luck.
 In the Seoul region, the floral songpyeon and five-color songpyeon were made small and beautiful, and in Hwanghae-do and Gangwon-do they fingerprinted and ate them coarsely.
 The method of making five-color songpyeon is achieved by adding natural ingredients such as mugwort, gardenia water, omija water and cinnamon powder to the rice flour, kneading the rice cake with the five colors and adding the filling. However, in the past, pine endodermis were used in place of cinnamon powder to make the dough brown.
 
 Ogok-bap (오곡밥) [ edit ] 
 Ogok-bap  means five rice dish, which consists of rice mixed with glutinous rice, cornstarch, red bean, perilla, and soybean. By consuming grains with the energy of blue, red, yellow, white, and black, we pray for good health as well as a good year for our body with the energy of the five elements, and to chase away bad luck and happiness and well-being.
 In addition, there is a custom of sharing five grains of rice between neighbors because it is said that three or more families of different surnames share rice with each other.
 It is consumed on the day of the first full moon of the year when people make rituals for guardian spirits against disasters and misfortune. Koreans also celebrate the upcoming spring.
 
 Beverages [ edit ] 
 Non-alcoholic beverages [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Korean tea 
 See also:  List of Korean dishes § Types of non-alcoholic beverages 
   Daechu cha  (jujube tea) 
 All Korean traditional nonalcoholic beverages are referred to as  eumcheong  or  eumcheongnyu  (음청류  飮 淸 類 ) which literally means "clear beverages". [76]  According to historical documents regarding Korean cuisine, 193 items of  eumcheongnyu  are recorded. [77]   Eumcheongnyu  can be divided into the following categories:  tea ,  hwachae  (fruit punch),  sikhye  (sweet rice drink),  sujeonggwa  (persimmon punch),  tang  (탕, boiled water),  jang  (장, fermented grain juice with a sour taste),  suksu  (숙수, beverage made of herbs),  galsu  (갈수, drink made of fruit extract, and Oriental medicine), honeyed water, juice and milk by their ingredient materials and preparation methods. Among the varieties, tea,  hwachae ,  sikhye , and  sujeonggwa  are still widely favored and consumed; however, the others almost disappeared by the end of the 20th century. [78] [79] 
 In Korean cuisine,  tea , or  cha , refers to various types of  herbal tea  that can be served hot or cold. Not necessarily related to the leaves, leaf buds, and  internodes  of the  Camellia sinensis  plant, they are made from diverse substances, including fruits (e.g.  yuja-cha ), flowers (e.g.  gukhwa-cha ), leaves, roots, and grains (e.g.  bori-cha ,  hyeonmi-cha ) or herbs and substances used in  traditional Korean medicine , such as  ginseng  (e.g.  insam-cha ) and ginger (e.g.  saenggang-cha ). [80] 
 
 Alcoholic beverages [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Korean alcoholic beverages 
 See also:  Beer in North Korea ,  Beer in South Korea , and  List of Korean beverages 
   A bowl of  makgeolli , a type of  takju 
 While  soju  is the best known liquor, there are well over 100 different alcoholic beverages, such as beers, rice and fruit wines, and liquors produced in South Korea as well as a sweet rice drink. The top-selling domestic beers ( maekju  in Korean) are  lagers , which differ from Western beers in that they are brewed from rice, rather than barley. Consequently, Korean beers are lighter, sweeter and have less head than their Western counterparts. The  South Korean beer  market is dominated by the two major breweries:  Hite  and  OB .  Taedonggang  is a  North Korean beer  produced at a brewery based in  Pyongyang  since 2002. [81]   Microbrewery  beers and bars are growing in popularity after 2002. [82] 
 Soju  is a clear spirit which was originally made from grain, especially rice, and is now also made from sweet potatoes or barley.  Soju  made from grain is considered superior (as is also the case with grain vs. potato  vodka ).  Soju  is around 22%  ABV , and is a favorite beverage of hard-up college students, hard-drinking businessmen, and blue-collar workers.
 Yakju  is a refined pure liquor fermented from rice, with the best known being  cheongju .  Takju  is a thick unrefined liquor made with grains, with the best known being  makgeolli , a white, milky rice wine traditionally drunk by farmers. [83] 
 In addition to the  rice wine , various fruit wines and herbal wines exist in Korean cuisine. Acacia,  maesil  plum,  Chinese quince , cherry,  pine cone , and pomegranate are most popular.  Majuang wine  (a blended wine of Korean grapes with French or American wines) and ginseng-based wines are also available.
 
 Sweets [ edit ] 
 See also:  List of Korean desserts 
   Tteok 
   Various  hahngwa 
 Traditional rice cakes,  tteok  and Korean confectionery  hangwa  are eaten as treats during holidays and festivals.  Tteok  refers to all kinds of  rice cakes  made from either pounded rice (메떡,  metteok ), pounded  glutinous rice  (찰떡,  chaltteok ), or glutinous rice left whole, without pounding. It is served either filled or covered with sweetened mung bean paste,  red bean paste , mashed red beans,  raisins , a sweetened filling made with sesame seeds, sweet pumpkin, beans, jujubes, pine nuts or honey).  Tteok  is usually served as dessert or as a snack. Among varieties,  songpyeon  is a chewy stuffed  tteok  served at  Chuseok .  Honey  or another soft sweet material such as sweetened sesame or black beans are used as fillings.  Pine  needles can be used for imparting flavor during the steaming process. [84]   Yaksik  is a sweet rice cake made with glutinous rice, chestnuts, pine nuts, jujubes, and other ingredients, while  chapssaltteok  is a  tteok  filled with  sweet bean paste .
 On the other hand,  hangwa  is a general term referring to all types of Korean traditional  confectionery . The ingredients of  hahngwa  mainly consist of grain flour, honey,  yeot , and sugar, or of fruit and  edible roots .  Hangwa  is largely divided into  yumilgwa  (fried confectionery),  suksilgwa ,  jeonggwa ,  gwapyeon ,  dasik  (tea food) and  yeot .  Yumilgwa  is made by  stir frying  or frying pieces of dough, such as  maejakgwa  and  yakgwa .  Maejakgwa  is a ring-shaped confection made of wheat flour, vegetable oil,  cinnamon ,  ginger  juice,  jocheong , and  pine nuts , while  yakgwa , literally "medicinal confectionery", is a flower-shaped biscuit made of  honey ,  sesame oil  and wheat flour.
 Suksilgwa  is made by boiling fruits, ginger, or nuts in water, and then forming the mix into the original fruit's shape, or other shapes.  Gwapyeon  is a  jelly -like confection made by boiling sour fruits, starch, and sugar.  Dasik , literally "eatery for tea", is made by kneading rice flour, honey, and various types of flour from nuts, herbs, sesame, or jujubes.  Jeonggwa , or  jeongwa , is made by boiling fruits, plant roots and seeds in honey,  mullyeot  ( 물엿 , liquid candy) or sugar. It is similar to  marmalade  or  jam/jelly . [85] [86] [87]   Yeot  is a Korean traditional candy in liquid or solid form made from  steamed rice , glutinous rice,  glutinous kaoliang , corn, sweet potatoes or mixed grains. The steamed ingredients are lightly fermented and boiled in a large pot called  sot  (솥) for a long time.
 Yugwa(유과) and  Yak-gwa (약과).They are traditional desserts enjoyed during Chuseok, marriage or the sixtieth birthday (Hwangap - 환갑).
 Yugwa is a generic name for 산자, 강정 and 빈사과. They are classified as: square shaped 산자, finger shaped 강정, drop shaped and square shaped 빈사과 . Furthermore, many different names have been given based on coatings, toppings and fillings. Plum blossoms obtained by frying sesame seeds and nutmeg, steamed dried and fried glutinous rice, sebann with finely chopped sesame seeds, seunggeomcho and pine nut powder are used. In addition, they are dyed pink, yellow, etc. Depending on the region, it is also called Gwajul or Sanja. First, soak some good glutinous rice in water and let it ferment so that the glutinous rice sticks. The fermentation period varies from one week to ten days depending on the season, and after having fermented until crushed by hand, knead and steam it for a long time, then beat until cherries form.
 Sanja is a large square shape, gangjeong is the thickness of a finger and bell gangjeong is the size of a thumb. 빈사과 is one the size of a red bean, which is lumped together with the syrup or sugar syrup and cut into squares. Once the excess oil has been removed, honey or syrup is applied and the ginger juice is added at this time. Ginger juice has the effect of preventing rancidity of fats. It is completed by covering with various types of gluten wheat.
 Yugwa, which is difficult to make, is best prepared in the winter. Honey or syrup is an important ingredient in making Yugwa, which crumbles and melts when you put it in your mouth.↵During the Joseon Dynasty, Yugwa was used during the rite of passage and in the royal family various types of Yugwa were placed high on the banquet table. In the aristocratic family, it is customary to send gangjeong to accompany the groom or to business guests returning from a wedding party to the bride's house, full of dongguri intertwined with stones or willows.↵Furthermore, Yugwa was chosen as the ancestral food par excellence for the ancestors, and is a food not to be missed during the Lunar New Year holiday.
 Yakgwa  (약과; 藥菓) is a dessert made of wheat flour, honey, ginger juice and rice wine. In premodern Korea they were enjoyed by upper classes as a rare dish, today is common to serve it with tea.
 Yakgwa is a traditional and good quality dish with a sweet and savory taste. In Korean, the Yak character is used to name foods that commonly contain honey and sesame oil. From ancient times, instead of fruit, honey and sesame oil were used to medicate and it has become a sweet. Even today the yakgwa among the bourgeois class is a dish that can never be missing. However, they are not prepared with difficulty as in ancient times and are easily found on the market. You can buy them anywhere easily and enjoy them comfortably for a snack. The Yakgwa was developed as a Buddhist banquet and was a very important ancestral food, it was food that was given as a gift for weddings.
 Also this reputation spread nationwide from China, Koryeo's oil and honey pastry was generally known for festivities.
 
 Regional and variant cuisines [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Korean regional cuisine 
   A traditional meal in  Kaesong ,  North Korea . 
 Korean regional cuisines (Korean:  hyangto eumsik , literally "native local foods") [88]  are characterized by local specialties and distinctive styles within Korean cuisine. The divisions reflected historical boundaries of the  provinces  where these food and culinary traditions were preserved until modern times.
 Although Korea has been divided into two nation-states since 1948 ( North Korea  and South Korea), it was once divided into  eight provinces  ( paldo ) according to the administrative districts of the  Joseon Dynasty . The northern region consisted of  Hamgyeong  Province,  Pyeongan  Province and  Hwanghae  Province. The central region comprised  Gyeonggi  Province,  Chungcheong Province , and  Gangwon Province .  Gyeongsang  Province and  Jeolla  Province made up the southern region. [89] 
 Until the late 19th century, transportation networks were not well developed, and each provincial region preserved its own characteristic tastes and cooking methods. Geographic differences are also reflected by the local specialty foodstuffs depending on the climate and types of agriculture, as well as the natural foods available. With the modern development of transportation and the introduction of foreign foods, Korean regional cuisines have tended to overlap and integrate. However, many unique traditional dishes in Korean regional cuisine have been handed down through the generations. [90] [91] 
 
 Buddhist cuisine [ edit ] 
   Korean temple cuisine at Sanchon, a restaurant located in  Insadong , Seoul. 
 Further information:  Korean temple cuisine  and  Buddhist cuisine 
 Korean temple cuisine originated in Buddhist temples of Korea. Since  Buddhism  was introduced into Korea,  Buddhist  traditions have strongly influenced Korean cuisine, as well. During the  Silla period  (57 BCE – 935 CE),  chalbap  (찰밥, a bowl of cooked  glutinous rice )  yakgwa  (a fried dessert) and  yumilgwa  (a fried and puffed rice snack) were served for Buddhist altars and have been developed into types of  hangwa , Korean traditional  confectionery . During the  Goryeo Dynasty ,  sangchu ssam  (wraps made with lettuce),  yaksik , and  yakgwa  were developed, and since spread to China and other countries. Since the Joseon Dynasty, Buddhist cuisine has been established in Korea according to regions and temples. [92] [93] 
 On the other hand,  royal court cuisine  is closely related to Korean temple cuisine. In the past, when the royal court maids,  sanggung , who were assigned to  Suragan  (hangul: 수라간; hanja:  水剌間 ; the name of the royal kitchen), where they prepared the king's meals, became old, they had to leave the royal palace. Therefore, many of them entered Buddhist temples to become nuns. As a result, culinary techniques and recipes of the royal cuisine were integrated into Buddhist cuisine. [94] 
 
 Vegetarian cuisine [ edit ] 
   Closeup of the ingredients in  goldongban  or  bibimbap 
 Vegetarian cookery  in Korea may be linked to the  Buddhist  traditions that influenced Korean culture from the  Goryeo  dynasty onwards. There are hundreds of vegetarian restaurants in Korea, although historically they have been local restaurants that are unknown to tourists. Most have buffets, with cold food, and vegetarian  kimchi  and  tofu  being the main features.  Bibimbap  is a common  vegan  dish. Menus change with seasons. Wine with the alcohol removed and fine  teas  are also served. The  Korean tea ceremony  is suitable for all vegetarians and vegans, and began with Buddhist influences. All food is eaten with a combination of stainless steel oval  chopsticks  and a long-handled shallow spoon called together  sujeo .
 
 Ceremonial food [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Korean ceremonial food 
 See also:  Korean Traditional Festivals 
 Food is an important part of traditions of Korean family ceremonies, which are mainly based on the Confucian culture.  Gwan Hon Sang Je  (관혼상제; 冠婚喪祭), the four family ceremonies (coming-of-age ceremony, wedding, funeral, and ancestral rite) have been considered especially important and elaborately developed, continuing to influence Korean life to these days. Ceremonial food in Korea has developed with variation across different regions and cultures. [95] 
 For example, rituals are mainly performed on the anniversary of deceased ancestors, called  jesa . Ritual food include rice, liquor, soup, vinegar and soy sauce (1st row); noodles, skewered meat, vegetable and fish dishes, and rice cake (2nd row); three types of hot soup, meat and vegetable dishes (3rd row); dried snacks,  kimchi , and sweet rice drink (4th row); and variety of fruit (5th row). [96] 
 
 Street food [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Street food in South Korea 
   Gimbap , rice (bap) and various filler ingredients, rolled in sheets of dried seaweed ( gim ) 
   Korea Street Food  tteokbokki  (떡볶이) and  Eomuk  (어묵/오뎅) 
 In South Korea, inexpensive food may be purchased from  pojangmacha , street carts during the day, where customers may eat standing beside the cart or have their food wrapped up to take home. At night,  pojangmacha  (포장마차) become small tents that sell food, drinks, and alcoholic beverages. [97] 
 Seasonal street foods include  hotteok , and  bungeoppang , which are enjoyed in autumn and winter.  Gimbap  (김밥) and  tteokbokki  (떡볶이)are also very popular street food. [98] 
 
People also enjoy to eat  Sundae  (순대),  Twigim  (튀김), and  Eomuk  (오뎅/어묵) which are popular with  tteokbokki . Also,  Gyeran-ppang  (계란빵) which is Egg Bread and  Hoppang  (호빵) are also enjoyed in winter.  Dak-kkochi  (닭꼬치) is a popular food in Korea with various sauces on chicken.  Beondegi  (번데기) and  dalgona /ppopgi  (뽑기) are two examples of original street foods many people have enjoyed since childhood.    Hoppang , filled with smooth, sweetened red bean paste.     Dak-kkochi , Bbopki/Dalgona, Korean chicken skewers consisting of grilled small pieces of chicken. 
 Etiquette [ edit ] 
 Dining [ edit ] 
   A single-person  bapsang  (meal table). Each person was given a table in a traditional dining setting. 
   Korean  chopsticks  and  spoon  made of  stainless steel . 
 Dining etiquette in Korea can be traced back to the  Confucian  philosophies of the  Joseon period . Guidebooks, such as  Sasojeol  (士小節,  Elementary Etiquette for Scholar Families ), written in 1775 by Yi Deokmu (이덕무; 李德懋), comment on the dining etiquette for the period. Suggestions include items such as "when you see a fat cow, goat, pig, or chicken, do not immediately speak of slaughtering, cooking or eating it", [99]  "when you are having a meal with others, do not speak of smelly or dirty things, such as boils or  diarrhea ," [99]   "when eating a meal, neither eat so slowly as to appear to be eating against your will nor so fast as if to be taking someone else's food. Do not throw chopsticks on the table. Spoons should not touch plates, making a clashing sound", [99]  among many other recommendations which emphasized proper  table etiquette .
 Other than the etiquette mentioned above, blowing one's nose when having a meal is considered an inappropriate act as well.
 The eldest male at the table was always served first, and was commonly served in the men's quarters by the women of the house.  Women usually dined in a separate portion of the house after the men were served. The eldest men or women always ate before the younger family members. The meal was usually quiet, as conversation was discouraged during meals. In modern times, these rules have become lax, as families usually dine together now and use the time to converse. Of the remaining elements of this decorum, one is that the younger members of the table should not pick up their  chopsticks  or start eating before the elders of the table or guests and should not finish eating before the elders or guests finish eating. [100] [101] 
 In Korea, unlike in other East Asian cuisines such as  Chinese  and  Japanese , the rice or soup bowl is not lifted from the table when eating from it. This is due to the fact that each diner is given a metal spoon along with the chopsticks known collectively as  sujeo . The use of the spoon for eating rice and soups is expected. There are rules which reflect the decorum of sharing communal side dishes; rules include not picking through the dishes for certain items while leaving others, and the spoon used should be clean, because usually diners put their spoons in the same serving bowl on the table. Diners should also cover their mouths when using a  toothpick  after the meal. [100] [101] 
 The table setup is important as well, and individual place settings, moving from the diner's left should be as follows: rice bowl, spoon, then chopsticks. Hot foods are set to the right side of the table, with the cold foods to the left. Soup must remain on the right side of the diner along with  stews . Vegetables remain on the left along with the rice, and  kimchi  is set to the back while sauces remain in the front. [100] 
 
 Drinking [ edit ] 
 The manner of drinking  alcoholic drinks  while dining is significant in  Korean dining etiquette . Each diner is expected to face away from the  eldest male  and cover his mouth when drinking alcohol.
According to Hyang Eum Ju Rye (향음주례; 鄕飮酒禮), the drinking etiquette established in  Choseon Dynasty , it is impolite for a king and his vassal, a father and his son, or a teacher and his student to drink face to face. Also, a guest should not refuse the first drink offered by host, and in the most formal situations, the diner should politely twice refuse a drink offered by the eldest male or a host. When the host offers for the third time, then finally the guest can receive it. If the guest refuses three times, drink is not to be offered any more. [102] 
 
 Royal court cuisine [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Korean royal court cuisine 
 See also:  List of Korean dishes § Royal court dishes 
   Anapji Lake  in  Gyeongju , the capital of  Silla Kingdom . 
 Collectively known as  gungjung eumsik  during the pre-modern era, the foods of the royal palace were reflective of the opulent nature of the past rulers of the Korean peninsula. This nature is evidenced in examples as far back as the  Silla  kingdom, where a man-made lake ( Anapji Lake , located in  Gyeongju ), was created with multiple pavilions and halls for the sole purpose of opulent  banquets , and a spring fed channel,  Poseokjeong , was created for the singular purpose of setting wine cups afloat while they wrote poems. [103] 
 Reflecting the regionalism of the kingdoms and bordering countries of the peninsula, the cuisine borrowed portions from each of these areas to exist as a showcase. The royalty would have the finest regional specialties and delicacies sent to them at the palace. Although there are records of banquets predating the Joseon period, the majority of these records mostly reflect the vast variety of foods, but do not mention the specific foods presented. [104]  The meals cooked for the royal family did not reflect the seasons, as the commoner's meals would have. Instead, their meals varied significantly day-to-day. Each of the eight provinces was represented each month in the royal palace by ingredients presented by their governors, which gave the cooks a wide assortment of ingredients to use for royal meals. [105] 
 
   A model of the royal kitchen in the  Dae Jang Geum  theme park, South Korea. 
 Food was considered significant in the Joseon period. Official positions were created within the  Six Ministries  ( Yukjo , 육조) that were charged with all matters related to procurement and consumption of food and drink for the royal court. The Board of Personnel ( Ijo , 이조) contained positions specific for attaining rice for the royal family. The Board of Rights ( Yejo ) were responsible for foods prepared for ancestor rites, attaining wines and other beverages, and medicinal foods. There were also hundreds of slaves and women who worked in the palace that had tasks such as making  tofu , liquor, tea, and  tteok  (rice cakes). The women were the cooks to the royal palace and were of commoner or low-born families. These women would be split into specific skill sets or "bureau" such as the bureau of special foods ( Saenggwa-bang , 생과방) or the bureau of cooking foods ( Soju-bang , 소주방). These female cooks may have been assisted by male cooks from outside the palace during larger banquets when necessary. [106] 
 Five meals were generally served in the royal palace each day during the Joseon period, and records suggest this pattern had existed from antiquity. Three of these meals would be full meals, while the afternoon and after dinner meals would be lighter. The first meal,  mieumsang  (미음상), was served at sunrise and was served only on days when the king and queen were not taking herbal medicines. The meal consisted of  rice porridge  ( juk , 죽) made with ingredients such as abalone ( jeonbokjuk ), white rice ( huinjuk ), mushrooms ( beoseotjuk ), pine nuts ( jatjuk ), and sesame ( kkaejuk ). The side dishes could consist of  kimchi ,  nabak kimchi , oysters, soy sauce, and other items. The porridge was thought to give vitality to the king and queen throughout the day. [107] 
 The  sura  (수라) were the main meals of the day. Breakfast was served at ten in the morning, and the evening meals were served between six and seven at night. The set of three tables ( surasang , 수라상), were usually set with two types of rice, two types of soup, two types of stew ( jjigae ), one dish of  jjim  (meat stew), one dish of  jeongol  (a casserole of meat and vegetables), three types of  kimchi , three types of  jang  (장) and twelve side dishes,  called 12 cheop (12첩). The meals were set in the  suragan  (수라간), a room specifically used for taking meals, with the king seated to the east and the queen to the west. Each had their own set of tables and were attended by three palace servant women known as  sura sanggung  (수라상궁). These women would remove bowl covers and offer the foods to the king and queen after ensuring the dishes were not poisoned. [108] 
 Banquets (궁중 연회 음식) were held on special occasions in the Korean Royal Palace. These included birthdays of the royal family members, marriages, and national festivals, including Daeborum, Dano, Chuseok, and Dongji. [109]  Banquet food was served on individual tables which varied according to the rank of the person. Usually banquet food consisted of ten different types of dishes. Main dishes were prepared based on the seasonal foods. Main dishes of the banquet included  sinseollo ,  jeon ,  hwayang jeok ,  honghapcho ,  nengmyun  and  mulgimchi . [109]  A typical banquet ingredient was  chogyetang  (chicken broth with vinegar), which was prepared with five different chickens, five abalones, ten sea cucumbers, twenty eggs, half a bellflower root, mushrooms, two cups of black pepper, two peeled pine nuts, starch, soy sauce and vinegar.  Yaksik  was a favorite banquet dessert. [110] 
 
 See also [ edit ] 
 
 Food portal 
 
 Asian cuisine 
 Chinese cuisine 
 Japanese cuisine 
 Korean baked goods 
 List of Korean desserts 
 List of Korean dishes 
 List of Korean drinks 
 Korean fried chicken 
 North Korean cuisine 
 South Korean cuisine 
 
 Notes [ edit ] 
 
 
 ^  a   b   "Korean Food in History (역사 속 한식이야기)"  (in Korean). Ministry of Culture, Sports and Tourism of Republic of Korea. Archived from  the original  on 27 November 2011 . Retrieved  2 August  2010 . 
 
 ^   "Korean Cuisine (한국요리 韓國料理)"  (in Korean).  Naver  /  Doosan Encyclopedia . Retrieved  28 March  2009 . 
 
 ^   Lee, Kyung Won; Cho, Wookyoun (19 June 2017).  "The Consumption of Dairy Products Is Associated with Reduced Risks of Obesity and Metabolic Syndrome in Korean Women but not in Men" .  Nutrients .  9  (6): 630.  doi : 10.3390/nu9060630 .  ISSN   2072-6643 .  PMC   5490609 .  PMID   28629203 . 
 
 ^   "Ssireum" . Korean Overseas Information Service. Archived from  the original  on 21 December 2008. 
 
 ^   "Gakjeochong (각저총 角抵塚)"  (in Korean).  Nate  / EncyKorea . Archived from  the original  on 10 June 2011. 
 
 ^   Pettid, 13. 
 
 ^   Pettid 2008 ,  p.15   Archived  31 October 2022 at the  Wayback Machine 
 
 ^   King Sejong's Humanism, from  National Assembly of the Republic of Korea 
 
 ^   Pettid, 17. 
 
 ^   The Academy of Korean Studies 
 
 ^   Pettid, 18-19. 
 
 ^   Pettid, 18. 
 
 ^   Pettid, 19. 
 
 ^   Pettid, 163. 
 
 ^  a   b   Pettid, 19-20. 
 
 ^   Pettid, 29,163. 
 
 ^   Pettid, 20. 
 
 ^   Pettid, 164-165. 
 
 ^   Pettid, 166. 
 
 ^   Yi Kyubo, 1-9. 
 
 ^   Koryǒsa, 57, 53b-54b. 
 
 ^   Pettid, 33. 
 
 ^   Yu Ji-sang (유지상).  "The reason why kongbap changed to boribap (콩사연)" .  JoongAng Ilbo  (in Korean). Archived from  the original  on 26 January 2009 . Retrieved  28 March  2009 . 
 
 ^   Pettid, 34. 
 
 ^   "All About Misugaru + Misugaru Dalgona Latte Recipe | 미수가루" . 
 
 ^   Crawford, (2006), p. 81. 
 
 ^   Crawford and Lee, (2003). 
 
 ^   Crawford and Lee, (2003), p.90 
 
 ^   장 醬  [Jang] (in Korean).  Nate  /  Encyclopedia of Korean Culture . Archived from  the original  on 11 June 2011. 
 
 ^   콩  [Kong] (in Korean).  Nate  /  Encyclopedia of Korean Culture . Archived from  the original  on 11 June 2011. 
 
 ^   녹두죽 綠豆粥  [Nokdujuk] (in Korean).  Doosan Encyclopedia . [ permanent dead link ] 
 
 ^   당면 唐麵  [Dangmyeon] (in Korean).  Doosan Encyclopedia . [ permanent dead link ] 
 
 ^   녹두묵  [Nokdumuk] (in Korean).  Doosan Encyclopedia . Archived from  the original  on 27 September 2008. 
 
 ^   팥  [Pat] (in Korean).  Nate  /  Encyclopedia of Korean Culture . Archived from  the original  on 11 June 2011. 
 
 ^   "팥 (Phaseolus angularis)"  (in Korean).  Nate  /  Encyclopædia Britannica . Archived from  the original  on 11 June 2011. 
 
 ^   Shin, Dong Hwa "Korean Traditional Food: Status, Prospects, and Vision for Globalization" Chonbuk National University, 2004 
 
 ^   Kim, S., Chung, K. R., Yang, H., & Kwon, D. Y. (2016) Sungchang gochujang (Korean red chili paste): The unfolding of authenticity. Journal of Ethnic Foods, 3(3), 201-208. DOI:10.1016/j.jef.2016.09.002 
 
 ^   Kwon, D. Y., Chung, K. R., Yang, H., & Jang, D. (2015). Gochujang (Korean red pepper paste): A Korean ethnic sauce, its role and history. Journal of Ethnic Foods, 2(1), 29-35. DOI:10.1016/j.jef.2015.02.006 
 
 ^   Pettid, 58. 
 
 ^   Pettid, 60. 
 
 ^   Pettid, 59-60. 
 
 ^  a   b   c   Pettid, 62. 
 
 ^   Yu Jisang (유지상) 
 
 ^   Pettid, 61. 
 
 ^  a   b   Pettid, 63. 
 
 ^   Marks, 8. 
 
 ^   Martin Robinson; Andrew Bender (April 2004).  Korea . Rob Whyte. Lonely Planet Publications. p.  147 .  ISBN   978-1-74059-449-3 .  shellfish korean broth. 
 
 ^   Yiu H. Hui; Sue Ghazala (1 September 2003).  Handbook of Vegetable Preservation and Processing . Dee M. Graham, K. D. Murrell, Wai-Kit Nip. CRC Press. p. 191.  ISBN   978-0-8247-4301-7 . 
 
 ^   Korea Tourism Organization 
 
 ^   Pettid, 65-66. 
 
 ^   Okwha Chung; Judy Monroe (September 2002).  Cooking the Korean Way . Lerner Publishing Group. pp. 13–14.  ISBN   978-0-8225-4115-8 . 
 
 ^   David Clive Price; Masano Kawana (15 November 2002).  Food of Korea . Periplus Editions. pp. 24–25.  ISBN   978-962-593-026-8 . 
 
 ^   Pettid, 84-85. 
 
 ^   "초복 앞둔 유통가 '보양식' 열기 (Popularity of boyangshik ahead of coming chobok)" .  Korea Times  (in Korean). Archived from  the original  on 13 June 2011 . Retrieved  20 July  2010 . 
 
 ^   "보양식 드시고 건강하세요 (Eat boyangshik and be healthy)" . Kyounggikdoin Times. Archived from  the original  on 26 April 2012 . Retrieved  20 July  2010 . 
 
 ^   "Spring boyangshik"  (in Korean). lifehanbang.co.kr. Archived from  the original  on 19 February 2013 . Retrieved  20 July  2010 . 
 
 ^   "Why is dog meat so popular in South Korea and what is 'Bosintang' dog soup?" . 7 August 2018. 
 
 ^  a   b   [1]   Archived  3 March 2016 at the  Wayback Machine  2008 Seoul Shinmoon article 
 
 ^   A Study of the Favorite Foods of the Balhae People   Archived  10 March 2012 at the  Wayback Machine  Yang Ouk-da 
 
 ^   S. Huh. (2004, p.83). 비주, 숨겨진 우리 술을 찾아서 [Rediscovering Korean liquors]. Paju, Korea: Woongjin Thinkbig.  ISBN   89-01-04720-9 
 
 ^   "한국 개고기 시장 1조4000억"   Archived  12 August 2015 at the  Wayback Machine  (24 October 2006).  Pressian . In Korean. Retrieved 12 August 2015. 
 
 ^   "시민 72% "개고기 섭취 의향 없어"…42% "요즘엔 안 먹어" " . 6 September 2019. 
 
 ^   Pettid, 56. 
 
 ^   Pettid, 56-57. 
 
 ^   Pettid, 57. 
 
 ^   "Korean food was the theme" .  The Daily Gleaner . 15 April 1971. 
 
 ^   Pettid, 57-58. 
 
 ^   Patra, Jayanta Kumar; Das, Gitishree; Paramithiotis, Spiros; Shin, Han-Seung (28 September 2016).  "Kimchi and Other Widely Consumed Traditional Fermented Foods of Korea: A Review" .  Frontiers in Microbiology .  7 : 1493.  doi : 10.3389/fmicb.2016.01493 .  ISSN   1664-302X .  PMC   5039233 .  PMID   27733844 . 
 
 ^   "Kimchi - food" . 
 
 ^   Kim, M., & Chun, J. (2005). Bacterial community structure in kimchi, a Korean fermented vegetable food, as revealed by 16S rRNA gene analysis. International Journal of Food Microbiology, 103(1), 91-96. See Abstract. 
 
 ^   Jang, Dai-Ja; Chung, Kyung Rhan; Yang, Hye Jeong; Kim, Kang-sung; Kwon, Dae Young (September 2015).  "Discussion on the origin of kimchi, representative of Korean unique fermented vegetables" .  Journal of Ethnic Foods .  2  (3): 126–136.  doi : 10.1016/j.jef.2015.08.005 . 
 
 ^   Hongu, Nobuko; Kim, Angela S.; Suzuki, Asuka; Wilson, Hope; Tsui, Karen C.; Park, Sunmin (September 2017).  "Korean kimchi : promoting healthy meals through cultural tradition" .  Journal of Ethnic Foods .  4  (3): 172–180.  doi : 10.1016/j.jef.2017.08.005 . 
 
 ^   "Easy Korean Food: Learn About Korean Cooking And Cuisine with Recipes & Pictures" .  www.easykoreanfood.com . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   국수  [Noodle (guksu)] (in Korean).  Doosan Encyclopedia . [ permanent dead link ] 
 
 ^   국수  [Noodle (guksu)] (in Korean).  Nate  /  Encyclopedia of Korean Culture . Archived from  the original  on 10 June 2011. 
 
 ^   (in Korean)  飮淸類  Nate Hanja Dictionary 
 
 ^   Baek Un-hwa, The industrialization of Korean traditional beverages 
 
 ^   Introduction of Eumcheongryu, Korea Agro-Fisheries Trade Corporation 
 
 ^   Sohn Gyeong-hee, Historical overview of Korean traditional eumcheongryu 
 
 ^   차  [Tea (cha)] (in Korean).  Nate  /  Encyclopedia of Korean Culture . Archived from  the original  on 10 June 2011 . Retrieved  23 October  2009 . 
 
 ^   Reuters, "North Korean beer: great taste, low proliferation risk", Mar 9, 2008 
 
 ^   The Korea Economic Daily, 2006-12-01 
 
 ^   Food in Korea, "Jontongjoo – Kinds of Traditional Liquors" 
 
 ^   Roy, Christian (2005).  Traditional Festivals: A Multicultural Encyclopedia .  ABC-CLIO . p. 285.  ISBN   978-1-57607-089-5 . 
 
 ^   "Kinds of Hangwa" .  Food in Korea . Korea Agro-Fisheries Trade Corporation. 
 
 ^   "Jeonggwa (정과 正果)"  (in Korean).  Nate  /  Britannica . 
 
 ^   "Jeonggwa (정과 正果"  (in Korean).  Nate  /  EncyKorea . 
 
 ^   향토음식   Archived  2011-07-14 at the  Wayback Machine   Nate  Korean-English Dictionary 
 
 ^   "(Korean Food Culture Series – Part 7) Local Foods" .  Korea Tourism Organization . 5 February 2008. Archived from  the original  on 31 May 2012 . Retrieved  1 December  2009 . 
 
 ^   향토음식 鄕土飮食  [Hyangto eumsik] (in Korean).  Nate / Britannica . Archived from  the original  on 10 June 2011. 
 
 ^   향토음식 鄕土飮食  [Hyangto eumsik] (in Korean).  Nate / Encyclopedia of Korean Culture . Archived from  the original  on 10 June 2011. 
 
 ^   "Sachal eumsik (사찰음식 寺刹飮食)"  (in Korean).  Doosan Encyclopedia . Retrieved  2 July  2015 . 
 
 ^   Song, Min-seop (송민섭) (8 May 2005).  심신이 맑아지는 사찰음식…마음까지 정갈  (in Korean). Seyeo Ilbo . Retrieved  2 July  2015 . 
 
 ^   사찰 음식, 정신을 수양하며 건강을 먹는다  (in Korean).  JoongAng Ilbo  via  Daum  News. 1 April 2008. Archived from  the original  on 3 July 2015 . Retrieved  2 July  2015 . 
 
 ^   Jang, J. et al. (2005). Understanding the food culture. [식생활 문화의 이해]. Seoul: Bomungak.  ISBN   89-91060-34-X 
 
 ^   Lee, Yeun Ja "Jongga Ancestral Rituals and Food Culture" Koreana, Volume 24, No.2, Summer 2010 
 
 ^   Ho, Esther  "Guide to pojangmacha: Why Koreans love drinking in tents"   Archived  2012-03-30 at the  Wayback Machine   CNN Go . 23 March 2012. Retrieved 2012-04-13 
 
 ^   "Best specialty food carts in Seoul"   Archived  2011-10-19 at the  Wayback Machine   CNN Go . 7 July 2011. Retrieved 2011-10-11 
 
 ^  a   b   c   Yi Tǒngmu 62. 
 
 ^  a   b   c   Pettid, 159. 
 
 ^  a   b   Jang et al. (2005, p.102). 
 
 ^   Jeong, H. (2011). Story of alcoholic drink by Professor Jeong Hun Bae [정헌배 교수의 술나라 이야기]. Seoul: Yedam.  ISBN   978-89-5913-611-7 . 
 
 ^   Pettid, 129 
 
 ^   Pettid, 130. 
 
 ^   Pettid, 132. 
 
 ^   Pettid, 130-132. 
 
 ^   Pettid, 133. 
 
 ^   Pettid, 134-135. 
 
 ^  a   b   Olimiko.  "koreafoods.net" .  www.koreafoods.net . Archived from  the original  on 13 November 2018 . Retrieved  22 August  2019 . 
 
 ^   Kim, Jong Su "Royal Banquets and Uigwe during the Late Chosun Period," Korea Journal, Summer 2008 
 
 
 Bibliography [ edit ] 
 
 Baek Un-hwa (백운화). Inje Food Science Forum (인제식품과학 FORUM), "Part 3 Status quo and prospect about the industrialization of Korean traditional beverages (제 3 주제 전통 음청류의 산업화 현황과 전망)" taken from  [2]  on 2008-06-15. pp. 75~95. 
 Coultrip-Davis, Deborah, Young Sook Ramsay, and Deborah Davis (1998).  Flavors of Korea: Delicious Vegetarian Cuisine . Tennessee: Book Publishing Company.  ISBN   978-1-57067-053-4 . 
 Cost, Bruce.  Asian ingredients: a guide to the foodstuffs of China, Japan, Korea, Thailand, and Vietnam . New York: Harper Perennial, 2000.  ISBN   0-06-093204-X 
 Crawford, Gary W. (2006) East Asian Plant Domestication. In  Archaeology of East Asia , edited by Miriam Stark. Wiley-Blackwell, 2006  ISBN   1-4051-0213-6 
 Food in Korea, "Jontongjoo – Kinds of Traditional Liquors" taken from  [3]   Archived  23 May 2008 at the  Wayback Machine 
 Herskovitz, Jon.  Reuters , "North Korean beer: great taste, low proliferation risk", Mar 9, 2008, taken from  [4]   Archived  26 October 2021 at the  Wayback Machine 
 Hopkins, Jerry.  Extreme Cuisine: The Weird & Wonderful Foods that People Eat , Singapore: Tuttle Publishing, 2004. 
 Korea Agro-Fisheries Trade Corporation. "Introduction of Eumcheongryu" taken from  [5]   Archived  13 March 2009 at the  Wayback Machine  on 2008-05-22. 
 Korea Tourism Organization . "Experience Royal Cuisine" taken from  [6]   Archived  26 January 2009 at the  Wayback Machine  on 2008-06-13. 
 Koryǒsa ,  The History of the Koryǒ Dynasty , Seoul, 1990. 
 National Assembly of the Republic of Korea . "King Sejong's Humanism" taken from  [7]   Archived  22 June 2008 at the  Wayback Machine  on 2008-06-10. 
 Marks, Copeland.  The Korean Kitchen: Classic Recipes from the Land of the Morning Calm . San Francisco: Chronicle Books, 1993. 
 O'Brien, Betsy.  Let's Eat Korean Food . Elizabeth, NJ:Hollym, 1997.  ISBN   1-56591-071-0 
 Pettid, Michael J. (2008).  Korean cuisine: an illustrated history . Reaktion Books.  ISBN   978-1-86189-348-2 . 
 Sohn Gyeong-hee (손경희). Inje Food Science Forum (인제식품과학 FORUM), "Part 1 HIstorical overview of Korean traditional eumcheongryu (제 1 주제 한국 전통 음청류의 역사적 고찰)" taken from  [8]  on 2008-06-16. 
 The Academy of Korean Studies . "농사직설(農事直說), Nongsa jikseol" taken from  [9]  on 2008-06-10. 
 "Hanjeongsik, a full-course Korean meal" .  The Chosun Ilbo . 2001. Archived from  the original  on 7 July 2003 . Retrieved  11 June  2008 . 
 The Korea Economic Daily, "Brew master.. the only beer in the world" (브루 마스터 .. 세계 유일의 맥주) taken from  [10]   Archived  12 December 2008 at the  Wayback Machine 
 Yi Kyubo, Tongmyǒng-wang p'yǒn' (The lay of King Tongmyǒng) in  Tongguk Yi Sangguk chip  ( The Collected Works of Minister Yi of the Eastern Country ), Seoul, 1982. 
 Yi Yang-Cha, and Armin E. Möller (1999).  Koreanisch vegetarisch: Die kaum bekannte, fettarme, phantasievolle und küchenfreundliche Art asiatisch zu kochen  (Korean Vegetarian: Almost Unknown, Low Fat, Creative and Kitchen-friendly Way of Asian Cooking).  ISBN   978-3-7750-0457-2 . 
 Yi Tǒngmu,  Sasojǒl  ( Elementary Etiquette for Scholar Families ), quaoted in Sources of Korean Tradition, Volume Two: From the Twentieth Centuries, ed. Yǒongho Ch'oe, Peter H. Lee and W. Theodore de Bary. New York, 2000. 
 Yu Jisang (유지상). "How about today?  Pojangmacha , outing at night" (오늘 어때? 포장마차 ‘밤마실’) taken from  [11]   Archived  11 December 2008 at the  Wayback Machine  on 2008-06-13. 
 
 External links [ edit ] 
 
 
 Korean cuisine   at Wikipedia's  sister projects 
 
 Media  from Commons Recipes  from Wikibooks Travel information  from Wikivoyage 
 
 공공 용어의 외국어 번역 및 표기 지침 (List of names of Korean foods in English) 
 Official site of Korea National Tourism List of Korean Food   Archived  28 September 2013 at the  Wayback Machine 
 Food in Korea  at the  Wayback Machine  (archived April 6, 2009) at the Korea Agro-Fisheries Trade Corporation 
 Food in Korea 
 List of articles about Korean cuisine  at the  Doosan Encyclopedia   (in Korean) 
 Categories of Korean cuisine  at the  Empas  /  EncyKorea   (in Korean) 
 https://folkency.nfm.go.kr/kr/topic/detail/ ( in Korean) 
 https://folkency.nfm.go.kr/kr/topic/detail/7618 (in Korean) 
 https://folkency.nfm.go.kr/kr/topic/detail/7929 (in Korean) 
 https://folkency.nfm.go.kr/kr/topic/detail/7858 (in Korean) 
 https://folkency.nfm.go.kr/kr/topic/detail/7777 (in Korean) 
 https://folkency.nfm.go.kr/kr/topic/detail/7544# (in Korean) 
 https://folkency.nfm.go.kr/kr/topic/detail/7963 (in Korean) 
 https://folkency.nfm.go.kr/kr/topic/detail/4128 (in Korean) 
 https://folkency.nfm.go.kr/kr/topic/detail/7981 (in Korean) 
 https://ich.unesco.org/en/RL/kimjang-making-and-sharing-kimchi-in-the-republic-of-korea-00881 ( in English) 
 v t e Asian cuisine Sovereign states 
 Afghanistan 
 Armenia 
 Azerbaijan 
 Bahrain 
 Bangladesh 
 Bhutan 
 Brunei 
 Burma (Myanmar) 
 Cambodia 
 China 
 Cyprus 
 East Timor (Timor-Leste) 
 Egypt 
 Georgia 
 India 
 Indonesia 
 Iran 
 Iraq 
 Israel 
 Japan 
 Jordan 
 Kazakhstan 
 North Korea 
 South Korea 
 Kuwait 
 Kyrgyzstan 
 Laos 
 Lebanon 
 Malaysia 
 Maldives 
 Mongolia 
 Nepal 
 Oman 
 Pakistan 
 Philippines 
 Qatar 
 Russia 
 Saudi Arabia 
 Singapore 
 Sri Lanka 
 Syria 
 Tajikistan 
 Thailand 
 Turkey 
 Turkmenistan 
 United Arab Emirates 
 Uzbekistan 
 Vietnam 
 Yemen 
 States with limited recognition 
 Abkhazia 
 Artsakh 
 Northern Cyprus 
 Palestine 
 South Ossetia 
 Taiwan 
 Dependencies and other territories 
 British Indian Ocean Territory 
 Christmas Island 
 Cocos (Keeling) Islands 
 Hong Kong 
 Macau 
 
 v t e Cuisines Continental 
 African 
 North 
 West 
 list 
 Americas 
 Caribbean 
 North 
 South 
 list 
 Asian 
 Caucasian 
 Central 
 Indian subcontinent 
 Levantine 
 list 
 European 
 Balkan 
 Central 
 Eastern 
 list 
 Oceanic 
 Intercontinental
 Global 
 Latin American 
 Mediterranean 
 Middle Eastern 
 National  and regional 
 Afghan 
 Albanian 
 Algerian 
 American 
 Californian 
 Floribbean 
 Hawaiian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Lowcountry (South Carolina) 
 New England 
 New Mexico 
 Pacific Northwest 
 Pennsylvania Dutch 
 Puerto Rican 
 Southern US 
 Southwest US 
 Texas 
 Angolan 
 Argentine 
 Armenian 
 Australian 
 Austrian 
 Azerbaijani 
 Bahraini 
 Bangladeshi 
 Barbadian 
 Belarusian 
 Belgian 
 Belizean 
 Beninese 
 Bhutanese 
 Bolivian 
 Bosnian-Herzegovinian 
 Botswana 
 Brazilian 
 British 
 Channel Islands 
 English 
 Gibraltarian 
 Northern Irish 
 Saint Helena 
 Scottish 
 Welsh 
 Bruneian 
 Bulgarian 
 Burkinabé 
 Burmese 
 Burundian 
 Cambodian 
 Cameroonian 
 Canadian 
 Acadian 
 Québécois 
 Central African Republic 
 Chadian 
 Chilean 
 Chinese 
 Cantonese 
 Hong Kong 
 Macanese 
 Tibetan 
 Xinjiang 
 Colombian 
 Congolese 
 Corsican 
 Croatian 
 Cuban 
 Cypriot 
 Czech 
 Danish 
 Faroese 
 Greenlandic 
 Djiboutian 
 Dominican 
 Dominican Republic 
 Dutch 
 East Timorese 
 Ecuadorian 
 Egyptian 
 Emirati 
 Equatorial Guinean 
 Eritrean 
 Estonian 
 Ethiopian 
 Fijian 
 Filipino 
 Finnish 
 French 
 Occitan 
 French Guianan 
 Gabonese 
 Gambian 
 Georgian 
 German 
 Ghanaian 
 Greek 
 Cretan 
 Epirotic 
 Greek Macedonian 
 Heptanesean 
 Guatemalan 
 Guinea-Bissauan 
 Guinean 
 Haitian 
 Honduran 
 Hungarian 
 Icelandic 
 Indian 
 Arunachalese 
 Assamese 
 Bengali 
 Bihari 
 Goan 
 Gujarati 
 Himachal Pradesh 
 Kashmiri 
 Jharkhandi 
 Karnataka 
 Kerala 
 Maharashtrian 
 Manipuri 
 Meghalayan 
 Mizo 
 Naga 
 Odia 
 Punjabi 
 Rajasthani 
 Sikkimese 
 Sindhi 
 Tamil 
 Telangana 
 Telugu 
 Indonesian 
 Acehnese 
 Balinese 
 Banjar 
 Batak 
 Betawi 
 Indo 
 Javanese 
 Madurese 
 Makassar 
 Minahasan 
 Minangkabau 
 Palembangese 
 Sundanese 
 Iranian 
 Iraqi 
 Irish 
 Israeli 
 Italian 
 Abruzzese 
 Ligurian 
 Lombard 
 Lucanian 
 Neapolitan 
 Roman 
 Sardinian 
 Sicilian 
 Venetian 
 Ivorian 
 Jamaican 
 Japanese 
 Okinawan 
 Jordanian 
 Kazakh 
 Kenyan 
 Korean 
 North Korean 
 South Korean 
 Kosovan 
 Kuwaiti 
 Kyrgyz 
 Lao 
 Latvian 
 Lebanese 
 Lesotho 
 Liberian 
 Libyan 
 Liechtensteiner 
 Lithuanian 
 Luxembourg 
 Macedonian 
 Malagasy 
 Malawian 
 Malaysian 
 Sabahan 
 Sarawakian 
 Maldivian 
 Malian 
 Maltese 
 Mauritanian 
 Mauritian 
 Mexican 
 Moldovan 
 Monégasque 
 Mongolian 
 Montenegrin 
 Moroccan 
 Mozambican 
 Namibian 
 Nauruan 
 Nepalese 
 New Zealand 
 Nicaraguan 
 Niger 
 Nigerian 
 Niuean 
 Norwegian 
 Omani 
 Pakistani 
 Palestinian 
 Panamanian 
 Peruvian 
 Polish 
 Portuguese 
 Qatari 
 Romanian  (incl.  Transylvanian Saxon ) 
 Russian 
 Bashkir 
 Chechen 
 Circassian 
 Komi 
 Mordovian 
 Sakha 
 Tatar 
 Udmurt 
 Yamal 
 Rwandan 
 Saint Lucian 
 Salvadoran 
 Sammarinese 
 São Tomé and Príncipe 
 Saudi Arabian 
 Senegalese 
 Serbian 
 Seychellois 
 Sierra Leonean 
 Singaporean 
 Slovak 
 Slovenian 
 Somali 
 South African 
 Spanish 
 Andalusian 
 Asturian 
 Balearic 
 Basque 
 Canarian 
 Cantabrian 
 Catalan 
 Extremaduran 
 Galician 
 Manchegan 
 Valencian 
 Sri Lankan 
 Sudanese 
 Swazi 
 Swedish 
 Swiss 
 Syrian 
 Taiwanese 
 Tajik 
 Tanzanian 
 Zanzibari 
 Thai 
 Togolese 
 Tunisian 
 Turkish 
 Turkmen 
 Trinidadian and Tobagonian 
 Ugandan 
 Ukrainian 
 Uruguayan 
 Uzbek 
 Venezuelan 
 Vietnamese 
 Western Saharan 
 Yemeni 
 Zambian 
 Zimbabwean 
 Ethnic 
 Ainu 
 Arab 
 Indonesian 
 Aromanian 
 Assyrian 
 Balochi 
 Berber 
 Cajun 
 Chinese 
 American 
 Canadian 
 Chifa 
 Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Crimean Tatar 
 Greek American 
 Hazaragi 
 Indian 
 Anglo-Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Indigenous American 
 Inuit 
 Italian American 
 Kurdish 
 Livonian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Malay 
 Ossetian 
 Parsi 
 Pashtun 
 Peranakan 
 Romani 
 Sámi 
 Soul food 
 Sylheti 
 Transylvanian Saxon 
 Yup'ik 
 Religious 
 Buddhist 
 Christian 
 Goan Catholic 
 Mangalorean Catholic 
 Mennonite 
 Hindu 
 Islamic 
 Chinese 
 Ital 
 Jain 
 Jewish 
 American 
 Ashkenazi 
 Bukharan 
 Ethiopian 
 Mizrahi 
 Sephardic 
 Syrian 
 Ritual slaughter 
 Sikh 
 Historical 
 Ancient Egyptian 
 Ancient Greek 
 Ancient Israelite 
 Ancient Roman 
 Antebellum America 
 Aztec 
 Byzantine 
 Early modern European 
 Historical Chinese 
 Historical Indian subcontinent 
 Historical North Indian and Pakistani 
 History of agriculture 
 History of alcoholic drinks 
 History of bread 
 History of seafood 
 History of vegetarianism 
 Historical Argentine 
 Historical Japanese 
 Inca 
 Mayan 
 Muisca 
 Mughal 
 Medieval 
 Ottoman 
 Peasant 
 Soviet 
 Thirteen Colonies 
 Styles 
 Classique 
 Fast food 
 Fusion 
 New American 
 Eurasian 
 Haute 
 Molecular gastronomy 
 Note by Note 
 Nouvelle 
 Lists 
 List of cuisines 
 List of historical cuisines 
 Lists of prepared foods 
 Related 
 Cookbook 
 Cooking 
 Culinary arts 
 Drink 
 Food 
 history 
 Diet 
 Meal preparation 
 
   Food portal 
   Drink portal 
   Category 
   Commons 
   Cookbook 
   WikiProject 
   Outline 
 
 Authority control   National libraries 
 France 
 BnF data 
 Israel 
 United States 
 Korea 
 Other 
 IdRef 
 
  
NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw2276
Cached time: 20230310193926
Cache expiry: 1814400
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc, no‐toc‐conversion]
CPU time usage: 1.504 seconds
Real time usage: 1.820 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 24402/1000000
Post‐expand include size: 252267/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 11865/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 48/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 211854/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.708/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 22407819/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/400
 
 
Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1338.446      1 -total
 32.92%  440.636      1 Template:Reflist
 14.80%  198.153      2 Template:Navbox
 14.13%  189.187     30 Template:Cite_web
 13.19%  176.588      1 Template:Asian_topic
  9.86%  132.020      2 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  8.48%  113.491      5 Template:Transliteration
  7.80%  104.446      1 Template:Korean_cuisine
  6.98%   93.383     52 Template:Iso2country
  4.42%   59.095      1 Template:Sister_project_links
 
  Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:idhash:16793-0!canonical and timestamp 20230310193924 and revision id 1143427344. Rendering was triggered because: page-view
  
 esi <esi:include src="/esitest-fa8a495983347898/content" />  
 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Korean_cuisine&oldid=1143427344 " 
 Category :  Korean cuisine Hidden categories:  CS1 Korean-language sources (ko) Webarchive template wayback links CS1 uses Korean-language script (ko) All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from December 2017 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use British English from January 2022 Use mdy dates from October 2021 Use dmy dates from May 2020 Articles containing Korean-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2023 Articles with Korean-language sources (ko) Region topic template using suffix Articles with BNF identifiers Articles with J9U identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers Articles with NLK identifiers Articles with SUDOC identifiers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  This page was last edited on 7 March 2023, at 17:19  (UTC) . 
 Text is available under the  Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0 ;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the  Terms of Use  and  Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the  Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. 
 
 
 Privacy policy 
 About Wikipedia 
 Disclaimers 
 Contact Wikipedia 
 Mobile view 
 Developers 
 Statistics 
 Cookie statement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
