
 
 
 Jump to content 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle sidebar 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Create account Log in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Personal tools 
 
 
 
 
   Create account   Log in 
 
 
 
 
		Pages for logged out editors  learn more 
 
 
 Contributions Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Navigation 
 
 
 Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate 
 
 
 
 
 Contribute 
 
 
 Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file 
 
 
 
 
 Tools 
 
 
 What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item 
 
 
 
 
 Print/export 
 
 
 Download as PDF Printable version 
 
 
 
 
 In other projects 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons 
 
 
 
 
 Languages 
 
 On this Wikipedia the language links are at the top of the page across from the article title.  Go to top . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CentralNotice  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Contents 
 move to sidebar 
 hide 
 
 
 
 
 (Top) 
 
 
 
 
 
 1 Origins of the Lao cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 Lao and Thai cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 Ingredients 
 
 
				Toggle Ingredients subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 3.1 Rice and noodles 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.2 Vegetables, herbs and spices 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.3 Pastes and sauces 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.4 Meat 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.5 Fish 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.6 Fruits 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4 Kitchen utensils 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5 Cooking methods 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6 Eating customs 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 7 Dishes 
 
 
				Toggle Dishes subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 7.1 Dips 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 7.2 Appetizers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 7.3 Salads 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 7.4 Soups and stews 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 7.5 Grilled dishes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 7.6 Steamed dishes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 7.7 Rice dishes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 7.8 Noodles 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 7.9 Breads 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 7.10 Desserts 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8 Drinks 
 
 
				Toggle Drinks subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 8.1 Non-alcoholic 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8.2 Alcoholic 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 9 See also 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 10 References 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 11 Further reading 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 12 External links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
						Toggle the table of contents
					 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle the table of contents 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lao cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 22 languages 
 
 
 
 অসমীয়া Čeština Deutsch Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Jawa ქართული ລາວ Bahasa Melayu 日本語 Polski Português Русский ไทย Українська Tiếng Việt 
 Edit links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Article Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 English 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 More 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
 
 
   A Lao meal in Don Det, Laos 
 Culinary traditions of Laos 
 Part of  a series  on the Culture of Laos 
 History 
 People 
 Languages 
 Traditions 
 Costume 
 
 FolkloreLao folklore 
 Cuisine 
 Festivals 
 Public holidays 
 
 Religion 
 Art 
 Literature 
 Music  and  Performing arts 
 Dance 
 Theatre 
 
 Media 
 Cinema 
 
 Sport 
 Monuments 
 World Heritage Sites 
 Architecture 
 
 Symbols 
 Flag 
 Coat of arms 
 National anthem 
 
   Laos portal v t e 
 
 
 
 This article contains  Lao text .  Without proper  rendering support , you may see  question marks, boxes, or other symbols  instead of  Lao script . 
 
 Lao cuisine  or  Laotian cuisine  ( Lao :  ອາຫານລາວ ,  pronounced  [ʔáː hǎːn láːw] ) is the national  cuisine  of  Laos .
 The staple food of the  Lao  is  sticky rice  ( Lao :  ເຂົ້າໜຽວ , khao niao,  pronounced  [kʰȁw.nǐa̯w] ). Laos has the highest sticky rice consumption per-capita in the world with an average of 171 kilograms (377 lb) of sticky rice consumed annually per person. [1] [2]  Sticky rice is deeply ingrained in the culture, religious tradition and national identity of  Laos . It is a common belief within the Lao community that no matter where they are in the world, sticky rice will always be the glue that holds the Lao communities together, connecting them to their culture and to Laos. [3]  Affinity for sticky rice is considered the essence of what it means to be  Lao . [4]  Often the Lao will refer to themselves as  luk khao niaow  ( Lao :  ລູກເຂົ້າໜຽວ ,  pronounced  [luːk kʰȁw.nǐaw] ), which can be translated as 'children or descendants of sticky rice'. [5] 
 The  International Rice Research Institute  (IRRI) has described Laos as a “collector’s paradise”. [3]  Laos has the highest degrees of biodiversity of sticky rice in the world. As of 2013, approximately 6,530 glutinous rice varieties were collected from five continents (Asia, South America, North America, Europe and Africa) where glutinous rice are grown for preservation at the International Rice Genebank (IRGC). [4]  The IRRI gathered more than 13,500 samples and 3,200 varieties of glutinous rice from Laos. [3] 
 The trifecta of Laos' national cuisine are  sticky rice ,  larb , and  green papaya salad  ( Lao :  ຕຳໝາກຫຸ່ງ ,  tam mak hoong ). The most famous Lao dish is  larb  ( Lao :  ລາບ ; sometimes also spelled  laab  or  laap ), a spicy mixture of marinated meat or fish that is sometimes raw (prepared like  ceviche ) with a variable combination of herbs,  greens , and spices.
 Lao cuisine has many regional variations, corresponding in part to the fresh foods local to each region. A French legacy is still evident in the capital city,  Vientiane , where  baguettes  ( Lao :  ເຂົ້າຈີ່ ) are sold on the street and French restaurants are common and popular, which were first introduced when Laos was a part of  French Indochina .
 
 
 Origins of the Lao cuisine [ edit ] 
 The  Lao  originally came from a northern region that is now part of China. As they moved south they brought their traditions with them. [6]  Due to historical Lao migrations from Laos into neighboring regions, Lao cuisine has influenced the mainly Lao-populated region of  Northeastern Thailand , [7] [8] [9] [10] [11]  and Lao foods were also introduced to  Cambodia [12]  and   Northern Thailand [8] [13]  where the Lao have migrated.
 
   A 1864 drawing by  Henri Mouhot  during his travels in Laos depicting Laotians cooking over a bonfire 
 Like most Southeast Asian nations, Laos has been heavily influenced by Indian and Chinese culture. From time immemorial, Lao people traded directly with ancient China. It was the Indianization of Laos, however, that has had the most impact. The spread of Hinduism, Buddhism, and Islam into Southeast Asia during this period took with it Indian traditions and culture to what are now Indonesia, Malaysia, Singapore, Thailand, Burma, Cambodia and Laos where it took roots and continues to flourish to this day. [14] [15]  It is also during this time that Buddhist monks introduced traditional Indian spices, curry and coconut milk to Laos. [16]  However, unlike most of its neighbours, Lao people's affinity for glutinous or sticky rice and Lao cuisine's heavy focus on sticky rice meant that coconut milk and noodles never played a significant role in Lao cuisine. Instead, coconut milk, curry and noodles are limited to a few Laotian soups, noodle dishes and sticky rice-based desserts. 
 With the  Columbian exchange , non-native crops—such as  tomato ,  papaya ,  sweetcorn ,  pineapple  and  chili peppers —were introduced to Southeast Asia probably through the various sea ports of modern-day  Thailand ,  Cambodia , and  Vietnam  via the  Philippines [17]  and  Malacca . Through trades with the Portuguese and other Europeans, acceptance and cultivation of non-native crops and ingredients quickly spread throughout Southeast Asia.
 By the mid-1500s, the Europeans were already exploring and trading with mainland Southeast Asia reaching as far as  Vientiane  and  Luang Prabang ,  Laos . Some of the more notable Europeans who had travelled as far as Vientiane and Luang Prabang or wrote extensively about their experiences were  Fernão Mendes Pinto  (1542-1545), [18]   Diogo Veloso  and  Blas Ruiz  (1596), Geebard van Wusthof (1641), [19]  Giovanni Filippo de Marini (1642-1648), [20]   Jean-Baptiste Pallegoix  (1830), and  Henri Mouhot  (1861).
 Simon de la Loubère  (1642-1729) observed that the cultivation of the papaya was already widespread in Siam around the early-1700s [21]  and by the time Jean-Baptiste Pallegoix (1830) arrived as missionary to Bangkok, the papaya and chili peppers was already fully integrated in the Lao territory, dependencies and the Southeast Asian food culture as a whole. [22] [23] [24] [25] [26] 
 French explorer  Henri Mouhot , during his trip to Luang Prabang, noted that the Laotians adored chili peppers. [27] 
 
 Lao and Thai cuisine [ edit ] 
 In his book  Culture and Customs of Laos , Arne Kislenko noted the following about Lao cuisine:
 
 
Any discussion about Lao cuisine cannot be limited to Laos. There are approximately six times more ethnic Lao in the Isan region of northeastern Thailand than in Laos itself, which makes it necessary to go beyond national boundaries in search of definitively Lao food. In fact, with the recent droves of migrants from Isan further south to Bangkok, the Thai capital has in many respects become the epicenter of Lao cuisine. Some estimate that more Lao are there than in any other city in the world, including Vientiane. There are also sizable expatriate communities in places like the United States and France that make for numerous culinary variations abroad. [28] 
 According to the cultural anthropologist Penny Van Esterik, during the 1950s and 1960s, Lao food was little known by the central Thais and could be found only where there were gatherings of Lao or northeasterners: 
 
 
In the 1950s and 1960s glutinous rice, roast chicken, laab, somtam (papaya salad), and other Lao favorites were available in Bangkok only around the boxing stadium where northeastern boxers and fans gathered to eat and drink before and after boxing matches. Lao food could also be found outside construction sites in mobile food carts providing construction workers from the northeast with their regional foods and beside gas stations serving long-distance bus drivers. [29] 
 At the conclusion of the Vietnam War, between 1975 and 1995, it was estimated that approximately 200,000 Lao refugees crossed the Mekong River into Thailand. [30]  Most stayed in the refugee camps while other moved to  Bangkok  looking for work.
 With the opening of the  Mittraphap Road  and the northeastern railway connecting central Thailand to her northern provinces created a gateway for one of Thailand's biggest inter-regional migrations during the economic boom of the 1980s, as demand for labour increased. It was estimated that between 1980 and 1990 about 1.1 million northeasterners moved from the northeast to central Thailand and Bangkok. [31]  This, in turn, helped popularize and create an unprecedented demand for Lao food outside of Laos and the northeast. [28] 
 Van Esterik also noted that, "[i]n attempting to include northeastern food in a standardized national cuisine, middle-class Bangkok selected and modified the taste of a few dishes—grilled chicken, somtam, laab—by reducing the chili peppers and increasing the sugar, and ignored other dishes such as fermented fish and insects". [29]  According to Professor Sirijit Sunanta [32]  these dishes were then represented as Thai food when presented to the world. [33] 
 Although more ethnic Lao live in Thailand than in Laos, and Lao cuisine is key to popularising Thai food abroad, [34]  the word "Lao" is hardly mentioned. This is perhaps due to forced  Thaification  (1942–present), an official attempt to promote national unity and " Thainess ", in which any mention of "Lao" and other non-Thai descriptors were removed and replaced with "northeastern Thai" or "Isan". [35] 
 Consequently,  Thaification  has led to social discrimination against northeasterners, and the word "Lao" became a derogatory term. [36]  Being "Lao" was stigmatized as being uneducated and backward, causing many northeasterners to be ashamed to be known as Lao. [37]  More recently, as Lao identity loses its stigma, there is now a real sense of resurgence and pride in Lao identity, particularly among the Isan youth. [38] 
 In the West, even with sizable expatriate communities, Lao cuisine is still virtually unknown, even though much of what is served in Thai restaurants is likely to be Lao [34]  or Lao-owned. In fact, unbeknownst to most people, when they eat their favourite  som tam ,  larb , and  sticky rice  at their favourite Thai or northeastern Thai ( Isan ) restaurants they are actually eating the Thai versions of traditional Lao food. [39] [40] [41] [42] [43] [44] [45]  This accidental reinforcement of  Thaification  by the expatriate Lao communities and Lao restaurateurs is observed by Malaphone Phommasa and Celestine Detvongsa in their article "Lao American Ethnic Economy":
 
 
Unlike […] ethnic specific stores, Lao-owned restaurants are doing better in reaching out to the general public. Although there are some restaurants that advertised as singularly "Laotian", many Lao restaurants are established under the guise of Thai restaurants and Thai/Lao restaurants to entice mainstream customers. Because most Americans are unfamiliar with Laotian food, Lao entrepreneurs have aimed to acquire more business by advertising themselves as Thai restaurants: the latter have successfully achieved popularity with the mainstream population. These restaurateurs would then incorporate Lao dishes onto the menu. Although there are many similarities between Lao and northern Thai cuisine, certain foods will distinguish a true Thai restaurant from a Lao-owned restaurant would be the inclusion of "sticky rice" on the menu... [46]   One of the earliest Thai restaurants to open in North America was by Keo Sananikone, a Lao refugee and early pioneer of Thai food in the US. In 1977, Keo opened a series of Thai restaurants starting with Mekong, Keo's, and Mekong II in Hawaii, which became a hot spot for the Hollywood crowd. [47]  Keo later wrote an internationally best-selling Thai cookbook,  Keo's Thai Cuisine , in 1985. Keo explains the reason for opening Thai as opposed to Lao restaurants: “I felt that Laotian food would not have been successful in America at that time. Laotian food is very basic and simple, and Thai food is very exotic and colourful.” [48] 
 Ingredients [ edit ] 
 Rice and noodles [ edit ] 
 Rice   ( Lao :  ເຂົ້າ ;  Lao pronunciation:  [kʰa᷆w] ) 
 Glutinous rice  - ( Lao :  ເຂົ້າໜຽວ ;  Lao pronunciation:  [kʰa᷆w.nǐaw] ) a type of  rice  grown mainly in  Southeast  and  East Asia , which has opaque  grains , very low  amylose  content, and is especially sticky when cooked. 
 Cellophane noodles  - ( Lao :  ເສັ້ນລ້ອນ ;  Lao pronunciation:  [se᷆n.lɔ̂ːn] ) transparent noodles made from  mung bean  starch and water. 
 Khao poon  - ( Lao :  ເສັ້ນເຂົ້າປຸ້ນ ;  Lao pronunciation:  [se᷆n.kʰa᷆w.pûn] ) are fresh  rice noodles  which are made from rice which has first been fermented for three days, boiled, and then made into noodles by pressing the resulting dough through a sieve into boiling water. 
 Rice noodles  - ( Lao :  ເສັ້ນເຝີ ;  Lao pronunciation:  [se᷆n.fɤ̌ː] )  noodles that are made from rice. This should not be confused with Vietnamese pho. Though the word has Vietnamese origin, the dish it refers to in Laos might not be the same as Vietnamese pho. 
 Vegetables, herbs and spices [ edit ] 
   Chili peppers  in  Vientiane 
 Asian basil  - ( Lao :  ບົວລະພາ , Isan: บัวระพา,  Lao pronunciation:  [bùa.la.pʰáː] ) eaten raw with  feu . 
 Bamboo shoots  - ( Lao :  ໜໍ່ໄມ່ , Isan: หน่อไม้,  Lao pronunciation:  [nɔ̄ː.mâj] ), used in stews or boiled as a side dish. 
 Banana  flower - ( Lao :  ໝາກປີ , Isan: หมากปี,  Lao pronunciation:  [ma᷆ːk.pìː] ), a raw accompaniment to noodle soup or cooked in others. 
 Chili pepper  - ( Lao :  ໝາກເຜັດ ;  Lao pronunciation:  [ma᷆ːk.pʰét] , Isan: พริก,  Lao pronunciation:  [pʰīk] ), seven popular types. 
 Climbing wattle  (acacia) - ( Lao :  ຜັກຂາ , Isan: ผักขา,  Lao pronunciation:  [pʰák.kʰǎː] ) used in soups, curries, omelettes, and stir-fries. 
 Coriander  (cilantro) - ( Lao :  ຜັກຫອມປ້ອມ ;  Lao pronunciation:  [pʰák.hɔ̌ːm.pɔ̂ːm] , Isan: ผักซี,  Lao pronunciation:  [pʰák.sīː] ), both leaves and seeds added to dips, marinades, and a wide variety of dishes. 
 Cucumber  - ( Lao :  ໝາກແຕງ , Isan: หมากแตง,  Lao pronunciation:  [ma᷆ːk.tɛ̀ːŋ] ), eaten as a garnish or as a substitute for green papaya in salad. 
 Galangal  - ( Lao :  ຂ່າ , Isan: ข่า,  pronounced  [kʰāː] ), typically used in soups, mixed dishes, and marinades. 
 Garlic  - ( Lao :  ກະທຽມ , Isan: กระเทียม,  Lao pronunciation:  [ka.tʰíam] ) 
 Ginger  flower 
 Ginger  root - ( Lao :  ຂີງ , Isan: ขิง,  Lao pronunciation:  [kʰǐŋ] ) 
 Kaffir lime  - ( Lao :  ໝາກຂີ້ຫູດ ;  pronounced  [ma᷆ːk.kʰi᷆ː.hu᷆ːt] , Isan: มะกรูด  maak-khii-huut ), typically used in soups and stews. 
 Kaipen  - ( Lao :  ໄຄແຜ່ນ , Isan: ไกแผ่น,  Lao pronunciation:  [kʰáj.pʰɛ̄n] ), dried sheets of edible  Mekong River   algae , similar to  nori . 
 Lao basil  - ( Lao :  ຜັກອີ່ຕູ່ ;  Lao pronunciation:  [pʰák.ʔīː.tūː] ) Isan: แมงลัก used in soups and stews. 
 Lao coriander  - ("Lao dill"), used in stews and eaten raw. 
 Lao eggplant  - ( Lao :  ໝາກເຂືອ , Isan: หมากเขือ;  Lao pronunciation:  [ma᷆ːk.kʰɯ̌a] ), small and round  Kermit eggplant , used in stews or eaten raw. 
 Lemon grass  - ( Lao :  ຫົວສິງໄຄ , Isan: หัวสิงไค;;  pronounced  [hǔa.sǐŋ.kʰáj] ,  hua sing-khai ), used in soups, stews and marinades. 
 Lime  - ( Lao :  ໝາກນາວ , Isan: หมากนาว,  Lao pronunciation:  [ma᷆ːk.náːw] ), common ingredient to many dishes. 
 Mint  - ( Lao :  ໃບຫອມລາບ ;  Lao pronunciation:  [bàj.hɔ̌ːm.lâːp] , Isan: ใบสะระแหน่,  Lao pronunciation:  [bàj.sa.la.nɛ̄ː] ), used in goy/laap, and eaten raw. 
 Midnight horror  - ( Lao :  ໝາກລີ້ນໄມ້ , Isan: หมากลิ้นไม้,;  Lao pronunciation:  [ma᷆ːk.lîːn.mâj] ) a bitter green, eaten raw. 
 Mushrooms  - ( Lao :  ເຫັດ , Isan: เห็ด,  Lao pronunciation:  [hét] ), used in soups and stir-fries. 
 Neem  ( kadao ) - ( Lao :  ຜັກກະເດົາ , Isan: ผักกะเดา,  Lao pronunciation:  [pʰák.ka.dàw] ),  Azadirachta indica  or  neem , a bitter vegetable often eaten raw. 
 Papaya  (green) - ( Lao :  ໝາກຫຸ່ງ , Isan: มักหุ่ง,  pronounced  [ma᷆ːk.hūŋ] ), shredded and used in spicy papaya salad. 
 Rattan shoots  - typically used in stews (bitter). 
 Scarlet wisteria  - ( Lao :  ດອກແຄ , Isan: ดอกแค,  Lao pronunciation:  [dɔ᷆ːk.kʰɛ́ː] )  Sesbania grandiflora , blossom eaten as vegetable in soups and curries. 
 Sakhaan  - ( Lao :  ສະຄ້ານ , Isan: สะค้าน;  Lao pronunciation:  [sa.kʰâːn] ) stem of  Piper ribesioides , used in stews. 
 Shallot  - ( Lao :  ບົ່ວແດງ , Isan: บั่วแดง;  Lao pronunciation:  [būa.dɛ̀ːŋ] ) 
 Tamarind  - ( Lao :  ໝາກຂາມ , Isan: หมากขาม,  Lao pronunciation:  [ma᷆ːk.kʰǎːm] ), sour fruit used in soups or as a snack. 
 Tamarind leaf  - ( Lao :  ໃບໝາກຂາມ , Isan: ใบหมากขาม,  Lao pronunciation:  [bàj.ma᷆ːk.kʰǎːm] ) used in soups. 
 Tomato  - ( Lao :  ໝາກເລັ່ນ , Isan: หมากเล่น,  Lao pronunciation:  [ma᷆ːk.lēn] ), eaten as a garnish item or in papaya salad. 
 Turkey berry  - ( Lao :  ໝາກແຄ້ງ , Isan: หมากแค้ง,  Lao pronunciation:  [ma᷆ːk.kʰɛ̂ːŋ] ),  Solanum torvum , typically used in stews and curries. 
   Stir-fried water spinach at a Lao restaurant 
 Water spinach  - ( Lao :  ຜັກບົ້ງ , Isan: ผักบุ้ง,  Lao pronunciation:  [pʰák.bûŋ] ),  Ipomoea aquatica , stir-fried, steamed, or eaten as raw vegetable accompaniment. 
 Wild betel  leaves - ( Lao :  ຜັກອີ່ເລີດ , Isan: ผักอีเลิด,  Lao pronunciation:  [pʰák.ʔīː.lɤ̂ːt] ),  Piper sarmentosum , a green, eaten raw. 
 Yanang  leaf - ( Lao :  ໃບຢານາງ , Isan: ใบย่านาง,  Lao pronunciation:  [bàj.jāː.náːŋ] ), used as a green colouring agent and as a seasoning or thickener for soups and stews. 
 Yard long beans  - ( Lao :  ໝາກຖົ່ວ , Isan: หมากถั่ว,  Lao pronunciation:  [ma᷆ːk.tʰūa] ), eaten raw, in stews, and can be made into a spicy bean salad ( tam mak thoua ). 
 Pastes and sauces [ edit ] 
 Fish sauce  ( nam pa ) - clear fish sauce ( Lao :  ນ້ຳປາ , Isan: น้ำปลา,  Lao pronunciation:  [nâm.pàː] ), used as a general condiment. 
 Padaek  - ( Lao :  ປາແດກ , Isan: ปลาแดก,  Lao pronunciation:  [pàː.dɛ᷆ːk] ), Lao-style fish paste. 
 Soy sauce 
 Meat [ edit ] 
   Dried water buffalo skin 
 Century egg  ( khai niaow ma ; lit. 'horse urine egg') - ( Lao :  ໄຂ່ຢ່ຽວມ້າ , Isan: ไข่เยี่ยวม้า;  Lao pronunciation:  [kʰāj jiāw mâː] ) 
 Pig blood curd 
 Pork belly  "three-layer pork" - ( Lao :  ຊີ້ນໝູສາມຊັ້ນ , Isan: ซี้นหมูสามซั้น;  Lao pronunciation:  [sîːn.mǔː.sǎːm.sân] ) 
 Dried  water buffalo  skin - ( Lao :  ໜັງເຄັມ ;  Lao pronunciation:  [nǎŋ.kʰém] ) used in  jaew bong  and stews. 
 Fish [ edit ] 
   Padaek 
 Although  Laos  is landlocked, different types of fish are consumed, especially freshwater ones, and Padaek, a Laotian fish sauce, is also used in cooking; among the most famous Laotian fish dishes we can mention:
 
 Larb fish: fish version of Larb [49] 
 Mok pa: is steamed fish, typically wrapped in banana leaves and tied with bamboo string. It is made with lemongrass, kaffir leaves, green onions, fish sauce, green chiles, shrimp paste, and fresh dill [50] 
 Raw Shrimp: This dish is considered a specialty in Laos, the raw shrimp caught in the Mekong River is freshly squeezed with lemon, the shrimp will be raw with spices and then eaten raw with fish sauce [51] 
 See also:  List of edible insects by country 
 Fruits [ edit ] 
 Fruits in Laos may consist of  watermelon ,  pineapple ,  sugar apple , ( custard apple  or  sweetsop ),  longan ,  litchi ,  Asian pear ,  mango ,  rose apple  ( water apple ),  banana ,  jackfruit ,  rambutan , young  coconut ,  orange , sweet  tamarind ,  papaya ,  durian ,  sugarcane ,  pomelo ,  sapodilla ,  guava ,  star apple ,  mangosteen ,  melon ,  santol ,  langsat ,  grapes , corossolier ( soursop ),  mak yom , and  mak num nom .
 Melon carving is also a popular tradition in Laos, where artists may carve beautiful flowers and other designs into fruits such as watermelon. Fruit arrangements are also common, and these are done during special occasions such as weddings and other ceremonies.
 
 Kitchen utensils [ edit ] 
   A Lao-style  mortar and pestle 
 The typical Lao stove, or  brazier , is called a  tao-lo  and is fueled by  charcoal . It is shaped like a bucket, with room for a single pot or pan to sit on top.  The  wok ,  maw khang  in  Lao , is used for frying and  stir frying .  Sticky rice is steamed inside of a bamboo basket, a  huad , which sits on top of a pot, which is called the  maw nung .
 A large, deep mortar called a  khok  is used for pounding  tam mak hoong  and other foods.  It is indispensable in the Lao kitchen.
 
 Cooking methods [ edit ] 
 Grilling, boiling, stewing, steaming, searing and mixing (as in salads) are all traditional cooking methods. Stir-frying is now common, but considered to be a Chinese influence. Stews are often green in color, because of the large proportion of vegetables used as well as  ya nang  leaf.  Soups/stews are categorized as  tom,   tom jeud,   kaeng,  and  kaeng soua. 
 Ping  means grilled. It is a favorite cooking method.  Ping gai  is grilled chicken,  ping sin  is grilled meat, and  ping pa  is grilled fish. Before grilling, the meat is typically seasoned with minced garlic, minced coriander root, minced galangal, salt, soy sauce, and fish sauce, each in varying quantities, if at all, according to preference. The Lao seem to prefer a longer grilling at lower heat.
 The result is grilled meat that is typically drier than what Westerners are accustomed to. The Lao probably prefer their food this way, because they wish to keep their hands dry and clean for handling sticky rice. [ citation needed ]   They also typically eat the grilled food with a hot sauce ( chaew ) of some sort, which takes away the dryness.
 Lao food differs from neighboring cuisines in multiple respects.  One is that the Lao meal almost always includes a large quantity of fresh raw greens, vegetables and herbs served undressed on the side.  Another is that savory dishes are never sweet.  "Sweet and sour" is generally considered bizarre and foreign in Laos.  Yet another is that some dishes are bitter.  There is a saying in Lao cuisine, " van pen lom; khom pen ya, " which can be translated as, "sweet brings you down; bitter is medicine."
 Green herbs favored in Lao cuisine but generally ignored by their neighbors include  mint  and  dill .   Galangal  is a cooking herb that is heavily favored in Laos, unlike in neighboring countries.  It appears in many Lao dishes, along with the conventional herbs (such as garlic, shallots, and lemongrass).  Another distinctive characteristic of Lao food—or more properly, Lao eating habits—is that food is frequently eaten at room temperature. This may be attributable to the fact that Lao food served with sticky rice is traditionally handled by hand.
 
 Eating customs [ edit ] 
   A  ka tok e, a platform for arranging and presenting a Lao meal. 
 The traditional manner of eating was communal, with diners sitting on a reed mat on the wooden floor around a raised platform woven out of rattan called a  ka toke . Dishes are arranged on the  ka toke,  which is of a standard size.  Where there are many diners, multiple  ka tokes  will be prepared. Each  ka toke  will have one or more baskets of sticky rice, which is shared by all the diners at the  ka toke. 
 In recent times, eating at a  ka toke  is the exception rather than the rule. The custom is maintained, however, at temples, where each monk is served his meal on a  ka toke.  Once food is placed on the  ka toke  it becomes a  pha kao . In modern homes, the term for preparing the table for a meal is still  taeng pha kao,  or prepare the  phah kao. 
 Traditionally, spoons were used only for soups and white rice, and chopsticks (ໄມ້ທູ່, mai thu ) were used only for noodles. Most food was handled by hand. The reason this custom evolved is probably due to the fact that sticky rice can only be easily handled by hand. [ citation needed ] 
 Lao meals typically consist of a soup dish, a grilled dish, a sauce, greens, and a stew or mixed dish ( koy  or  laap ). The greens are usually fresh raw greens, herbs and other vegetables, though depending on the dish they accompany, they could also be steamed or more typically, parboiled.  Dishes are not eaten in sequence; the soup is sipped throughout the meal.  Beverages, including water, are not typically a part of the meal. When guests are present, the meal is always a feast, with food made in quantities sufficient for twice the number of diners. For a host, not having enough food for guests would be humiliating.
 The custom is to close the rice basket when one is finished eating.
 
 Dishes [ edit ] 
 Dips [ edit ] 
   Jaew bong 
 Jaew  ( Lao :  ແຈ່ວ ), a popular type of dipping sauce in Laos.
 
 Jaew mak khua  - made from roasted eggplant. 
 Jaew mak len  - made from roasted sweet tomatoes. 
 Jaew bong  - sweet and spicy paste made with roasted chilies, pork skin, galangal and other ingredients. 
 Jaew padaek  - made from fried  padaek , fish, roast garlic, chilies, lemon grass, and other ingredients. 
 Appetizers [ edit ] 
   Sai oua  sausage with a dipping sauce 
 Kap kaem  ( Lao :  ກັບແກ້ມ ), are dishes served as snacks, before the main dish, or with beer.
 
 Kaipen  - fried snack made of fresh water algae, usually served with  jaew bong . 
 Khai khuam  - stuffed eggs "upside down". 
 Khai nug  - steamed, boiled egg made by making a hole in the egg to remove the contents and pouring it back in after mixing the yolk with other ingredients. 
 Khua pak bong  - stir fried  water spinach . 
 Look seen  - Laotian beef meatballs. 
 Mekong river moss  - fried moss from the  Mekong River . 
 Miang 
 Sai kok  - chunky pork sausage. 
 Sai oua  - grilled pork sausage. 
 Seen hang  - Laotian beef jerky that is flash-fried beef. 
 Seen savanh  - thinly sliced beef jerky with sweeter taste and covered with sesame seeds. 
 Seen tork 
 Som khai pa  - pickled fish roe. 
 Som moo  - pickled pork with pork skin (summer sausages). 
 Som pa  - pickled fish. 
 Som phak kad  - pickled greens. 
 Som phak kai lum who moo  - pickled cabbage with pickled pork ears. 
 Yaw  - Laotian pork roll. Known as  giò lụa  in Vietnam. 
 Yaw dip  - a type of  spring roll  made with rice paper, vermicelli, lettuce, and various fillings including shrimp. It's usually eaten with peanut sauce or Laotian sweet sauce. Known as  Gỏi cuốn  in Vietnam. 
 Yaw jeun  - fried  spring roll . 
 Salads [ edit ] 
   Tam mak hoong  green papaya salad 
 Sarad  ( Lao :  ສະຫຼັດ ), is a general name to describe a dish with mixed vegetables, herbs, and spices. Meat salads in Laos are known as  larb  or  laap .
 
 Larb  - a spicy Lao minced meat salad made with fermented fish and herbs. Various meats include fish, duck, chicken, pork, and beef, as well as mushrooms. 
 Nam tok  - a meat-based salad similar to larb. It can also be made into a stew. 
 Pon  - spicy puree of cooked fish. 
 Tam som  - is the following salads made with Lao chili peppers, lime juice, tomatoes, fish sauce/paste, and sugar. Crab paste and shrimp paste are optional.
 Tam khao poon  - spicy vermicelli noodles salad. 
 Tam mak guh  - spicy  plantain  salad. 
 Tam mak hoong  - spicy green papaya salad. 
 Tum mak khua  - spicy eggplant salad. 
 Tam mak taeng  - spicy cucumber salad. 
 Tam mak thua  - spicy green long/yard beans salad. 
 Soups and stews [ edit ] 
 Kaeng  ( Lao :  ແກງ ; lit. 'soup')
 
 Kaeng jeut  - vegetable and pork soup. 
 Kaeng galee  - Lao curry. 
 Keng No Mai  or  soup naw mai  - a green stew made with bamboo shoots. 
 Or  - green vegetable stew. 
 Or lam  - Luang Prabang style green vegetable stew. 
 Tom jeaw pa  - spicy fish soup. 
 Tom kha gai  - a spicy and sour soup made with coconut milk, mushrooms, and chicken. 
 Tom padaek  - fish stewed in  padaek . 
 Tom yum  - a spicy and sour soup made with lemongrass, and various meats such as beef, chicken, pork, and shrimp or other seafood. 
 Grilled dishes [ edit ] 
 Ahan ping  ( Lao :  ອາຫານປີ້ງ ; lit. 'grilled food')
 
 Ping gai  - grilled, marinated chicken. 
 Ping hua ped  - grilled, marinated duck head. It can be considered as an appetizer. 
 Ping moo  - grilled, marinated pork. 
 Ping pa  - grilled fish mixed with spices and herbs. 
 Ping ped  - grilled, marinated duck. 
 Ping seen  - grilled, marinated beef. 
 Ping theen gai  - grilled, marinated chicken feet. 
 Seen dat  - Laotian-styled barbecue. Traditional meats and vegetables are seared on a dome-shaped griddle. 
 Steamed dishes [ edit ] 
 Ahan neung  ( Lao :  ອາຫານຫນື້ງ ; lit. 'steamed food')
 
 Mok pa  - fish steamed in banana leaf. 
 Mok gai  - chicken steamed in banana leaf. 
 Mok khai 
 Mok kai pa 
 Ua dok kae 
 Titi gai  - steak in a banana leaf wrap. 
 Rice dishes [ edit ] 
   Sticky rice served in a basket at a restaurant in Vientiane 
 Ahan kap khao  ( Lao :  ອາຫານກັບເຂົ້າ ; lit. 'food with rice'), are dishes made with rice as the main ingredient. In most Lao meals, glutinous rice known as  khao niao , is a staple to the Laotian diet.
 
 Khao khua  or  khao phat  - Laotian-styled  fried rice . 
 Khao niao  - steamed glutinous rice. Popularly known as "sticky rice". This type of rice is usually kept in a bamboo basket and is shared among all diners. Different ingredients such as coconut milk and red beans can be added to make the rice into a sweet dessert. 
 Khao piak khao  (lit. 'rice wet rice') - rice porridge. Toppings may contain blood curds, century eggs, fried onions or garlic, and scallions. 
 Khao ping  or  khao jee  - baked sticky rice seasoned with eggs.  Khao chee  is also another name for bread. 
 Khao jao  or  khao neung  - steamed white rice. Jasmine rice is generally used. This type of rice is also used as an ingredient for many stir-fried dishes. 
 Nam khao  - crispy rice salad made with deep-fried rice balls, chunks of fermented pork sausage called  som moo , chopped peanuts, grated coconut, sliced scallions or shallots, mint, cilantro, lime juice, fish sauce, and other ingredients. 
 Noodles [ edit ] 
 Feu  ( Lao :  ເຝີ ) or  Mee  ( Lao :  ໝີ່ ). Noodles are popular dishes in northern and central Laos. These can vary from "wet noodles", served with broth, or "dry noodles" which are typically stir-fried.
 
 Feu  - Laotian-styled  Pho , or rice noodle soup. 
 Kaeng sen lon  - soup made with glass noodles and meatballs. 
 Khao piak sen  - rice flour noodles in chicken broth. Similar to the Vietnamese dish,  bánh canh , and the Japanese dish,  udon . 
 Khao poon  - rice vermicelli soup, also known as "Lao  laksa ". 
 Khua mee  - pan-fried rice noodles topped with thinly sliced egg omelette. 
 Lard na  - stir-fried noodles covered in gravy. 
 Mee haeng  - wheat noodles with vegetables and meat. 
 Mee ka tee  - rice vermicelli made in coconut milk. 
 Mee nam  - wheat noodles in a broth of vegetables and meat. 
 Pad Lao  - stir-fried noodles mixed with lightly scrambled egg. Similar to  Pad Thai . 
 Pad ki mao  - stir-fried broad rice noodles. 
 Pad sen lon  - stir-fried glass noodles. 
 Suki  - Laotian-styled  Sukiyaki . 
 Yum sen lon  - tangy salad made with glass noodles. 
 Breads [ edit ] 
   Khao chi pate  with omelette, pâté and herbs 
 Bread is originally a French import, but very popular.  The most common form is small  baguettes , known as ( Lao :  ເຂົ້າຈີ່ ,  romanized :  khao chi ).
 
 Khao chi pate  ( Lao :  ເຂົ້າຈີ່ປາເຕ້ ) - baguette stuffed with  pâté  and condiments, the Lao version of  banh mi 
 Desserts [ edit ] 
 Khong van  ( Lao :  ຂອງຫວານ ; lit. 'sweet things'). Lao desserts are generally made with the combination of tropical fruits and glutinous rice products. These can vary from types of cakes, to jelly, to drinks, and custards.
 
 Khao lam  - a sweet sticky rice dish made with red beans, coconut, coconut milk, and sugar prepared in bamboo. 
 Khao niao mak muang  - sticky rice with coconut and mango. 
 Khao pard  - jelly-like rice cake, unique for its layers. It's usually green from the use of pandan leaves as an ingredient. 
 Khao tom  - steamed rice wrapped in banana leaf. Various fillings include pork, bananas, and taro. 
 Khanom kok  - coconut dumpling made on a griddle. It may be topped with green onions. 
 Khanom maw kaeng  - coconut custard cake. 
 Lod xong  - a green, worm-like dessert made with rice jelly, coconut milk, and liquefied palm sugar. 
 Nam van  - a general name for a dessert which can contain tapioca and various fruits including durian, jack fruit, and water chestnuts. 
 Sangkaya  - custard made with  Kabocha , a type of Asian squash. 
 Voon  - jelly made with coconut milk 
 Drinks [ edit ] 
   A Lao coffee. 
   A light and a dark Beerlao. 
 Lao coffee is often called  Pakxong  coffee ( cafe pakxong  in Lao), which is grown on the  Bolovens Plateau  around the town of Pakxong. This area is sometimes said to be the best place in Southeast Asia for coffee cultivation. Both Robusta and Arabica are grown in Laos, and if you ask for Arabica, there is a very good chance the proprietor will know what you are talking about. Most of the Arabica in Laos is consumed locally and most of the Robusta is exported to Thailand, where it goes into  Nescafé . The custom in Laos is to drink coffee in glasses, with condensed milk in the bottom, followed by a chaser of green tea.  The highly regarded tea is also grown on the Bolovens Plateau.
 There are two general types of traditional alcoholic beverages, both produced from rice:  lao hai  and  lao lao .  Lao hai  means  jar alcohol  and is served from an earthen jar. [52]  It is communally and competitively drunk through straws at festive occasions. It can be likened to  sake  in appearance and flavor.  Lao lao  or  Lao alcohol  is more like a whiskey.  It is also called  lao khao  or, in English,  white alcohol .  However, there is also a popular variant of lao lao made from purple rice, which has a pinkish hue.
 In more recent times, the Lao state-owned brewery's  Beerlao  has become very popular in Laos. The  Bangkok Post  has described it as the  Dom Perignon  of Asian beers. [ citation needed ]  In 2004,  Time  magazine described it as Asia's best beer. In June 2005, it beat 40 other brews to take the silver prize at  Russia 's Osiris Beer Festival, which it had entered for the first time.
 
 Non-alcoholic [ edit ] 
 Ca fay  - Laotian  coffee . 
 Nam oi  - sugarcane juice. 
 Nam pun  - Smoothie 
 Nam mak pow  - coconut juice; with or without coconut meat. 
 Oliang  - iced coffee; black or with condensed milk. 
 Saa  - Laotian  tea . 
 Alcoholic [ edit ] 
 Beerlao 
 Lau-khao  - Laotian rice wine. 
 Lau-lao  - Laotian whiskey. 
 Lau-hai  - Laotian rice wine made with glutinous rice. 
 See also [ edit ] 
 
 Food portal Laos portal 
 Hmong cuisine 
 Phia Sing 
 References [ edit ] 
 
 
 ^   Ives, Mike (1 February 2011).  "A Taste of Sticky Rice, Laos' National Dish" .  Smithsonian Magazine . Retrieved  16 April  2020 . 
 
 ^   "Rice Landscape Analysis - Feasibility of and opportunities for rice fortification in the Lao People's Democratic Republic" .  World Food Programme . Retrieved  2021-06-11 . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   "Laos at the crossroads" .  grain.org . Retrieved  2021-06-11 . 
 
 ^  a   b   Sattaka, Patcha (2016-12-27).  "Geographical Distribution of Glutinous Rice in the Greater Mekong Sub-region" .  Journal of Mekong Societies .  12  (3): 27–48.  ISSN   2697-6056 . 
 
 ^   May 18; Comments, 2018 | JC Gibbs |.  "FORKLIFE: Children of Sticky Rice" .  Smithsonian Center for Folklife and Cultural Heritage . Retrieved  2021-06-11 . 
 
 ^   Fairbank, J. K., Loewe, M., & Twitchett, D. C. (1986). "The Ch'in and Han Empires 221 B.C.-A.D. 220" (1986).  The Cambridge history of China . Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
 
 ^   McDermott, Nancie.  Real Thai the best of Thailand's regional cooking . San Francisco: Chronicle Books, 1992. p. 79. 
 
 ^  a   b   Nguyen, Tien (2011-09-12).  "L.A.'s Idea of Thai Food vs. What Thais Really Eat" .  LA Weekly . Archived from  the original  on 2013-10-13 . Retrieved  2015-02-17 . 
 
 ^   [1]   Archived  April 3, 2012, at the  Wayback Machine 
 
 ^   "Laos Food - An introduction to Lao Food" .  Laos-guide-999.com . 2014-10-09 . Retrieved  2015-02-17 . 
 
 ^   White, Daniel; Emmons, Ron; Eveland, Jennifer; Lin-Liu, Jen (9 June 2011).  Frommer's Southeast Asia .  ISBN   9781118087671 . Retrieved  2015-02-17 . 
 
 ^   Anderson, E.N.; Buell, Paul D.;  Goldstein, Darra  (2018).  Asian Cuisines: Food Culture from East Asia to Turkey and Afghanistan .  Berkshire Publishing Group . p. 54.  ISBN   978-1-614-72846-7 . 
 
 ^   [2]   Archived  September 17, 2011, at the  Wayback Machine 
 
 ^   Florida, Deborah S. Hartz, Sun-Sentinel, South.  "CURRY IN FAVOR" .  chicagotribune.com . Retrieved  2021-08-20 . 
 
 ^   McDermott, Nancie (1999).  The Curry Book: Memorable Flavors and Irresistible Recipes from Around the World . Houghton Mifflin Harcourt.  ISBN   978-0-618-00202-3 . 
 
 ^   Kochhar, Atul (2015-12-17).  Atul's Curries of the World . Bloomsbury Publishing.  ISBN   978-1-4729-3277-8 . 
 
 ^   Orillaneda, B. (2018). "Maritime Trade in the Philippines During the 15th Century CE". [online] Journals.openedition.org. Available at:  https://journals.openedition.org/moussons/3529  Accessed 19 Nov. 2018 
 
 ^   Mendes Pinto, F. and Catz, R. (2013).  The Travels of Mendes Pinto . Chicago: University of Chicago Press, page. xxxi, 231, 306, 365. Print. 
 
 ^   Staunton, Sidney Augustus. The War in Tong-King: Why the French Are in Tong-King, and What They Are Doing There. Cupples, Upham, 1884. Print 
 
 ^   Marini, Gio Filippo de.  A New and Interesting Description of Lao Kingdom (1642-1648) . White Lotus Press, 1998. Print 
 
 ^   De la Laloubère, Simon.  Description Du Royaume De Siam, Par Simon De Laloubère, envoyé Extraordinaire Du Roy auprès Du Roy De Siam: où l'on voit quelles sont les opinions, les moeurs & la religion des Siamois: avec plusieurs remarques de physique touchant les plantes & les animaux du pais . Vol. 2, Amsterdam: Chez David Mortier, 1714. 67. Print 
 
 ^   Callis, Kristine Lee (2005).  The History of Plant Use in Laos: Analysis of European Accounts of Plant Use for Primarily Religious and Medicinal Purposes   (PDF) .  North Carolina State University . pp. 43–44. 
 
 ^   Pavie, Auguste, Lefèvre-Pontalis, Pierre. Mission Pavie, exploration de l'Indo-Chine: mémoires et documents, Volume 2, Part 2 Mission Pavie, exploration de l'Indo-Chine: mémoires et documents, Pierre Lefèvre-Pontalis. Paris: Ernest Leroux, 1894. Print 
 
 ^   Pavie, Auguste, et al.  Exploration De L'Indo-Chine: mémoires Et Documents . Ernest Leroux, 1894. Print 
 
 ^   Massie, M.  Dictionnaire Laotien . Ernest Leroux, 1894. Print 
 
 ^   Garnier, Francis.  Voyage d'exploration en Indochine, effectué pendant les anneés 1866, 1867 et 1868 par une commission française présidée par M. le capitaine de frégate, Doudart de Lagrée , 2 vols. Paris: Hachette et Cie, 1873. 454. Print 
 
 ^   Mouhot, Henri, and Ferdinand de. Lanoye.  Voyage Dans Les Royaumes De Siam, De Cambodge, De Laos Et Autres Parties Centrales De L'Indo-Chine: Relation Extraite Du Journal Et De La Correspondance De L'auteur . Hachette, 1868. 322. Print 
 
 ^  a   b   Kislenko, Arne (2009).  Culture and Customs of Laos . ABC-CLIO. p. 117.  ISBN   9780313339776 . Retrieved  6 March  2021 . 
 
 ^  a   b   Van Esterik, Penny (30 April 2010).  "From Marco Polo to McDonald's: Thai cuisine in transition"   (PDF) .  Food and Foodways: Explorations in the History and Culture of Human Nourishment .  5  (2) . Retrieved  16 April  2020 . 
 
 ^   "Laotians Waiting in Thai Camps for Chance to Fight Again" .  Washington Post . Retrieved  August 27,  2019 . 
 
 ^   Phongpaichit, Pasuk and Chris Baker. Thailand's boom. St Leonards: AlIen & Unwin; 1 996. 
 
 ^   "MURILCA : Research Institute for Languages and Cultures of Asia, Mahidol University" . 
 
 ^   Sunanta, Sirijit. 2005. The globalization of Thai cuisine. Paper presented at the Canadian Council for Southeast Asian Studies Conference, York University, October 14–16, in Toronto, Canada 
 
 ^  a   b   Warren, William. Bangkok. London: Reaktion, 2002. 130. Print. 
 
 ^   Baker, Chris; Phongpaichit, Pasuk (2009).  A History of Thailand  (2nd ed.). Cambridge University Press. pp. 131–135.  ISBN   9780521759151 . 
 
 ^   Jory, PDE (2000). "Multiculturalism in Thailand: Cultural and Regional Resurgence in a Diverse Kingdom".  Harvard Asia Pacific Review .  4  (1): 18–22. 
 
 ^   Smalley, William Allen.  Linguistic Diversity and National Unity: Language Ecology in Thailand . Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1994. 
 
 ^   "Edith Cowan University" . Ro.ecu.edu.au . Retrieved  2015-02-17 . 
 
 ^   Stokes, Daniel. 2003. Low language in high places: social and political perspectives on grammar in the prose of 'Rong Wongsawan'. Thesis (M.A.)--University of Wisconsin--Madison, 2003. 38. Print. 
 
 ^   "Lao Food Movement" . Chef Seng . Retrieved  2015-02-17 . 
 
 ^   Cranmer, Jeff, and Steven Martin. Laos. 2nd ed. London: Rough Guides, 2002. 43. Print. 
 
 ^   Keyes, Charles F.  "Thailand | history - geography :: Cuisine | Encyclopædia Britannica" . Britannica.com . Retrieved  2015-02-17 . 
 
 ^   Burke, Andrew, and Austin Bush. "Eating." Bangkok: city guide. 9th ed. Footscray, Vic.: Lonely Planet, 2010. 157. Print 
 
 ^   "About Thai food" . Tourismthailand.org. Archived from  the original  on 2014-06-09 . Retrieved  2015-02-17 . 
 
 ^   "Isan Meat Salad ( Larb )" . Nationmultimedia.com. 2012-01-16. Archived from  the original  on 2014-10-30 . Retrieved  2015-02-17 . 
 
 ^   Phommasa, Malaphone, and Celestine Detvongsa. "Lao American Ethnic Economy." Asian Americans An Encyclopedia of Social, Cultural, Economic, and Political History.. Ed. Xiaojian Zhao, Edward J.W. Park, PhD. Santa Barbara: ABC-CLIO, 2013. 746-747. Print. 
 
 ^   "Taste the World" .  Honolulu Magazine . 2007-01-01 . Retrieved  2021-08-20 . 
 
 ^   Harisha Andra.  Food Culture In Southeast Asia Penny Van Esterik . 
 
 ^   "Lao Fish Larb with Lime Lemongrass Dressing" . 22 March 2018. 
 
 ^   "Mok Pa (Lao Steamed Fish in Banana Leaves)" . 26 March 2022. 
 
 ^   "Raw shrimp spicy salads" . 
 
 ^   Jeff Cranmer, Steven Martin, Kirby Coxon,  Rough guide to Laos , page 49 . Rough Guides. 2002.  ISBN   1-85828-905-X . Retrieved  2010-07-15 . 
 
 
 Further reading [ edit ] 
 Davidson, Alan (1975).  Fish and Fish Dishes of Laos . Rutland, Vermont: Charles E. Tuttle Co.  ISBN   0-907325-95-5 . 
 Du Pont De Bie, Natacha (2004).  Ant Egg Soup: The Adventures of a Food Tourist in Laos . London: Sceptre.  ISBN   0-340-82567-7 . 
 Sing, Phia .  Alan Davidson  and Jennifer Davidson, eds. (1981)  Traditional Recipes of Laos: Being the Manuscript Recipe Books of the Late Phia Sing, from the Royal Palace at Luang Prabang, Reproduced in Facsimile and Furnished With an English Translation . London: Prospect Books.  ISBN   0-907325-02-5 . 
 Culloty, Dorothy (2010). Food from Northern Laos - The Boat Landing Cookbook. Te Awamutu, New Zealand: Galangal Press  ISBN   978-0-473-17236-7 
 Xaixana Champanakone (2010). "Lao Cooking and The Essence of Life". Vientiane Publishing  ISBN   978-9932-00-061-6 
 External links [ edit ] 
 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons has media related to  Cuisine of Laos . 
 
 New York Times Article on Lao food 
 Excerpts from  Traditional Recipes of Laos 
 v t e Lao cuisine Staples / Entrees 
 Goi 
 Mok 
 Khao jee 
 Khao jee pâté 
 Koi 
 Lao beef jerky 
 Lao sausage 
 Larb 
 Lard na 
 Pad kee mao 
 Pad Lao 
 Pad sen lon 
 Phat khing 
 Phat si-io 
 Pīng kai 
 Pon pa 
 Som moo 
 Som phak 
 Sticky rice 
 Soups / Stews 
 Ant egg soup 
 Feu 
 Kaeng som 
 Keng No Mai 
 Khao piak sen 
 Khao poon 
 Khao soi 
 Or lam 
 Tom kha kai 
 Tom yum 
 Salads / Wraps 
 Bamboo shoot salad 
 Luang prabang salad 
 Nam khao 
 Nam tok 
 Pun 
 Soop nor mai 
 Tam mak hoong 
 Yum sen lon 
 Snacks / Desserts 
 Kaipen 
 Khanom mor gaeng 
 Khanom sun 
 Khao tom 
 Mango sticky rice 
 Miang kham 
 Nam waan 
 Vun 
 Beverages 
 Beerlao 
 Lao coffee 
 Lao hai 
 Lao-Lao 
 Lao tea 
 Condiments 
 Jeow bong 
 Jeow het 
 Jeow mak gork 
 Jeow mak len 
 Kapi 
 Nam pa 
 Padaek 
 Equipment / Utensils 
 Huad 
 Khantoke 
 Khok 
 Maw khang 
 Mor gaeng 
 Mor kharng 
 Mor nung 
 Saak 
 Tao-lo 
   Laos portal     Food portal 
 v t e Laos   articles History 
 Peopling 
 Khun Borom 
 Lao people 
 Tai peoples 
 Lan Xang 
 Vat Phou 
 Luang Phrabang 
 Vientiane 
 Champasak 
 Muang Phuan 
 French protectorate 
 Japanese invasion 
 Lao Issara 
 Kingdom of Laos 
 Indochina Wars 
 Ho Chi Minh trail 
 Pathet Lao 
 Laotian Civil War 
 Vietnamese invasion 
 Neutrality 
 History until 1945 
 History since 1945 
 Insurgency 
 2007 coup attempt 
 Geography 
 Borders 
 Deforestation 
 Ecoregions 
 Mekong 
 Phou Bia 
 Rivers 
 Protected areas 
 Towns 
 Wildlife 
 World Heritage Sites 
 Politics 
 Administrative divisions 
 Constitution 
 Elections 
 Foreign relations 
 General Secretary 
 Human rights 
 Law 
 Law enforcement 
 Military 
 National Assembly 
 Political parties 
 President 
 Prime Minister 
 Economy 
 Agriculture 
 Central bank 
 Kip  (currency) 
 Energy 
 Fishing 
 Stock exchange 
 Telecommunications 
 Tourism 
 Trade unions 
 Transport 
 Society 
 Crime 
 Demographics 
 Education 
 Ethnic groups 
 Health 
 Language 
 Prostitution 
 Religion 
 Sex trafficking 
 Women 
 Culture 
 Anthem 
 Cuisine 
 Dramatic arts 
 Emblem 
 Festivals 
 Flag 
 Literature 
 Music 
 Public holidays 
 Sports 
 Outline Index 
 Category 
 Portal 
 v t e Asian cuisine Sovereign states 
 Afghanistan 
 Armenia 
 Azerbaijan 
 Bahrain 
 Bangladesh 
 Bhutan 
 Brunei 
 Burma (Myanmar) 
 Cambodia 
 China 
 Cyprus 
 East Timor (Timor-Leste) 
 Egypt 
 Georgia 
 India 
 Indonesia 
 Iran 
 Iraq 
 Israel 
 Japan 
 Jordan 
 Kazakhstan 
 North Korea 
 South Korea 
 Kuwait 
 Kyrgyzstan 
 Laos 
 Lebanon 
 Malaysia 
 Maldives 
 Mongolia 
 Nepal 
 Oman 
 Pakistan 
 Philippines 
 Qatar 
 Russia 
 Saudi Arabia 
 Singapore 
 Sri Lanka 
 Syria 
 Tajikistan 
 Thailand 
 Turkey 
 Turkmenistan 
 United Arab Emirates 
 Uzbekistan 
 Vietnam 
 Yemen 
 States with limited recognition 
 Abkhazia 
 Artsakh 
 Northern Cyprus 
 Palestine 
 South Ossetia 
 Taiwan 
 Dependencies and other territories 
 British Indian Ocean Territory 
 Christmas Island 
 Cocos (Keeling) Islands 
 Hong Kong 
 Macau 
 
 v t e Cuisines Continental 
 African 
 North 
 West 
 list 
 Americas 
 Caribbean 
 North 
 South 
 list 
 Asian 
 Caucasian 
 Central 
 Indian subcontinent 
 Levantine 
 list 
 European 
 Balkan 
 Central 
 Eastern 
 list 
 Oceanic 
 Intercontinental
 Global 
 Latin American 
 Mediterranean 
 Middle Eastern 
 National  and regional 
 Afghan 
 Albanian 
 Algerian 
 American 
 Californian 
 Floribbean 
 Hawaiian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Lowcountry (South Carolina) 
 New England 
 New Mexico 
 Pacific Northwest 
 Pennsylvania Dutch 
 Puerto Rican 
 Southern US 
 Southwest US 
 Texas 
 Angolan 
 Argentine 
 Armenian 
 Australian 
 Austrian 
 Azerbaijani 
 Bahraini 
 Bangladeshi 
 Barbadian 
 Belarusian 
 Belgian 
 Belizean 
 Beninese 
 Bhutanese 
 Bolivian 
 Bosnian-Herzegovinian 
 Botswana 
 Brazilian 
 British 
 Channel Islands 
 English 
 Gibraltarian 
 Northern Irish 
 Saint Helena 
 Scottish 
 Welsh 
 Bruneian 
 Bulgarian 
 Burkinabé 
 Burmese 
 Burundian 
 Cambodian 
 Cameroonian 
 Canadian 
 Acadian 
 Québécois 
 Central African Republic 
 Chadian 
 Chilean 
 Chinese 
 Cantonese 
 Hong Kong 
 Macanese 
 Tibetan 
 Xinjiang 
 Colombian 
 Congolese 
 Corsican 
 Croatian 
 Cuban 
 Cypriot 
 Czech 
 Danish 
 Faroese 
 Greenlandic 
 Djiboutian 
 Dominican 
 Dominican Republic 
 Dutch 
 East Timorese 
 Ecuadorian 
 Egyptian 
 Emirati 
 Equatorial Guinean 
 Eritrean 
 Estonian 
 Ethiopian 
 Fijian 
 Filipino 
 Finnish 
 French 
 Occitan 
 French Guianan 
 Gabonese 
 Gambian 
 Georgian 
 German 
 Ghanaian 
 Greek 
 Cretan 
 Epirotic 
 Greek Macedonian 
 Heptanesean 
 Guatemalan 
 Guinea-Bissauan 
 Guinean 
 Haitian 
 Honduran 
 Hungarian 
 Icelandic 
 Indian 
 Arunachalese 
 Assamese 
 Bengali 
 Bihari 
 Goan 
 Gujarati 
 Himachal Pradesh 
 Kashmiri 
 Jharkhandi 
 Karnataka 
 Kerala 
 Maharashtrian 
 Manipuri 
 Meghalayan 
 Mizo 
 Naga 
 Odia 
 Punjabi 
 Rajasthani 
 Sikkimese 
 Sindhi 
 Tamil 
 Telangana 
 Telugu 
 Indonesian 
 Acehnese 
 Balinese 
 Banjar 
 Batak 
 Betawi 
 Indo 
 Javanese 
 Madurese 
 Makassar 
 Minahasan 
 Minangkabau 
 Palembangese 
 Sundanese 
 Iranian 
 Iraqi 
 Irish 
 Israeli 
 Italian 
 Abruzzese 
 Ligurian 
 Lombard 
 Lucanian 
 Neapolitan 
 Roman 
 Sardinian 
 Sicilian 
 Venetian 
 Ivorian 
 Jamaican 
 Japanese 
 Okinawan 
 Jordanian 
 Kazakh 
 Kenyan 
 Korean 
 North Korean 
 South Korean 
 Kosovan 
 Kuwaiti 
 Kyrgyz 
 Lao 
 Latvian 
 Lebanese 
 Lesotho 
 Liberian 
 Libyan 
 Liechtensteiner 
 Lithuanian 
 Luxembourg 
 Macedonian 
 Malagasy 
 Malawian 
 Malaysian 
 Sabahan 
 Sarawakian 
 Maldivian 
 Malian 
 Maltese 
 Mauritanian 
 Mauritian 
 Mexican 
 Moldovan 
 Monégasque 
 Mongolian 
 Montenegrin 
 Moroccan 
 Mozambican 
 Namibian 
 Nauruan 
 Nepalese 
 New Zealand 
 Nicaraguan 
 Niger 
 Nigerian 
 Niuean 
 Norwegian 
 Omani 
 Pakistani 
 Palestinian 
 Panamanian 
 Peruvian 
 Polish 
 Portuguese 
 Qatari 
 Romanian  (incl.  Transylvanian Saxon ) 
 Russian 
 Bashkir 
 Chechen 
 Circassian 
 Komi 
 Mordovian 
 Sakha 
 Tatar 
 Udmurt 
 Yamal 
 Rwandan 
 Saint Lucian 
 Salvadoran 
 Sammarinese 
 São Tomé and Príncipe 
 Saudi Arabian 
 Senegalese 
 Serbian 
 Seychellois 
 Sierra Leonean 
 Singaporean 
 Slovak 
 Slovenian 
 Somali 
 South African 
 Spanish 
 Andalusian 
 Asturian 
 Balearic 
 Basque 
 Canarian 
 Cantabrian 
 Catalan 
 Extremaduran 
 Galician 
 Manchegan 
 Valencian 
 Sri Lankan 
 Sudanese 
 Swazi 
 Swedish 
 Swiss 
 Syrian 
 Taiwanese 
 Tajik 
 Tanzanian 
 Zanzibari 
 Thai 
 Togolese 
 Tunisian 
 Turkish 
 Turkmen 
 Trinidadian and Tobagonian 
 Ugandan 
 Ukrainian 
 Uruguayan 
 Uzbek 
 Venezuelan 
 Vietnamese 
 Western Saharan 
 Yemeni 
 Zambian 
 Zimbabwean 
 Ethnic 
 Ainu 
 Arab 
 Indonesian 
 Aromanian 
 Assyrian 
 Balochi 
 Berber 
 Cajun 
 Chinese 
 American 
 Canadian 
 Chifa 
 Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Crimean Tatar 
 Greek American 
 Hazaragi 
 Indian 
 Anglo-Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Indigenous American 
 Inuit 
 Italian American 
 Kurdish 
 Livonian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Malay 
 Ossetian 
 Parsi 
 Pashtun 
 Peranakan 
 Romani 
 Sámi 
 Soul food 
 Sylheti 
 Transylvanian Saxon 
 Yup'ik 
 Religious 
 Buddhist 
 Christian 
 Goan Catholic 
 Mangalorean Catholic 
 Mennonite 
 Hindu 
 Islamic 
 Chinese 
 Ital 
 Jain 
 Jewish 
 American 
 Ashkenazi 
 Bukharan 
 Ethiopian 
 Mizrahi 
 Sephardic 
 Syrian 
 Ritual slaughter 
 Sikh 
 Historical 
 Ancient Egyptian 
 Ancient Greek 
 Ancient Israelite 
 Ancient Roman 
 Antebellum America 
 Aztec 
 Byzantine 
 Early modern European 
 Historical Chinese 
 Historical Indian subcontinent 
 Historical North Indian and Pakistani 
 History of agriculture 
 History of alcoholic drinks 
 History of bread 
 History of seafood 
 History of vegetarianism 
 Historical Argentine 
 Historical Japanese 
 Inca 
 Mayan 
 Muisca 
 Mughal 
 Medieval 
 Ottoman 
 Peasant 
 Soviet 
 Thirteen Colonies 
 Styles 
 Classique 
 Fast food 
 Fusion 
 New American 
 Eurasian 
 Haute 
 Molecular gastronomy 
 Note by Note 
 Nouvelle 
 Lists 
 List of cuisines 
 List of historical cuisines 
 Lists of prepared foods 
 Related 
 Cookbook 
 Cooking 
 Culinary arts 
 Drink 
 Food 
 history 
 Diet 
 Meal preparation 
 
   Food portal 
   Drink portal 
   Category 
   Commons 
   Cookbook 
   WikiProject 
   Outline 
 
 Authority control : National libraries  
 France 
 BnF data 
 Israel 
 United States 
 
  
NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw2378
Cached time: 20230311172912
Cache expiry: 1814400
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc, no‐toc‐conversion]
CPU time usage: 1.207 seconds
Real time usage: 1.461 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 24109/1000000
Post‐expand include size: 243479/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 19066/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 51/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 148549/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.610/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 20295092/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/400
 
 
Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1134.117      1 -total
 23.54%  267.013      1 Template:Reflist
 15.77%  178.885      3 Template:Navbox
 14.45%  163.928     60 Template:Lang-lo
 11.41%  129.398      1 Template:Asian_topic
 10.67%  121.019      1 Template:Culture_of_Laos
 10.03%  113.756      1 Template:Culture_of_region
  9.81%  111.275      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  7.95%   90.152      4 Template:Cite_journal
  7.13%   80.818     52 Template:Iso2country
 
  Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:idhash:210008-0!canonical and timestamp 20230311172910 and revision id 1137903844. Rendering was triggered because: page-view
  
 esi <esi:include src="/esitest-fa8a495983347898/content" />  
 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Lao_cuisine&oldid=1137903844 " 
 Categories :  Lao cuisine Southeast Asian cuisine Hidden categories:  Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Lao-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2023 Articles with unsourced statements from December 2021 Commons category link is on Wikidata Region topic template using suffix Articles with BNF identifiers Articles with J9U identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  This page was last edited on 7 February 2023, at 00:47  (UTC) . 
 Text is available under the  Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0 ;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the  Terms of Use  and  Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the  Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. 
 
 
 Privacy policy 
 About Wikipedia 
 Disclaimers 
 Contact Wikipedia 
 Mobile view 
 Developers 
 Statistics 
 Cookie statement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
