
 
 
 Jump to content 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle sidebar 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Create account Log in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Personal tools 
 
 
 
 
   Create account   Log in 
 
 
 
 
		Pages for logged out editors  learn more 
 
 
 Contributions Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Navigation 
 
 
 Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate 
 
 
 
 
 Contribute 
 
 
 Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file 
 
 
 
 
 Tools 
 
 
 What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item 
 
 
 
 
 Print/export 
 
 
 Download as PDF Printable version 
 
 
 
 
 Languages 
 
 On this Wikipedia the language links are at the top of the page across from the article title.  Go to top . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CentralNotice  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Contents 
 move to sidebar 
 hide 
 
 
 
 
 (Top) 
 
 
 
 
 
 1 Cultural influences 
 
 
				Toggle Cultural influences subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 1.1 Native American influence 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.2 African influence 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.3 European influence 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.4 Asian influence 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 North America 
 
 
				Toggle North America subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 2.1 Caribbean 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.1.1 Cuba 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.1.2 Dominican Republic 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.1.3 Haiti 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.1.4 Puerto Rico 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 Central America 
 
 
				Toggle Central America subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 3.1 Costa Rica 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.2 El Salvador 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.3 Guatemala 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.4 Honduras 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.5 Nicaragua 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.6 Panama 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4 Mexico 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5 South America 
 
 
				Toggle South America subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 5.1 Argentina 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5.2 Bolivia 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5.3 Brazil 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5.4 Chile 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5.5 Colombia 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5.6 Ecuador 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5.7 Paraguay 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5.8 Peru 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5.9 Uruguay 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5.10 Venezuela 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6 Traditional eating customs 
 
 
				Toggle Traditional eating customs subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 6.1 Traditions 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 7 See also 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8 References 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
						Toggle the table of contents
					 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle the table of contents 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Latin American cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 10 languages 
 
 
 
 العربية বাংলা Esperanto 한국어 עברית Jawa ქართული Nederlands Русский 中文 
 Edit links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Article Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 English 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 More 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
 
 
 Broad culinary traditions 
 See also:  Cuisine of the Americas § South America , and  Global cuisines 
 
 
 This article  needs additional citations for  verification .  Please help  improve this article  by  adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources:   "Latin American cuisine"  –  news   ·   newspapers   ·   books   ·   scholar   ·   JSTOR   ( July 2011 )  ( Learn how and when to remove this template message ) 
   Asado  with  offal  and sausages.  Asado  is a term used for a range of barbecue techniques and the  social event  of having or attending a barbecue in  Argentina ,  Uruguay ,  Paraguay ,  Chile ,  Colombia ,  Ecuador ,  Venezuela , northern  Mexico  and southern  Brazil . In these countries  asado  is the standard word for "barbecue". 
 Latin American cuisine  is the typical foods, beverages, and cooking styles common to many of the countries and cultures in  Latin America . Latin America is a highly diverse area of land whose nations have varying cuisines. Some items typical of Latin American cuisine include  maize -based dishes  arepas ,  pupusas ,  tacos ,  tamales ,  tortillas  and various  salsas  and other condiments ( guacamole ,  pico de gallo ,  mole ,  chimichurri ,  chili ,  aji ,  pebre ).  Sofrito , a culinary term that originally referred to a specific combination of sautéed or braised aromatics, exists in Latin American cuisine. It refers to a sauce of tomatoes, roasted bell peppers, garlic, onions and herbs. Rice and beans are also staples in Latin American cuisine.
 Latin American beverages are just as distinct as their foods. Some of the beverages can even date back to the times of the Native Americans. Some popular beverages include  coffee ,  mate ,  hibiscus tea ,  horchata ,  chicha ,  atole ,  cacao  and  aguas frescas .
 Desserts in Latin America are generally very sweet in taste. They include  dulce de leche ,  alfajor ,  rice pudding ,  tres leches cake ,  teja  and  flan .
 
 
 Cultural influences [ edit ] 
 Native American influence [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Native American cuisine 
 Information about Native American cuisine comes from a great variety of sources. Modern-day Native peoples retain a rich body of traditional foods, some of which have become iconic of present-day Native American social gatherings (for example,  frybread ) [ citation needed ] . Foods like  cornbread  are known to have been adopted into the cuisine of the United States from Native American groups. In other cases, documents from the early periods of contact with European, African, and Asian peoples allow the recovery of food practices which passed out of popularity in the historic period (for example,  black drink ).  Archaeological  techniques, particularly in the subdisciplines of  zooarchaeology  and  paleoethnobotany , have allowed for the understanding of other culinary practices or preferred foods which did not survive into the written historic record. The main crops Native Americans used in Mexico and Central America were corn and beans, which are used in contemporary dishes such as  pupusas ,  tamales ,  pozole , chuchitos, and  corn tortillas . The main Native American crops used by Natives of South America were potatoes, corn and  chuño , used mainly in modern-day Colombian, Ecuadorian, Peruvian, Chilean, Bolivian and Paraguayan dishes such as  arepas ,  papa a la huancaína ,  humitas ,  chipa guasu ,  locro  and many more.
 
 African influence [ edit ] 
 Main article:  African cuisine 
 Africans brought and preserved many of their traditions and cooking techniques. They were often given less desired cuts of meat, including shoulder and intestines.  Menudo , for example, was derived from the habit of the Spaniards of giving the slaves cow's intestines. Enslaved Africans developed a way to clean the  offal  and season it to taste. African slaves in the southern United States did the same thing with pig's intestines, creating the dish known today as  chitterlings . In South America, the scraps of food the landlords did not eat were combined to create new dishes that nowadays have been adopted into the cuisines of their respective nations (such as Peruvian tacu-tacu) and (Ecuadorian guatita).
 
 European influence [ edit ] 
 Main article:  European cuisine 
 Europeans brought their culinary traditions, but quickly adapted several of the fruits and vegetables native to the Americas into their own cuisines. Europe itself has been influenced by other cultures, such as with the  al-andalus  in Spain, and thus their food was already a mix of their world. The European influence for many Latin American cuisine mainly comes from  Spain ,  Portugal ,  Italy , and to a lesser extent  France , although some influences from cuisines as diverse as British, German and Eastern European are also evident in some countries' cuisines such as Argentina and Uruguay, which have Italian cuisine as a main influence, with great Spanish, British, German, Russian, French, and Eastern European influence as well.
 
 Asian influence [ edit ] 
 See also:  Asian cuisine  and  Chinese Latin American cuisine 
 A wave of immigrants from Asia, such as China and Japan, also influenced the cuisine of Perú, Brazil, Panama, and Ecuador. The Chinese brought with them their own spices and food-styles, something that the people of Latin America accepted into their tables. Not only that, but several Asian restaurants also adapted many Latin American food-styles into their own. This case can clearly be seen in the Peruvian and Ecuadorian  chifa . Other countries in Latin America such as Uruguay and Argentina have adapted Armenian and Israeli cuisine due to mass immigration from those countries to Argentina and Uruguay. The high Lebanese presence in certain South Americans countries has made some Lebanese foods like  kibbeh  a common staple.
 
 North America [ edit ] 
 Main article:  North American cuisine 
 North American cuisine is a term used for foods native to or popular in countries of North America, as with Canadian cuisine, Cuisine of the United States, Cuisine of the Caribbean, Cuisine of Central America, and Cuisine of Mexico. It has influences from many international cuisines, including Native American cuisine and European cuisine.
 The cuisines of nearby Central America and the Caribbean region – sometimes grouped with the North American continent – may be considered part of North American cuisine in the technical sense that they are not assigned to their own continents.
 
 Caribbean [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Caribbean cuisine 
 Caribbean cuisine is a fusion of Amerindian, African and European cuisine. These traditions were brought from the many homelands of this region's population. In addition, the population has created from this vast wealth of tradition many styles that are unique to the region.
 Seafood is one of the most common cuisine types in the islands, though this is certainly due in part to their location. [1]  Each island will likely have its own specialty. Some prepare lobster, while others prefer certain types of fish. For example, the island of Barbados is known for its "flying fish."
 Another Caribbean mainstay is rice, but the rice on each island may be a little different. Some season their rice, or add peas and other ingredients such as coconut. Sometimes the yellow rice is served on the side, but it is often part of a dish. 
 
 Cuba [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Cuban cuisine 
   Authentic Cuban dish of  ropa vieja ,  black beans , and  yuca 
 Cuban  cuisine is a distinctive fusion of Spanish, African and Caribbean cuisines. Cuban recipes share their basic spice palette ( cumin , oregano, and bay leaves) and preparation techniques with Spanish and African cooking. The black Caribbean rice influence is in the use of local foods such as tropical fruits, root vegetables, fish, etc.  A small but noteworthy Chinese influence is the daily use of steamed white rice as the main carbohydrate in a traditional Cuban meal. Rice is essential to a Cuban meal. It is usually eaten during lunch and dinner almost every day. [2] 
 Unlike nearby Mexico and Central America which have tortillas in their cuisines, the only resemblance to the use of tortillas is with  casave , dating from pre-Columbian indigenous times which is called Casave. This flatbread is produced by grinding  yuca  ( cassava ) root to form a paste which, when mixed with water, becomes a dough. This is lightly cooked as a flat circular disk and air-dried to preserve it for consumption for a later time. It is traditionally reconstituted in salt water and eaten with roasted pork. The other culinary curiosity is a regional dish consisting of a roasted rodent uniquely found in Cuba,  jutia  ( Desmarest's hutia ).
 
 Dominican Republic [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Dominican Republic cuisine 
   Mangú  is a popular dish with origins in Africa and its  fufu . 
 The cuisine of the Dominican Republic, much like its neighbors, is a fusion of Indigenous (Taino), Spanish, and African cuisines. All or nearly all food groups are accommodated in typical Dominican cuisine, as it incorporates meat or seafood; grains, especially rice, corn, and wheat; vegetables, such as beans and other legumes, potatoes, yuca, or plantains, and salad; dairy products, especially milk and cheese; and fruits, such as oranges, bananas, and mangos. However, there is heaviest consumption of starches and meats, and least of dairy products and non-starchy vegetables. Differences between Dominican cuisine and those of other parts of the West Indies include the milder spicing, which mainly uses onions, garlic, cilantro, cilantro ancho (culantro), ají cubanela (cubanelle pepper), and oregano.
 Sofrito, locally known as  sazón , a sautéed mix including local herbs and spices, is used in many dishes. Throughout the south-central coast bulgur, or whole wheat, is a main ingredient in quipes and tipili, two dishes brought by Levantine Middle Eastern immigrants. Other favorite foods and dishes include chicharrón, yautía, pastelitos or empanadas, batata (sweet potato), pasteles en hoja (ground roots pockets), chimichurris, plátanos maduros (ripe plantain), yuca con mojo (boiled yuca/cassava) and tostones/fritos (fried plantains
 Cuisine also varies due to geographical areas. In general, most Dominican meat dishes tend to involve pork, as pigs are farmed quite heavily on the island. Meat dishes tend to be very well cooked or even stewed in Dominican restaurants, a tradition stemming from the lesser availability of refrigeration on the island. Seaside Dominican fishing villages will have great varieties of seafood, the most common being shrimp, marlin, mahi-mahi or dorado, and lobster. Most villagers more commonly dine on cheap, lesser-quality fish, usually stewed with la criolla, a type of rice. Premium seafood tends to be too expensive for the many locals, and is saved for the island's upper class and the tourist resorts.
 
 Haiti [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Haitian cuisine 
   A table setting of Haitian food 
 Haitian  cuisine is a mixture of various cuisines, predominately of a similar nature with fellow Latin American countries. In addition to native  Taino  cooking,  French  and  Spanish colonization  in concordance with the introduction of African slaves heavily influenced the culinary practices of Haiti. For example, a staple food of major Haitian cities (e.g. Port-au-Prince) is French baguettes. The French and Spanish brought  Roman Catholicism  along with them, so the Haitian food calendar follows that of the Catholic tradition. For example,  soup joumou  (also known as giraumon soup) is served on New Year's Day. Joumou is a pumpkin soup made with salt beef and seasoned with nutmeg and other spices. [3]  Haitians eat traditional foods (e.g.  benye , white beans, kremas) in excess on feast days. Poorer areas, which were more impacted by the immigration of Syrians and the Lebanese in the 19th century, popularized Pain Haitien. Slaves created various popular Haitian dishes such as pain patate, akra de mori, and thiaka. Other staple foods are rice (diri), other grains, and millet (piti mii) for the poor. All of these foods are usually in every meal along with beans. Poultry is far more popular than pork or meat; however, the majority of the protein provided in a Haitian diet is from rice and beans. Some foods are regional staples. Seafood, while popular everywhere, has a heavy cultural influence on coast towns. Fruits and nuts from the mountains of Haiti are exported across that region of the island, providing Haitians with delicious and healthy drinks and desserts. [2]  Though similar to other cuisine in the region, it carries a uniqueness native only to the country and an appeal to many visitors in the island.
 
 Puerto Rico [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Puerto Rican cuisine 
   Arroz con gandules , regarded as "Puerto Rico national dish". [4] 
 Puerto Rican cuisine has its roots in the cooking traditions and practices of Europe ( Spain ),  Africa , and the Amerindian  Taínos .
 When in 1493 Spanish colonizers began a period of great change on the islands. The Spanish introduced foods from around the world including Europe, Asia, and Africa. They realized that not all the food they introduced to this new location were viable. So, while they had to abandon some of what was fundamental to their home country, they began to discover the local assets such as pigs and cattle. Still, some of what the Spaniards brought to Puerto Rico became of great importance to modern traditional dishes such as plantains, bananas, and coffee; all of which are now prominent in current Puerto Rican food culture. [5] 
 In the latter part of the 19th century the cuisine of Puerto Rico was greatly influenced by the  United States  in the ingredients used in its preparation. Puerto Rican cuisine has transcended the boundaries of the island and can be found in several countries outside the archipelago . Many crops cultivated in Puerto Rico stem from New World origins like plantains. [6] 
 Chef  Doreen Colondres  celebrates Puerto Rican and Latin American cuisine more broadly in her television segments and her cookery book. [7] [8] 
 
 Central America [ edit ] 
 Central American cuisine is a fusion of Indigenous, Spanish and African influence. [9]  Most of the countries are within the  Mesoamerica  cultural and historic region. Some of its staple foods, such as  maize ,  bell peppers ,  squash ,  beans , and  tomatoes  originated and are native to the region and over time have become basic staples in other international cuisines around the world. [10] 
 Its cuisine varies with its geographical areas, as well as its demographics. In the Pacific coasts of the countries in Central America, the influence of its food are more of an Indigenous and European infusion. In the Caribbean coast the fusion is more of an Indigenous and African fusion. The exception being El Salvador and Belize, where they are the other two countries that do not border both the Pacific and Caribbean. However, their cuisines still possess a fusion of all three cuisines because of their own diverse history, and their neighboring countries' demographics.
 Another staple in both Pacific and Caribbean cuisine of the area is rice. It is accompanied by a meat (pork, beef, and chicken), or seafood. Dishes mixed with rice are common throughout the region, an example being  gallopinto . The Caribbean coasts of Central America also have a more heavy usage of dishes containing  coconut  (milk, oil, etc.).
 
 Costa Rica [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Costa Rican cuisine 
   Gallo pinto  of Costa Rica 
 The main staple, known as  gallo pinto  (or simply  pinto ), consists of rice and black beans, which in many households is eaten at all three meals during the day.
 Other Costa Rican food staples include corn tortillas, white cheese and picadillos. Tortillas are used to accompany most meals. Costa Ricans will often fill their tortillas with whatever they are eating and eat it in the form of a gallo (direct translation: rooster, however, it resembles a soft Mexican taco). White cheese is non-processed cheese that is made by adding salt to milk in production. Picadillos are meat and vegetable combinations where one or more vegetables are diced, mixed with beef and garnished with spices. Common vegetables used in picadillos are potatoes, green beans, squash, ayote, chayote and arracache. Often, picadillos are eaten in the form of gallos.
 
 El Salvador [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Salvadoran cuisine 
   Salvadorean  pupusas 
 Salvadoran cuisine is a style of cooking derived from the nation of El Salvador. The traditional cuisine consists of food from the Pipil people, with a European twist in most modern dishes. Many of the dishes are made with maize (corn).
 El Salvador's most notable dish is the  pupusa , a thick hand-made corn flour or rice flour tortilla stuffed with cheese, chicharrón (fried pork rinds), refried beans or loroco (a vine flower bud native to Central America). There are also vegetarian options, often with ayote (a type of squash), or garlic. Some adventurous restaurants even offer pupusas stuffed with shrimp or spinach.
 Two other typical Salvadoran dishes are yuca frita and panes rellenos. Yuca frita, which is deep fried cassava root served with curtido (a pickled cabbage, onion and carrot topping) and pork rinds with pescaditas (fried baby sardines). The yuca is sometimes served boiled instead of fried. Panes con Pavo (turkey sandwiches) are warm turkey submarines. The turkey is marinated and then roasted with Pipil spices and handpulled. This sandwich is traditionally served with turkey, tomato, and watercress along with cucumber, onion, lettuce, mayonnaise, and mustard. A lot of Salvadoran food is served with French bread, or pan frances in Spanish.
 
 Guatemala [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Guatemalan cuisine 
   Fiambre , a traditional dish eaten in November. It consists of over 50 ingredients. 
 The cuisine of  Guatemala  reflects the multicultural nature of Guatemala, in that it involves food that differs in taste depending on the region. Guatemala has 22 departments (or divisions), each of which has very different typical foodstuffs. Guatemalan cuisine is widely known for its candy originating from Antigua Guatemala.
 There are also foods that it is traditional to eat on certain days of the week - for example, by tradition it is known that on Thursday, the typical food is "paches" which is like a tamal made with a base of potato, and on Saturday it is traditional to eat tamales.
 
 Honduras [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Honduran cuisine 
   Fried Yojoa Fish from  Honduras 
 Honduran  Cuisine combines Spanish, Caribbean, and pre-Columbian influences of the indigenous Maya- Lenca  population. Its most notable feature is that it uses more  coconut  than any other  Central American  cuisine in both sweet and savory dishes. Regional specialties include pollo con tajadas (fried chicken with fried green banana chips) fried  fish ,  carne asada , and  baleadas . Platano maduro fritos with sour creme are also a common dish.
 In addition to the baleadas, the following are also popular: meat roasted with chismol  carne asada , chicken with rice and corn, fried fish (Yojoa style) with  encurtido  (pickled onions and jalapeños). In the coastal areas and in the  Bay Islands , seafood and some meats are prepared in many ways, some of which include  coconut  milk.
 Among the soups the Hondurans enjoy are:  conch  soup,  bean  soup, Mondongo soup, or soup of intestine,  seafood  soups,  beef  soups, all of which are mixed with  plantains ,  yuca , cabbage among other things, and complemented with  corn  tortillas.
 Other typical dishes are the montucas or corn  tamale , stuffed tortillas, tamales wrapped up with  banana  leaves, among other types of food.  Also part of the Honduran typical dishes are an abundant selection of tropical fruits such as:  papaya ,  pineapple ,  plums , epazotes,  passionfruits , and a wide variety of bananas and plantains which are prepared in many ways.
 
 Nicaragua [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Nicaraguan cuisine 
   Baho , a traditional dish in Nicaragua. 
 The Cuisine of  Nicaragua  is a fusion of Spanish, Caribbean and pre-Columbian dishes of the indigenous peoples. When the Spaniards first arrived in  Nicaragua  they found that the indigenous peoples had incorporated foods available in the area into their  cuisine . [11]  Despite the blending and incorporation of pre-Columbian and Spanish influenced cuisine, traditional cuisine changes from the Pacific to the Caribbean coast. While the Pacific coast's main staple revolves around fruits and corn, the Caribbean coast makes use of  seafood  and the  coconut .
 As in many other  Latin American  countries,  corn  is a main staple. Corn is used in many of the widely consumed dishes, such as  nacatamal , and  indio viejo . Corn is also an ingredient for drinks such as  pinolillo  and  chicha  as well as in some sweets and desserts. Locally grown vegetables and fruits have been in use since before the arrival of the Spaniards and their influence on Nicaraguan cuisine. Many of Nicaragua's dishes include fruits and vegetables such as  jocote ,  grosella ,  mimbro ,  mango ,  papaya ,  tamarind ,  pipián ,  banana ,  avocado ,  yuca , and herbs such as  cilantro ,  oregano  and  achiote . [11] 
 Gallo pinto  is Nicaragua's  national dish , consisting of red  beans  and  rice . The dish has several variations including the addition of  coconut oil  or grated  coconut  which is primarily prepared on Nicaragua's  Caribbean  coast. It is thought to have originated in Nicaragua; however, there is some controversy about the origins of this dish.
 
 Panama [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Panamanian cuisine 
   Panamanian sweets such as Huevitos de Leche, Bocadillos, and Manjar blancos 
 Panamanian  cuisine has its own unique and rich cuisine. As a land bridge between two continents, Panama is blessed by nature with an unusual variety of tropical fruits, vegetables and herbs that are used in native cooking. Also, as a crossroads of the world catalyzed by the Panama Canal, Panamanian cuisine is influenced by its diverse population of Hispanic, native Indian, European, African, Colombian, Jamaican, and Chinese migration. A common Panamanian diet includes seafood such as crab, lobster, and squid, many versions of chicken soup, and vast amounts of fruit such as papayas, coconuts, and bananas. [12]  They also drink chicha, a very common drink found in Panama.
 
 Mexico [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Mexican cuisine 
   Chiles en Nogada . 
 Mexican cuisine is a style of food which is primarily a fusion of indigenous Mesoamerican cooking with European (especially Spanish) cooking developed after the Spanish conquest of the Aztec Empire. The basic staples remain the native corn, beans and chili peppers but the Europeans introduced a large number of other foods, the most important of which were meat from domesticated animals (beef, pork, chicken, goat and sheep), dairy products (especially cheese) and various herbs and spices. [13]  While the Spanish initially tried to superimpose their diet on the country, this was not possible thanks largely to Mexico's highly developed indigenous cuisines. Instead, the foods and cooking techniques of both the indigenous Mexicans and the Spanish began to be mixed contributing to the development of an even more varied and rich cuisine. Over the centuries, this resulted in various regional cuisines, based on local conditions such as those in the north,  Oaxaca ,  Veracruz  and the  Yucatán Peninsula . Mexican cuisine is highly tied to the culture, social structure and its popular traditions, the most important example of which is the use of mole for special occasions and holidays, particularly in the South region of the country. For this reason and others, Mexican cuisine was added by  UNESCO  to its list of the world's "intangible cultural heritage". [14] 
 Mexican-Americans in the  United States  have developed regional cuisines largely incorporating the ingredients and cooking styles of authentic Mexican cuisines.  Tex-Mex  is a term describing a regional American cuisine that blends food products available in the United States and the culinary creations of Mexican-Americans influenced by Mexican cuisine. [15]  Mexican cuisine varies by region, because of local climate and geography and ethnic differences among the indigenous inhabitants and because these different populations were influenced by the Spaniards in varying degrees. [16] 
 Central Mexico's cuisine is largely made up of influences from the rest of the country, but also has its authentics, such as  barbacoa ,  pozole , menudo, tamales, and carnitas.
Southeastern Mexico, on the other hand, is known for its spicy vegetable and chicken-based dishes. The cuisine of Southeastern Mexico also has quite a bit of Caribbean influence, given its geographical location. Veal is common in the Yucatán. Seafood is commonly prepared in the states that border the Pacific Ocean or the Gulf of Mexico, the latter having a famous reputation for its fish dishes, in particular  à la veracruzana .
 
 South America [ edit ] 
 Main article:  South American cuisine 
 The richest products of  South America  come from the middle of the continent, the  Amazonia Potatoes  are frequently grown as a result of this, and also plants such as  quinoa . The Peruvian capital,  Lima , was declared the "Gastronomic Capital of the Americas" in 2006. Many  plains  are also on this continent, which are rich for growing food in abundance. In the  Patagonia  south of  Argentina , many people produce  lamb  and  venison .  King crab  is typically caught at the southern end of the continent.  Antarctic krill  has been recently discovered and is now considered a fine dish.  Tuna  and  tropical fish  are caught all around the continent, but  Easter Island  is where they are found in abundance.  Lobster  is also caught in great quantities from the  Juan Fernández Islands .
 
 Argentina [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Argentine cuisine 
   Asado  of Argentina, a style of  barbecue 
 The cuisine of  Argentina  is strongly influenced by Italian and Spanish cuisines and cooking techniques. Indigenous gastronomies derived from groups such as the  Quechua ,  Mapuche , and  Guarani  have also played a role.
There are many regional differences, specially in the provincial states of the north, west, east and central Argentina, with many plants, fruits and dishes that are not known or barely known in  Buenos Aires .
 Another determining factor in Argentine cuisine is that Argentina is one of the world's major food producers. It is a major producer of meat (especially beef), wheat, corn, milk, beans, and since the 1970s, soybeans. Given the country's vast production of beef, red meat is an especially common part of the Argentine diet. Due to the very large number of Argentines of Italian ancestry, pizza and especially pasta are also very popular, but there are food traditions from other European nations as well, including the English afternoon tea.
 
 Bolivia [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Bolivian cuisine 
   Pique Macho, one of the main Bolivian dishes. 
 Bolivian cuisine is the result of Spanish cuisine with infusions of ancient  Andean  tradition and varies greatly due to the  geography of Bolivia . It has been influenced by the  Inca cuisine ,  Aymara cuisine ,  Spanish cuisine , and to a lesser extent the cuisines of other neighboring countries, like  Argentina  and  Paraguay . European immigration to Bolivia is not as common when compared with other Latin American countries, and while German, Italian,  Basque  and other cuisines have influenced the cuisine of Bolivia,  Spanish cuisine  remains the primary influence. [17] 
 In Western Bolivia in the  Altiplano , due to the high, cold climate cuisine tends to use spices, whereas in the lowlands of Bolivia in the more Amazonian regions dishes consist of products abundant in the region: fruits, vegetables, fish and  yuca . [18] 
 Almuerzo  is the most important meal of the Bolivian day, so much so that daily life tends to revolve around it. Long lunches are traditional throughout the country, so businesses and shops often close between the hours of 12 and 2 pm, so that the workers have time to return home for lunch. A typical Bolivian lunch would consist of several courses, including a soup, a main course of meat, rice, and potatoes, then a dessert and coffee. [19]  Lunch is taken at a leisurely pace and is traditionally followed by a nap, the oft-cited  siesta .
 
 Brazil [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Brazilian cuisine 
   Moqueca  of Brazil 
 The cuisine of  Brazil , like Brazil itself, varies greatly by region. Brazilian cuisine can be divided into several distinct locations. From the north of Brazil through the Amazonian jungle, and directly down the Brazilian coastline.
 This diversity reflects the country's mix of native Amerindians, Portuguese, Africans, Italians, Spaniards, Germans, Syrians, Lebanese and Japanese, among others. This has created a national cooking style marked by the preservation of regional differences.
 Coffee, being one of the main agricultural products of Brazil, [20]  is an indispensable part of every Brazilian's diet. "Chimarrão," [ citation needed ]  a caffeinated drink made of “erva mate”, [ citation needed ]  and the super caffeinated "cafezinho" are commonly served at meals, between meals, and for snacks. The average Brazilian drinks 12-24 of these concoctions per day. [21] 
 
 Chile [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Chilean cuisine 
   Caldillo de Congrio of Chile 
 Chilean cuisine stems from the combination of traditional  Spanish cuisine  with indigenous ingredients.
 European immigrants also brought with them various styles and traditions in cooking, heavily influencing the cuisine of Chile, including Italian, German, and French influences as well as the English afternoon tea. These mixtures have created a unique fusion. Seafood is widely used and an array of produce which historically has grown throughout the region have been implemented into Chilean gastronomy. Many recipes are accompanied and enhanced by  Chilean wine  such as  Curanto .
 
 Colombia [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Colombian cuisine 
   Bandeja paisa  of Colombia 
 The cuisine of  Colombia  consists of a large variety of dishes that take into account the difference in regional climates. For example, in the city of Medellín the typical dish is the  bandeja paisa . It includes beans, rice, ground meat or carne asada,  chorizo , fried egg, arepa and chicharrón. It is usually accompanied by avocado, tomato and sauces.
 Inland, the plates resemble the mix of cultures, inherited mainly from Amerindian and European cuisine, and the produce of the land mainly agriculture, cattle, river fishing and other animals' raising. Such is the case of the sancocho soup in Valledupar. Local species of animals like the guaratinaja, part of the wayuu Amerindian culture.
 
 Ecuador [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Ecuadorian cuisine 
 See also:  List of Ecuadorian dishes and foods 
   Fanesca  of Ecuador 
 The food in Ecuador is diverse, varying with altitude and associated agricultural conditions. Ecuadorian cuisine is an amalgamation of Spanish, Andean, and Amazonian cuisines and to a lesser degree Italian, Lebanese, African, and Chinese. Most regions in Ecuador follow the traditional 3 course meal of sopa/soup and segundo/second dish then dessert and a coffee are customary. Dinner is usually lighter and sometimes just coffee or agua de remedio/herbal tea with bread.
 Beef, chicken, and seafood are popular in the coastal regions and are typically served with carbohydrate-rich foods, such as rice accompanied with lentils, pasta, or plantain, whereas in the mountainous regions pork, chicken, beef and cuy (guinea pig) are popular and are often served with rice, corn, or potatoes. 
 Some of the typical dishes in the  coastal region  are: a variety of  ceviches ,  pan de yuca  (cassava bread),  corviche  (plantain, peanut and fish dumplings),  guatita ,  encebollado  (fish, cassava and onion stew),  empanada de viento  (deep-fried flour  empanada  with cheese filling, served sprinkled with sugar), empanada de verde (green plantain empanada with cheese filling),  mangrove crab ,  arroz con menestra  ( lentil or bean stew and rice ) con  asado ,  caldo de bola  (beef soup featuring a green plantain ball filled with meat, egg, and spices). Local staples are  rice ,  plantains  and a great variety of  seafood .
 Typical dishes in the  mountain region  include:  hornado ,  fritada ,  humitas ,  tamales ,  llapingachos ,  lomo saltado , and  churrasco .  Pork ,  chicken , beef, and  cuy  ( guinea pig ) are popular in the mountain regions and are served with a variety of grains (especially  rice  and  corn  or  potatoes ).  A popular street food in mountain regions is  hornado , consisting of potatoes served with roasted pig.  Fanesca , a fish soup including several types of bean, is often eaten during  Lent  and  Easter . During the week before the commemoration of the deceased or  All Souls' Day , the fruit beverage  colada morada  is typical, accompanied by  t'anta wawa  which is stuffed bread shaped like children.
 In the rainforest, a dietary staple is the yuca, elsewhere called cassava. The starchy root is peeled and boiled, fried, or used in a variety of other dishes. Across the nation it is also used as a bread, pan de yuca, which is analogous to the Brazilian  pão de queijo  and its often consumed alongside different types of drinkable yogurt "yogur persa" brought by Persian immigrants. 
 Chifa  (from the Mandarin words 吃饭, meaning "to eat rice") Ecuadorian-Chinese fusion food is a mainstay of Ecuadorian cuisine.
 
 Paraguay [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Paraguayan cuisine 
   Sopa paraguaya . 
 The cuisine of Paraguay is the set of dishes and culinary techniques of  Paraguay . Much like its neighboring countries, Paraguayan cuisine is a fusion of Indigenous cuisine ( Guaraní ), Spanish cuisine and international cuisines from those who have immigrated over the years. Meat, especially beef, is a staple of the Paraguayan diet. This is reflected in the  Asado , a series of barbecuing practices and the social event that are traditional to Argentina, Uruguay, and Paraguay.
 The cuisine of Paraguay includes unique dishes such as  sopa paraguaya ,   kiveve  prepared using a pumpkin, also known as "andai", or  Chipa Guasú . Chipa Guasú, an original dish to Paraguay, is a cake made with corn grains that is now widely served in Northeastern Argentina as well. The national drink of Paraguay is known as  terere , in addition to fruit juices and soft drinks being very common throughout the country.  Yucca  and  corn  are two important ingredients in Paraguayan cuisine [5] 
 
 Peru [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Peruvian cuisine 
   Ceviche , a  Peruvian  dish that has grown rapidly in popularity. 
 Peru has a varied cuisine with ingredients like  potato , uchu or  Ají  ( Capsicum  pubescens),  oca ,  ulluco ,  avocado , fruits like  chirimoya ,  lúcuma  and  pineapple , and animals like  taruca  ( Hippocamelus antisensis ),  llama  and  guinea pig  (called  cuy ). The combination of  Inca  and  Spanish  culinary traditions, resulted in new meals and ways of preparing them. The arrival of Africans, Chinese and Japanese immigrants in the 19th century also resulted in the development of  Creole  cuisine in the city of  Lima , where the vast majority of these immigrants settled.
 Some typical Peruvian dishes are  ceviche  ( fish  and  shellfish  marinated in  citrus  juices), the chupe de camarones (a  soup  made of  shrimp  ( Cryphiops caementarius )),  anticuchos  (cow's heart roasted  en  brochette ), the olluco con charqui (a casserole dish made of  ulluco  and  charqui ), the  Andean pachamanca  (meats, tubers and  broad beans  cooked in a stone oven), the  lomo saltado  (meat fried lightly with tomato and onion, served with  french fries  and  rice ) that has a Chinese influence, and the picante de cuy (a casserole dish made of fried guinea pig with some spices). Peruvian food can be accompanied by typical drinks like the chicha de jora (a  chicha  made of tender corn dried by the sun). There are also chichas made of  peanuts  or  purple corn , known as  chicha morada .
 
 Uruguay [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Uruguayan cuisine 
   A complete chivito 
 The cuisine of  Uruguay  is traditionally based on its European roots, especially from Italy, Spain, France, Portugal, Germany and Britain. Many foods from those countries such as pasta, sausages, and desserts are common in the nation's diet. The Uruguayan barbecue, asado, is one of the most exquisite and famous in the world. A sweet paste, Dulce de Leche is the national obsession, used to fill cookies, cakes, pancakes,  milhojas , and  alfajores .
 The base of the country's diet is meat and animal products: primarily beef but also chicken, lamb, pig, and sometimes fish. The preferred cooking methods for meats and vegetables are still  boiling  and  roasting , although modernization has popularized frying (see  milanesas  and  chivitos ). Meanwhile,  wheat  and fruit are generally served fried ( torta frita  and  pasteles ),  comfited  ( rapadura  and ticholos de banana), and sometimes baked ( rosca  de  chicharrones ), a new modern style.  Bushmeat  comes from  mulitas  and  carpinchos . Regional fruits like  butia  and  pitanga  are commonly used for flavoring caña, along with  quinotos  and  nísperos .
 
 Venezuela [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Venezuelan cuisine 
   Arepas  of Venezuela with chicken schnitzel, avocado, mayonnaise and red onion. 
 Due to its land, diversity of agricultural resources, and the cultural diversity of the  Venezuelan  people, Venezuelan cuisine often varies greatly from one region to another. Its cuisine, traditional as well as modern, is influenced by its European,  West African and Native American traditions.  Food staples  include  corn ,  rice ,  plantain ,  yams ,  beans  and several meats. Potatoes, tomatoes,  onions ,  eggplants ,  squashes ,  spinach  and  zucchini  are also common sides in the Venezuelan diet. Venezuela has several representative national dishes such as the  arepa  (a corn based bread like patty),  pan de jamón ,  tequeño ,  pabellón criollo  and the  hallaca  at  Christmas  time.
 
 Traditional eating customs [ edit ] 
 There are many different kinds of traditions associated with eating in Latin America. There are a variety of special days where certain foods are consumed, as well as many holidays that are celebrated in Latin America.
 
 Traditions [ edit ] 
 There are many forms of gratitude that inhabitants of Latin America employ when they discard excess food. Some people kiss the bread while others cut it before discarding it. [22] 
Other such traditions are upheld largely by the country, Argentina and Uruguay have one such tradition known as a " es:Ñoquis del 29 " or "the Gnocchi 29", where on the 29th of each month a family eats gnocchi, sometimes placing money under their plate to wish for abundance in the next month.
 There is a holiday celebrated in Latin America known as  Three Kings Day  (otherwise known as  Epiphany ) which is celebrated on January 6 of each year where families feast in honor of God's manifestation in human form in Jesus.
 In many countries of Latin America families consume lentils on the first day of the New Year because they are thought to bring prosperity.
 
 See also [ edit ] 
 
 Latin America portal Food portal Society portal 
 Latin American culture 
 List of cuisines 
 Louisiana Creole cuisine 
 Native American cuisine 
 Aztec cuisine 
 Inca cuisine 
 Maya cuisine 
 North American cuisine 
 South American cuisine 
 Spanish cuisine 
 References [ edit ] 
 
 
 ^   Spivey, Diane M. (2006).  Palmer, Colin (ed.). "Latin American and Caribbean Food and Cuisine".  Encyclopedia of African-American Culture and History . Detroit: Macmillan Reference.  2 : 838–844. 
 
 ^  a   b   Food cultures of the world encyclopedia . Santa Barbara, Calif.: Greenwood. 2011. pp. 165–171, 476.  ISBN   9780313376276 . Retrieved  September 25,  2016 . 
 
 ^   Spivey, Diane M. "Latin American and Caribbean Food and Cuisine."  Encyclopedia of African-American Culture and History . Ed. Colin A. Palmer. 2nd ed. Vol. 2. Detroit: Macmillan Reference USA, 2006. 838-844.  Gale Virtual Reference Library . Web. 26 Sept. 2016. 
 
 ^   Reporter's Notebook.  York Daily Record (York, Pennsylvania). 15 December 2003. Page 35. Accessed 24 January 2021. 
 
 ^  a   b   Albala, Ken (2011).  Food Cultures of the World Encyclopedia . Santa Barbara, CA: Greenwood. pp.  255 .  ISBN   9780313376276  – via eBook. 
 
 ^   Taylor, David W.; Anderson, Gregory J. (2014).  "Key plants preserve elements of culture: A study over distance and time of fresh crops in Puerto Rican markets in Hartford, Connecticut, "A moveable feast" " .  American Journal of Botany .  101  (4): 624–636.  doi : 10.3732/ajb.1300287 .  PMID   24688056 . 
 
 ^   Colondres, Doreen (November 23, 2015).  La cocina no muerde: Un recorrido por nuestras tierras y más de 100 recetas para tu mesa  (in Spanish). Penguin Random House Grupo Editorial USA.  ISBN   978-1-941999-47-9 . 
 
 ^   Hernández, Perla Alessandra.  "Chef Doreen Colondres visita la isla para ofrecer talleres de cocina" .  Sabrosia Puerto Rico  (in Spanish) . Retrieved  January 7,  2022 . 
 
 ^   "Gastronomy in Central America, a pleasure for the senses" . November 23, 2017. 
 
 ^   Mann, Charles C. 1491: Revelations of the Americas before Columbus. Vinton Press. 2005. pp. 196–97. 
 
 ^  a   b   "Try the culinary delights of Nicaragua cuisine" . Nicaragua.com . Retrieved  May 8,  2006 . 
 
 ^   "Ethnic Food of Panama" . Retrieved  September 26,  2016 . 
 
 ^   Albala, Ken (2011).  Food cultures of the world encyclopedia vol. 2 . Santa Barbara, Calif.: Greenwood. pp. 601–602.  ISBN   9780313376276 . 
 
 ^   "Traditional Mexican cuisine - ancestral, ongoing community culture, the Michoacán paradigm - intangible heritage - Culture Sector - UNESCO" .  www.unesco.org . Retrieved  October 6,  2016 . 
 
 ^   "There's more to Tex-Mex than meets the palate | The Center for the Humanities | Oregon State University" .  oregonstate.edu . Retrieved  October 6,  2016 . 
 
 ^   Albala, Ken (2011).  Food Cultures of the World Encyclopedia . Greenwood. pp.  217 .  ISBN   9780313376276 . 
 
 ^   Roufs, Timothy G.; Roufs, Kathleen Smyth.  Sweet Treats Around the World . p. 44. 
 
 ^   "A Guide to Bolivia's Most Mouthwatering Foods" .  Bolivian Life . Retrieved  October 6,  2017 . 
 
 ^   Traditional Cuisine . bolivia-guide.com Retrieved 2012-03-22 
 
 ^   "The CIA World Factbook" . September 29, 2021. 
 
 ^   "Brazilian cuisine".  Vegetarian Journal .  21  (2). 
 
 ^   Lamberto, Luciana.  "Customs and Traditions: How We Eat in Latin America" .  www.quericavida.com . Que Rico Vida . Retrieved  September 24,  2016 . 
 
 
 v t e Latin America and the Caribbean Caribbean 
 Antigua and Barbuda 
 Aruba 
 Bahamas 
 Barbados 
 Cuba 
 Curaçao 
 Dominica 
 Dominican Republic 
 Grenada 
 Haiti 
 Jamaica 
 Puerto Rico 
 Saint Kitts and Nevis 
 Saint Lucia 
 Saint Vincent and the Grenadines 
 Sint Maarten 
 Trinidad and Tobago 
 Central America 
 Costa Rica 
 El Salvador 
 Guatemala 
 Honduras 
 Nicaragua 
 Panama 
 Middle America 
 Mexico 
 South America 
 Argentina 
 Bolivia 
 Brazil 
 Chile 
 Colombia 
 Ecuador 
 Paraguay 
 Peru 
 Uruguay 
 Venezuela 
 Dependencies  not included.      Semi-autonomous territories are in italics. 
 v t e Cuisines Continental 
 African 
 North 
 West 
 list 
 Americas 
 Caribbean 
 North 
 South 
 list 
 Asian 
 Caucasian 
 Central 
 Indian subcontinent 
 Levantine 
 list 
 European 
 Balkan 
 Central 
 Eastern 
 list 
 Oceanic 
 Intercontinental
 Global 
 Latin American 
 Mediterranean 
 Middle Eastern 
 National  and regional 
 Afghan 
 Albanian 
 Algerian 
 American 
 Californian 
 Floribbean 
 Hawaiian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Lowcountry (South Carolina) 
 New England 
 New Mexico 
 Pacific Northwest 
 Pennsylvania Dutch 
 Puerto Rican 
 Southern US 
 Southwest US 
 Texas 
 Angolan 
 Argentine 
 Armenian 
 Australian 
 Austrian 
 Azerbaijani 
 Bahraini 
 Bangladeshi 
 Barbadian 
 Belarusian 
 Belgian 
 Belizean 
 Beninese 
 Bhutanese 
 Bolivian 
 Bosnian-Herzegovinian 
 Botswana 
 Brazilian 
 British 
 Channel Islands 
 English 
 Gibraltarian 
 Northern Irish 
 Saint Helena 
 Scottish 
 Welsh 
 Bruneian 
 Bulgarian 
 Burkinabé 
 Burmese 
 Burundian 
 Cambodian 
 Cameroonian 
 Canadian 
 Acadian 
 Québécois 
 Central African Republic 
 Chadian 
 Chilean 
 Chinese 
 Cantonese 
 Hong Kong 
 Macanese 
 Tibetan 
 Xinjiang 
 Colombian 
 Congolese 
 Corsican 
 Croatian 
 Cuban 
 Cypriot 
 Czech 
 Danish 
 Faroese 
 Greenlandic 
 Djiboutian 
 Dominican 
 Dominican Republic 
 Dutch 
 East Timorese 
 Ecuadorian 
 Egyptian 
 Emirati 
 Equatorial Guinean 
 Eritrean 
 Estonian 
 Ethiopian 
 Fijian 
 Filipino 
 Finnish 
 French 
 Occitan 
 French Guianan 
 Gabonese 
 Gambian 
 Georgian 
 German 
 Ghanaian 
 Greek 
 Cretan 
 Epirotic 
 Greek Macedonian 
 Heptanesean 
 Guatemalan 
 Guinea-Bissauan 
 Guinean 
 Haitian 
 Honduran 
 Hungarian 
 Icelandic 
 Indian 
 Arunachalese 
 Assamese 
 Bengali 
 Bihari 
 Goan 
 Gujarati 
 Himachal Pradesh 
 Kashmiri 
 Jharkhandi 
 Karnataka 
 Kerala 
 Maharashtrian 
 Manipuri 
 Meghalayan 
 Mizo 
 Naga 
 Odia 
 Punjabi 
 Rajasthani 
 Sikkimese 
 Sindhi 
 Tamil 
 Telangana 
 Telugu 
 Indonesian 
 Acehnese 
 Balinese 
 Banjar 
 Batak 
 Betawi 
 Indo 
 Javanese 
 Madurese 
 Makassar 
 Minahasan 
 Minangkabau 
 Palembangese 
 Sundanese 
 Iranian 
 Iraqi 
 Irish 
 Israeli 
 Italian 
 Abruzzese 
 Ligurian 
 Lombard 
 Lucanian 
 Neapolitan 
 Roman 
 Sardinian 
 Sicilian 
 Venetian 
 Ivorian 
 Jamaican 
 Japanese 
 Okinawan 
 Jordanian 
 Kazakh 
 Kenyan 
 Korean 
 North Korean 
 South Korean 
 Kosovan 
 Kuwaiti 
 Kyrgyz 
 Lao 
 Latvian 
 Lebanese 
 Lesotho 
 Liberian 
 Libyan 
 Liechtensteiner 
 Lithuanian 
 Luxembourg 
 Macedonian 
 Malagasy 
 Malawian 
 Malaysian 
 Sabahan 
 Sarawakian 
 Maldivian 
 Malian 
 Maltese 
 Mauritanian 
 Mauritian 
 Mexican 
 Moldovan 
 Monégasque 
 Mongolian 
 Montenegrin 
 Moroccan 
 Mozambican 
 Namibian 
 Nauruan 
 Nepalese 
 New Zealand 
 Nicaraguan 
 Niger 
 Nigerian 
 Niuean 
 Norwegian 
 Omani 
 Pakistani 
 Palestinian 
 Panamanian 
 Peruvian 
 Polish 
 Portuguese 
 Qatari 
 Romanian  (incl.  Transylvanian Saxon ) 
 Russian 
 Bashkir 
 Chechen 
 Circassian 
 Komi 
 Mordovian 
 Sakha 
 Tatar 
 Udmurt 
 Yamal 
 Rwandan 
 Saint Lucian 
 Salvadoran 
 Sammarinese 
 São Tomé and Príncipe 
 Saudi Arabian 
 Senegalese 
 Serbian 
 Seychellois 
 Sierra Leonean 
 Singaporean 
 Slovak 
 Slovenian 
 Somali 
 South African 
 Spanish 
 Andalusian 
 Asturian 
 Balearic 
 Basque 
 Canarian 
 Cantabrian 
 Catalan 
 Extremaduran 
 Galician 
 Manchegan 
 Valencian 
 Sri Lankan 
 Sudanese 
 Swazi 
 Swedish 
 Swiss 
 Syrian 
 Taiwanese 
 Tajik 
 Tanzanian 
 Zanzibari 
 Thai 
 Togolese 
 Tunisian 
 Turkish 
 Turkmen 
 Trinidadian and Tobagonian 
 Ugandan 
 Ukrainian 
 Uruguayan 
 Uzbek 
 Venezuelan 
 Vietnamese 
 Western Saharan 
 Yemeni 
 Zambian 
 Zimbabwean 
 Ethnic 
 Ainu 
 Arab 
 Indonesian 
 Aromanian 
 Assyrian 
 Balochi 
 Berber 
 Cajun 
 Chinese 
 American 
 Canadian 
 Chifa 
 Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Crimean Tatar 
 Greek American 
 Hazaragi 
 Indian 
 Anglo-Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Indigenous American 
 Inuit 
 Italian American 
 Kurdish 
 Livonian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Malay 
 Ossetian 
 Parsi 
 Pashtun 
 Peranakan 
 Romani 
 Sámi 
 Soul food 
 Sylheti 
 Transylvanian Saxon 
 Yup'ik 
 Religious 
 Buddhist 
 Christian 
 Goan Catholic 
 Mangalorean Catholic 
 Mennonite 
 Hindu 
 Islamic 
 Chinese 
 Ital 
 Jain 
 Jewish 
 American 
 Ashkenazi 
 Bukharan 
 Ethiopian 
 Mizrahi 
 Sephardic 
 Syrian 
 Ritual slaughter 
 Sikh 
 Historical 
 Ancient Egyptian 
 Ancient Greek 
 Ancient Israelite 
 Ancient Roman 
 Antebellum America 
 Aztec 
 Byzantine 
 Early modern European 
 Historical Chinese 
 Historical Indian subcontinent 
 Historical North Indian and Pakistani 
 History of agriculture 
 History of alcoholic drinks 
 History of bread 
 History of seafood 
 History of vegetarianism 
 Historical Argentine 
 Historical Japanese 
 Inca 
 Mayan 
 Muisca 
 Mughal 
 Medieval 
 Ottoman 
 Peasant 
 Soviet 
 Thirteen Colonies 
 Styles 
 Classique 
 Fast food 
 Fusion 
 New American 
 Eurasian 
 Haute 
 Molecular gastronomy 
 Note by Note 
 Nouvelle 
 Lists 
 List of cuisines 
 List of historical cuisines 
 Lists of prepared foods 
 Related 
 Cookbook 
 Cooking 
 Culinary arts 
 Drink 
 Food 
 history 
 Diet 
 Meal preparation 
 
   Food portal 
   Drink portal 
   Category 
   Commons 
   Cookbook 
   WikiProject 
   Outline 
 
 v t e Latin America  articles History By period 
 Spanish colonization 
 Portuguese colonization 
 French colonization 
 Decolonization 
 Latin American integration 
 Great Depression 
 World War II 
 Debt crisis 
 By topic 
 Catholic 
 Environmental 
 Jewish 
 Libraries 
 Military 
 Slavery 
 Foreign relations 
 Canada 
 China 
 Italy 
 Japan 
 League of Nations 
 United Kingdom 
 United States 
 Geography 
 Regions 
 Politics Governance 
 Drug legalization 
 Falangism 
 International peacekeeping 
 Liberalism and conservatism 
 Economy 
 Agriculture 
 Agroecology 
 Central banks and currencies 
 Stock exchanges 
 Tourism 
 Water and sanitation 
 Wealth inequality 
 Society 
 Crime 
 Illegal drug trade 
 Education 
 Latin American studies 
 Etiquette 
 Feminism 
 HIV/AIDS 
 Race and ethnicity 
 Culture 
 Art 
 Cinema 
 Films 
 Cuisine 
 Dance 
 Literature 
 Media 
 Music 
 Religion 
 Television 
 Companies 
 Telenovela 
 Video games 
 Demographics 
 Countries by population 
 Cities 
 Ethnic groups 
 Spanish language 
 Latin Americans 
 List 
 
 Category 
 Portal 
 
 Authority control : National libraries  
 Israel 
 United States 
 Latvia 
 
  
NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw2292
Cached time: 20230311172902
Cache expiry: 1814400
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc, no‐toc‐conversion]
CPU time usage: 0.703 seconds
Real time usage: 0.905 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3614/1000000
Post‐expand include size: 166240/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 11024/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 65/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 92435/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.365/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 8720146/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/400
 
 
Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  648.946      1 -total
 23.88%  154.995      1 Template:Reflist
 16.39%  106.341      4 Template:Navbox
 11.53%   74.815      1 Template:Latin_America_topics
 11.16%   72.430      1 Template:Latin_America_topic
 11.16%   72.411      1 Template:Region_topics
 10.71%   69.497      3 Template:Cite_journal
 10.21%   66.273      1 Template:More_citations_needed
  9.81%   63.674      1 Template:Ambox
  8.36%   54.263      1 Template:Short_description
 
  Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:idhash:524651-0!canonical and timestamp 20230311172901 and revision id 1140783110. Rendering was triggered because: api-parse
  
 esi <esi:include src="/esitest-fa8a495983347898/content" />  
 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Latin_American_cuisine&oldid=1140783110 " 
 Category :  Latin American cuisine Hidden categories:  CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use American English from April 2019 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from April 2019 Articles needing additional references from July 2011 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2023 Articles with unsourced statements from June 2020 Articles with J9U identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers Articles with LNB identifiers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  This page was last edited on 21 February 2023, at 19:40  (UTC) . 
 Text is available under the  Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0 ;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the  Terms of Use  and  Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the  Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. 
 
 
 Privacy policy 
 About Wikipedia 
 Disclaimers 
 Contact Wikipedia 
 Mobile view 
 Developers 
 Statistics 
 Cookie statement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
