
 
 
 Jump to content 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle sidebar 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Create account Log in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Personal tools 
 
 
 
 
   Create account   Log in 
 
 
 
 
		Pages for logged out editors  learn more 
 
 
 Contributions Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Navigation 
 
 
 Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate 
 
 
 
 
 Contribute 
 
 
 Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file 
 
 
 
 
 Tools 
 
 
 What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item 
 
 
 
 
 Print/export 
 
 
 Download as PDF Printable version 
 
 
 
 
 In other projects 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons 
 
 
 
 
 Languages 
 
 On this Wikipedia the language links are at the top of the page across from the article title.  Go to top . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CentralNotice  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Contents 
 move to sidebar 
 hide 
 
 
 
 
 (Top) 
 
 
 
 
 
 1 Central European cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 Eastern European cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 Northern European cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4 Southern European cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5 Western European cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6 Regional cuisines 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 7 Historical cuisines 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8 See also 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 9 References 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
						Toggle the table of contents
					 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle the table of contents 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 List of European cuisines 
 
 
 
 
 2 languages 
 
 
 
 日本語 Türkçe 
 Edit links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Article Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 English 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 More 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
 
 
 
 
 See also:  European cuisine 
 
 This is a  list of European cuisines . A  cuisine  is a characteristic style of  cooking  practices and traditions, [1]  often associated with a specific  culture .  European cuisine  (also called "Western cuisine") refers collectively to the cuisines of  Europe  and other  Western countries . [2]  European cuisine includes cuisines of  Europe , including (depending on the definition) that of  Russia , [2]  as well as non- indigenous  cuisines of  North America ,  Australasia ,  Oceania , and  Latin America , which derive substantial influence from European settlers in those regions. The term is used by  East Asians  to contrast with Asian styles of cooking. [3]  This is analogous to Westerners referring collectively to the cuisines of Asian countries as  Asian cuisine . When used by Westerners, the term may refer more specifically to cuisine  in  Europe; in this context, a synonym is  Continental  cuisine , especially in  British English .
 The cuisines of Western countries are diverse by themselves, although there are common characteristics that distinguishes Western cooking from cuisines of Asian countries [4]  and others. Compared with traditional cooking of Asian countries, for example, meat is more prominent and substantial in serving-size. [5]   Wheat -flour bread has long been the most common sources of  starch  in this cuisine, along with  pasta ,  dumplings  and  pastries , although the potato has become a major starch plant in the diet of Europeans and their diaspora since the  European colonization of the Americas .
 
 
 Central European cuisine [ edit ] 
 See also:  Central European cuisine 
   German  sausages  and cheese 
 Austrian cuisine  is a style of cuisine native to  Austria  and composed of influences from throughout the former  Austro-Hungarian Empire . [6]  Regional influences from  Italy ,  Hungary ,  Germany  and the  Balkans  have had an effect on Austrian cooking, and in turn this fusion of styles was influential throughout the Empire. [7] 
 Austrian wine 
 Viennese cuisine 
 Czech cuisine  has both influenced and been influenced by the cuisines of surrounding countries. Many of the fine cakes and pastries that are popular in  Central Europe  originated in the  Czech lands . Czech cuisine is marked by a strong emphasis on meat dishes. Pork is quite common, and beef and chicken are also popular. 
 Czech wine 
 German cuisine 
 German wine 
 Baden cuisine 
 Bavarian cuisine 
 Brandenburg cuisine 
 Franconian cuisine 
 Hamburg cuisine 
 Hessian cuisine 
 Lower Saxon cuisine 
 Mecklenburg cuisine 
 Palatine cuisine 
 Pomeranian cuisine 
 Rhenish-Hessian cuisine 
 Saxon cuisine 
 Schleswig-Holstein cuisine 
 Silesian cuisine 
 Swabian cuisine 
 Hungarian cuisine  is the  cuisine  characteristic of the nation of  Hungary  and its primary ethnic group, the  Magyars . Traditional Hungarian dishes are primarily based on meats, seasonal vegetables, fruits, fresh bread, cheeses and honey. Recipes are based on centuries-old traditions of spicing and preparation methods. 
 Hungarian wine 
 Goulash 
 Liechtensteiner cuisine 
 Liechtenstein wine 
 Polish cuisine  is the cuisine characteristic of the nation of  Poland  and its primary ethnic group, the  Poles . Traditional Polish dishes are based on meats, vegetables, fruits, breads, cheeses, sausages, milk, etc. The most typical ingredients used in Polish cuisine are sauerkraut, paprika, beetroot, cucumbers (gherkins), sour cream, kohlrabi, mushrooms, sausages and smoked sausage. A meal owes it taste to the herbs and spices used; such as marjoram, dill, caraway seeds, parsley, or pepper. The most popular desserts are cakes and pastries. 
 Polish wine 
 Pierogi 
 Silesian cuisine 
 Slovak cuisine  varies slightly, though sometimes dramatically, from region to region, and was influenced by the traditional cuisine of its neighbors. The origins of traditional Slovak cuisine can be traced to times when the majority of the population lived in villages, in self-sustenance, with very limited food imports and exports and with no modern means of  food preservation  or processing. This gave rise to a cuisine heavily dependent on a number of staple foods that could stand the hot summers and cold winters, including wheat, potatoes, milk and milk products, pork meat, sauerkraut and onion. To a lesser degree beef, poultry, lamb and goat, eggs, a few other local vegetables, fruit and wild mushrooms were traditionally eaten. 
 Slovak wine 
 Slovenian cuisine  there are many distinct cuisines in a country, whose main distinguishing feature is a great variety and diversity of land formation, climate, wind movements, humidity, terrain and history.  Slovenia  is a borderland country, surrounded by Italy, Austria, Hungary, and Croatia, with established and distinct national cuisines. There is a wide variety of meats in different parts of Slovenia.  Dandelion ) is Slovenian wild lettuce, which has been gathered in the fields for centuries. 
 Slovenian wine 
 Swiss cuisine 
 Swiss wine 
 
 Central European foods and dishes 
 
 
 
 Swiss cuisine –  paprika sausage with potatoes at the  Zeughauskeller ,  Zürich ,  Switzerland 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pretzels  are especially common in  Southern Germany .
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Austrian   Wiener Schnitzel 
 
 
 
 
 Eastern European cuisine [ edit ] 
 See also:  Eastern European cuisine 
 Cuisines of  Eastern Europe 
 Belarusian cuisine  shares the same roots with cuisines of other Eastern and Northern European countries, basing predominantly on meat and various vegetables typical for the region. 
 A plate of pelmeni. These types of  dumplings  are usually filled with minced meat. A large selection of Russian vodka Telesko vareno, Bulgarian beef soup 
 Bulgarian cuisine  is a representative of the cuisine of  Southeastern Europe . Essentially South Slavic, it shares characteristics with other  Balkans  cuisines. Owing to the relatively warm climate and diverse geography affording excellent growth conditions for a variety of vegetables, herbs and fruits, Bulgarian cuisine is diverse. 
 Bulgarian wine 
 Kazakh cuisine 
 Moldovan cuisine  –  Moldova 's fertile soil ( chernozem ) produces plentiful grapes, fruits, vegetables, cereals, meat and milk products, all of which have found their uses in the national cuisine. The fertile black soil combined with the use of traditional agricultural methods permits growing a wide range of ecologically clean foods in Moldova. 
 Moldovan wine 
 Romanian cuisine  is a diverse blend of different dishes from several traditions with which it has come into contact, but it also maintains its own character. It has been greatly influenced by Ottoman cuisine. 
 Romanian wine 
 Russian cuisine  is diverse, as  Russia  is the largest country in the world. [8]  Russia's great expansions of territory, influence, and interest during the 16th–18th centuries brought more refined foods and culinary techniques, as well as one of the most refined food countries in the world. It was during this period that smoked meats and fish, pastry cooking, salads and green vegetables,  chocolate ,  ice cream ,  wine , and liquor were imported from abroad. At least for the urban  aristocracy  and provincial  gentry , this opened the doors for the creative integration of these new foodstuffs with traditional Russian dishes. The result is extremely varied in technique, seasoning, and combination. Traditional and common Russian foods include: 
 
 Beer [9] 
 Blini , a pastry rolled with a variety of ingredients [9] 
 Borshch , a traditional Russian beet soup [9] 
 Caviar [9] 
 Crêpe [9] 
 Ice cream [9] 
 Pelmeni , pastry dumplings filled with minced meat [9] 
 Pirozhki , pastries filled with potato, cabbage, meat or cheese [9] 
 Shashlyk , Russian  kebab [9] 
 Sour cream [9] 
 Russian vodka [9] 
 
 Tatar cuisine 
 Mordovian cuisine 
 Russian wine 
   Ukrainian  borscht with side dishes of  smetana ,  pampushky  and pork cracklings 
 Ukrainian cuisine  has significant diversity, historical traditions and is influenced by Russian, Turkish and Polish cuisines. [10]  Common foods used include meats, vegetables, mushrooms, fruits, berries and herbs. [10] [11]  In  Ukraine , bread is a staple food, there are many different types of bread, and Ukraine is sometimes referred to as the "breadbasket of Europe." [10]  Pickled vegetables are utilized, particularly when fresh vegetables aren't in season. [10]  There are about 30 varieties of Ukrainian  Borsch  soup, [11]  a common dish that often includes meat. [10] 
 Crimean Tatar cuisine  is primarily the cuisine of the  Crimean Tatars , who live on the  Crimean  Peninsula in  Ukraine . The traditional cuisine of the Crimean Tatars derives basically from the same roots as the cuisine of the Volga Tatars, although unlike the Volga Tatars they do not eat horse meat and do not drink mare's milk ( kymyz ). However, the Crimean Tatars adopted many Uzbek dishes during their exile in Central Asia since 1944, and these dishes have been absorbed into Crimean Tatar national cuisine after their return to Crimea. 
 Ukrainian wine 
 Caucasian cuisine  – cuisines of  The Caucasus 
 Armenian cuisine  includes the foods and cooking techniques of the  Armenian people , the  Armenian diaspora  and traditional  Armenian  foods and dishes. The cuisine reflects the history and geography where Armenians have lived as well as incorporating outside influences. The cuisine also reflects the traditional crops and animals grown and raised in areas populated by Armenians. 
 Armenian wine 
 Azerbaijani cuisine  is the cuisine of  Azerbaijan . Azerbaijani cuisine throughout the centuries has been influenced by the foods of different cultures due to political and economic processes in Azerbaijan. Out of 11 climate zones known in the world, the  Azerbaijani climate  has nine. [12]  This contributes to the fertility of the land, which in its turn results in the richness of the country's cuisine. 
 Azerbaijani wine 
 Georgian cuisine  refers to the cooking styles and dishes with origins in the nation of  Georgia  and prepared by  Georgian people  around the world. The Georgian cuisine is specific to the country, but also contains some influences from the Middle Eastern and European culinary traditions. 
 Georgian wine 
 Northern European cuisine [ edit ] 
   An English  Sunday roast  with  roast beef , roast potatoes, vegetables and  Yorkshire pudding . 
   Irish stew  is a traditional  stew  made from  lamb , or  mutton , potatoes, carrots, onions, and  parsley . [13] 
   Lohikeitto  is a creamy  salmon   soup  and a common dish in  Finland  and other  Nordic countries . 
 Baltic  cuisines 
 Estonian cuisine 
 Latvian cuisine 
 Lithuanian cuisine 
 Livonian cuisine 
 Cuisines of the  Islands of the North Atlantic  (IONA) 
 British cuisine  is the specific set of cooking traditions and practices associated with the  United Kingdom . British cuisine has been described as "unfussy dishes made with quality local ingredients, matched with simple sauces to accentuate flavour, rather than disguise it." [14]  However, British cuisine has absorbed the cultural influence of those that have  settled in Britain , producing hybrid dishes, such as the Anglo-Indian  chicken tikka masala ." [15] [16] 
 Channel Islands cuisine 
 English cuisine 
 Cornish cuisine 
 Devonian cuisine 
 Dorset cuisine 
 Northern Irish cuisine 
 Scottish cuisine  is the specific set of cooking traditions and practices associated with  Scotland . It has distinctive attributes and recipes of its own, but shares much with wider  European cuisine  as a result of foreign and local influences both ancient and modern. Scotland's natural larder of  game ,  dairy ,  fish ,  fruit , and  vegetables  is the integral factor in traditional Scottish cooking. Scotland, with its temperate climate and abundance of indigenous game species, has provided a cornucopia of food for its inhabitants for millennia. The wealth of seafood available on and off the coasts provided the earliest settlers with their sustenance. Agriculture was introduced, with primitive  oats  quickly becoming the staple. 
 Welsh cuisine 
 Cuisine of Carmarthenshire 
 Cuisine of Ceredigion 
 Cuisine of Gower 
 Cuisine of Monmouthshire 
 Cuisine of Pembrokeshire 
 Wine from the United Kingdom 
 Regional foods 
 British Sunday roast 
 Fish and chips 
 Irish cuisine 
 Nordic cuisines 
 Danish cuisine 
 Danish wine 
 Faroese cuisine 
 New Nordic cuisine 
 Finnish cuisine 
 Icelandic cuisine 
 Norwegian cuisine 
 Sami cuisine 
 Swedish cuisine 
 Swedish wine 
 
 Northern European foods and dishes 
 
 
 
 Fish and chips  is an English dish of  fried fish  in crispy  batter  served with  chips .
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Haggis  is a Scottish savoury  pudding  containing sheep's  pluck  (heart, liver, and lungs),  minced  with  onion ,  oatmeal ,  suet ,  spices , and  salt , mixed with  stock , and cooked while traditionally encased in the animal's stomach.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Stegt flæsk  is a  Danish  national dish of fried  pork belly  generally served with  potatoes  and  parsley sauce  ( persillesovs ).
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gravlax  is a  Nordic  dish consisting of  salmon  that is  cured  using a mix of  salt  and  sugar .
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Skyr  is an  Icelandic   cultured dairy product  that has been a staple of the Icelandic diet since the Viking age.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sklandrausis  is a sweet  Latvian   pie  of  Livonian  origin, made of  rye  dough and filled with  potato  and  carrot  paste and  caraway .
 
 
 
 
 Southern European cuisine [ edit ] 
   Moussaka  is an eggplant or potato-based dish popular in  Mediterranean cuisine  and Balkan cuisine. Several variations exist. 
   Doner kebab  on rotisseries in Istanbul. 
 Balkan cuisine 
 Albanian cuisine  is uniquely influenced by  Turkish ,  Greek , and  Italian  cuisines. Every region in Albania has its own unique dishes. Albanian cuisine is characterized by the use of various Mediterranean herbs such as  oregano ,  black pepper , mint,  basilico ,  rosemary  and more in cooking meat and fish. 
 Albanian wine 
 Aromanian cuisine 
 Bosnian cuisine 
 Croatian cuisine 
 Croatian wine 
   Greek salad 
 Greek cuisine 
 Greek wine 
 Macedonian cuisine (Greek) 
 Regional foods 
 Taramosalata , a Greek  meze  made with salted and cured fish roe. [17] 
 Kosovan cuisine 
 Macedonian cuisine 
 Macedonian wine 
 Montenegrin cuisine 
 Montenegrin wine 
 Serbian cuisine 
 Serbian wine 
 Cuisines of the  Iberian Peninsula 
 Gibraltarian cuisine 
 Portuguese cuisine 
 Portuguese wine 
 Port wine 
 Spanish cuisine  has a variety of dishes including thousands of recipes and flavors arising from  Spain 's extensive history with many cultural influences, and variations in geography and climate. It is heavily influenced by  seafood  available from the waters that surround the country, and reflects the country's deep maritime roots.  Spanish wine  is a significant part of Spanish cuisine. Regional Spanish cuisines include: 
 Andalusian cuisine 
 Asturian cuisine 
 Aragonese cuisine 
 Balearic cuisine 
 Basque cuisine 
 Canarian cuisine 
 Cantabrian cuisine 
 Castilian-Leonese cuisine 
 Castilian-Manchego cuisine 
 Cuisine of the Community of Madrid 
 Catalan cuisine  (includes  Andorran cuisine ) 
 Extremaduran cuisine 
 Galician cuisine 
 Leonese cuisine 
 Valencian cuisine 
 Cuisine of Minorca 
   A  gourmet   antipasto  platter. 
   Pasta is a  staple food  of Italy. 
 Cuisines of the  Italian Peninsula 
 Italian cuisine  – presents popular dishes like  pizza ,  pasta ,  lasagne ,  Mozzarella  and other well-known food. Italian cuisine has been influenced by  Ancient Greek ,  Ancient Roman ,  Etruscan  cuisines and dates back to 4th century BCE. It maintains strong  regional diversity  and it uses a vast variety of ingredients, mostly because of the political divisions in  Italian history  and different climate and resources in the country. Most of the dishes are simple to prepare and not expensive, which is one of the reason it is very popular around the world. 
 Italian wine 
 Regional Cuisines – in Italian cuisine, each area has its own  specialties , primarily at the regional level, but also at provincial levels. [18] [19] [20]  The cuisine has an abundance of differences in taste, and is known to be one of the most popular in the world, [21]  with influences abroad. [22]  The differences can derive from a bordering country (such as France or Austria), whether a region is close to the sea or the mountains, and economics. Italian cuisine is also seasonal, often incorporating fresh produce. Italian regional cuisines include: 
 
 Abruzzese and Molisan 
 Arbëreshë 
 Basilicatan or Lucanian 
 Calabrian 
 Emilia-Romagnan 
 Friuli-Venezia Giulian 
 Lazian or Roman 
 Ligurian 
 Lombard 
 Mantuan 
 Marche 
 Neapolitan cuisine ,  Campanian 
 Piedmontese 
 Pugliese 
 Sardinian 
 Sicilian cuisine 
 Trentino-Alto Adigan/South Tyrolean 
 Tuscan cuisine 
 Umbrian 
 Valle d'Aostan 
 Venetian cuisine 
 
 Maltese cuisine 
 Maltese wine 
 Sammarinese cuisine 
 Mediterranean cuisine 
 Mediterranean diet 
 Cypriot cuisine  is the cuisine of  Cyprus  and can be described as a blend of Greek and Turkish cuisines.  Greek Cypriot  cuisine is another regional Greek cuisine along with Cretan, Ionian, or Attic. 
 Cypriot wine 
 Turkish cuisine  is largely the heritage of Ottoman cuisine, which can be described as a fusion and refinement of Central Asian, Middle Eastern, Eastern European, Armenian and Balkan cuisines. 
 Turkish wine 
 Northern Cypriot cuisine 
 
 Southern European foods and dishes 
 
 
 
 A variety of  tapas : appetizers or snacks in Spanish cuisine
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rabbit meat and  polenta , a traditional peasant food of  Veneto , Italy
 
 
 
 
 
 
 A large  paella , a  Valencian  rice dish
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mediterranean cuisine  in  Dalmatia , Croatia
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pizza  is a  Neapolitan  dish and one of the world's most popular fast foods
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gyros  are a Greek dish of meat cooked on a vertical rotisserie
 
 
 
 
 Western European cuisine [ edit ] 
   Coq au vin  is a French  braise  of  chicken  cooked with  wine ,  lardons ,  mushrooms , and optionally  garlic . 
 Belgian cuisine 
 Belgian wine 
 Dutch cuisine 
 Dutch wine 
 French cuisine 
 French regional cuisine  is characterized by its extreme diversity and style. Traditionally, each region of France has its own distinctive cuisine. [23]  French cuisine styles include  nouvelle cuisine ,  haute cuisine  and  cuisine classique . In November 2010 the French gastronomy was added by UNESCO to its lists of the world's " intangible cultural heritage ". [24] [25] 
 Corsican cuisine 
 Lyonnaise cuisine 
 French wine 
 Luxembourgian cuisine 
 Luxembourg wine 
 Monégasque cuisine 
 Occitan cuisine 
 
 Western European foods and dishes 
 
 
 
 Bouneschlupp  is a traditional  Luxemburgish  green bean  soup  with potatoes, bacon, and onions.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pot-au-feu  is a French dish of slowly boiled meat, typically beef, and vegetables.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Moules-frites  is a  Belgian  dish of  mussels  and  fries .
 
 
 
 
 Regional cuisines [ edit ] 
 Regional Dutch cuisines  can be distinguished by three geographic regions in the  Netherlands , northeastern, western and southern cuisine. [26] 
 German regional cuisine  can be divided into  Bavarian cuisine  (Southern Germany),  Lower Saxon cuisine  (Northern Germany),  Thuringian  (Central Germany) [27]  and  Saxony-Anhalt  (Central Germany). 
 The  Alpine cuisine  is characterised throughout the entire  Alpine region  by the isolated rural life on the alpine huts and in the mountain villages. 
 Historical cuisines [ edit ] 
 Regional cuisines of medieval Europe  were the results of differences in climate,  seasonal food  variations, [28]  political administration and religious customs [29]  that varied across the continent. 
 See also [ edit ] 
 List of cuisines 
 Portals :   Europe   Food   Drink   Society   Wine   Lists 
 References [ edit ] 
 
 
 ^   "Cuisine."   Thefreedictionary.com . Accessed June 2011. 
 
 ^  a   b   "European Cuisine."   Europeword.com   Archived  2017-10-09 at the  Wayback Machine . Accessed July 2011. 
 
 ^   Leung Man-tao (12 February 2007), "Eating and Cultural Stereotypes",  Eat and Travel Weekly , no. 312, p. 76. Hong Kong 
 
 ^   Kwan Shuk-yan (1988).  Selected Occidental Cookeries and Delicacies , p. 23. Hong Kong: Food Paradise Pub. Co. 
 
 ^   Lin Ch'ing (1977).  First Steps to European Cooking , p. 5. Hong Kong: Wan Li Pub. Co. 
 
 ^   Austrian cuisine 
 
 ^   Culinary Influences [ permanent dead link ] 
 
 ^   "Russia."   The World Factbook.   U.S. Central Intelligence Agency . Accessed July 2011. 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   e   f   g   h   i   j   k   "Russian Traditional Foods."   Archived  2011-08-18 at the  Wayback Machine   Goeasteurope.about.com   Archived  2011-08-13 at the  Wayback Machine . Accessed July 2011. 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   e   "Cuisine – Flavors and Colors of Ukrainian Culture."   Ukraine.com . Accessed July 2011. 
 
 ^  a   b   "Ukraine National Food, Meals and Cookery."   Ukrainetrek.com   Archived  2014-03-10 at the  Wayback Machine . Accessed July 2011. 
 
 ^   Climate zones of Azerbaijan   Archived  2007-01-07 at the  Wayback Machine 
 
 ^   Home Cooking: Traditional Irish Stew 
 
 ^   UKTV .  "British cuisine" . uktv.co.uk . Retrieved  2008-05-23 . 
 
 ^   "Robin Cook's chicken tikka masala speech" .  The Guardian . London. 2002-02-25 . Retrieved  2001-04-19 . 
 
 ^   BBC E-Cyclopedia (20 April 2001).  "Chicken tikka masala: Spice and easy does it" .  bbc.co.uk . Retrieved  28 September  2007 .   {{ cite news }} :  External link in  |work=  ( help ) 
 
 ^   "Taramosalata."   Ultimate-guide-to-greek-food.com   Archived  2011-08-14 at the  Wayback Machine . Accessed August 2011. 
 
 ^   Related Articles (2009-01-02).  "Italian cuisine – Britannica Online Encyclopedia" . Britannica.com . Retrieved  2010-04-24 . 
 
 ^   "Italian Food – Italy's Regional Dishes & Cuisine" . Indigoguide.com. Archived from  the original  on 2011-01-02 . Retrieved  2010-04-24 . 
 
 ^   "Regional Italian Cuisine" . Rusticocooking.com . Retrieved  2010-04-24 . 
 
 ^   "Cooking World » The most popular cuisines of the world (Part 1)" . Cooking-advices.com. 2007-06-25. Archived from  the original  on 2009-07-26 . Retrieved  2010-04-24 . 
 
 ^   Freeman, Nancy (2007-03-02).  "American Food, Cuisine" . Sallybernstein.com . Retrieved  2010-04-24 . 
 
 ^   "French Country Cooking."   Archived  2011-06-18 at the  Wayback Machine   French-country-decor-guide.com   Archived  2011-07-03 at the  Wayback Machine . Accessed July 2011. 
 
 ^   "Bon appétit: Your meal is certified by the UN."   Archived  2010-11-20 at the  Wayback Machine   The  Dallas Morning News.  Accessed July 2011. 
 
 ^   "Celebrations, healing techniques, crafts and culinary arts added to the Representative List of the Intangible Cultural Heritage."   United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization . Accessed July 2011. 
 
 ^   "The Cuisine of Holland"   Archived  2012-09-25 at the  Wayback Machine   Buzzle.com . Accessed July 2011. 
 
 ^   "German Regional Food Specialties."   Food-links.com . Accessed July 2011. 
 
 ^   Weiss, Melitta Adamson (2004).  "Food in medieval times."  Greenwood Press.  Google Books . Accessed July 2011. 
 
 ^   Weiss, Melitta Adamson (2004).  "Food in medieval times."  (abstract). Greenwood Press.  Google Books . Accessed July 2011. 
 
 
 v t e Cuisines Continental 
 African 
 North 
 West 
 list 
 Americas 
 Caribbean 
 North 
 South 
 list 
 Asian 
 Caucasian 
 Central 
 Indian subcontinent 
 Levantine 
 list 
 European 
 Balkan 
 Central 
 Eastern 
 list 
 Oceanic 
 Intercontinental
 Global 
 Latin American 
 Mediterranean 
 Middle Eastern 
 National  and regional 
 Afghan 
 Albanian 
 Algerian 
 American 
 Californian 
 Floribbean 
 Hawaiian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Lowcountry (South Carolina) 
 New England 
 New Mexico 
 Pacific Northwest 
 Pennsylvania Dutch 
 Puerto Rican 
 Southern US 
 Southwest US 
 Texas 
 Angolan 
 Argentine 
 Armenian 
 Australian 
 Austrian 
 Azerbaijani 
 Bahraini 
 Bangladeshi 
 Barbadian 
 Belarusian 
 Belgian 
 Belizean 
 Beninese 
 Bhutanese 
 Bolivian 
 Bosnian-Herzegovinian 
 Botswana 
 Brazilian 
 British 
 Channel Islands 
 English 
 Gibraltarian 
 Northern Irish 
 Saint Helena 
 Scottish 
 Welsh 
 Bruneian 
 Bulgarian 
 Burkinabé 
 Burmese 
 Burundian 
 Cambodian 
 Cameroonian 
 Canadian 
 Acadian 
 Québécois 
 Central African Republic 
 Chadian 
 Chilean 
 Chinese 
 Cantonese 
 Hong Kong 
 Macanese 
 Tibetan 
 Xinjiang 
 Colombian 
 Congolese 
 Corsican 
 Croatian 
 Cuban 
 Cypriot 
 Czech 
 Danish 
 Faroese 
 Greenlandic 
 Djiboutian 
 Dominican 
 Dominican Republic 
 Dutch 
 East Timorese 
 Ecuadorian 
 Egyptian 
 Emirati 
 Equatorial Guinean 
 Eritrean 
 Estonian 
 Ethiopian 
 Fijian 
 Filipino 
 Finnish 
 French 
 Occitan 
 French Guianan 
 Gabonese 
 Gambian 
 Georgian 
 German 
 Ghanaian 
 Greek 
 Cretan 
 Epirotic 
 Greek Macedonian 
 Heptanesean 
 Guatemalan 
 Guinea-Bissauan 
 Guinean 
 Haitian 
 Honduran 
 Hungarian 
 Icelandic 
 Indian 
 Arunachalese 
 Assamese 
 Bengali 
 Bihari 
 Goan 
 Gujarati 
 Himachal Pradesh 
 Kashmiri 
 Jharkhandi 
 Karnataka 
 Kerala 
 Maharashtrian 
 Manipuri 
 Meghalayan 
 Mizo 
 Naga 
 Odia 
 Punjabi 
 Rajasthani 
 Sikkimese 
 Sindhi 
 Tamil 
 Telangana 
 Telugu 
 Indonesian 
 Acehnese 
 Balinese 
 Banjar 
 Batak 
 Betawi 
 Indo 
 Javanese 
 Madurese 
 Makassar 
 Minahasan 
 Minangkabau 
 Palembangese 
 Sundanese 
 Iranian 
 Iraqi 
 Irish 
 Israeli 
 Italian 
 Abruzzese 
 Ligurian 
 Lombard 
 Lucanian 
 Neapolitan 
 Roman 
 Sardinian 
 Sicilian 
 Venetian 
 Ivorian 
 Jamaican 
 Japanese 
 Okinawan 
 Jordanian 
 Kazakh 
 Kenyan 
 Korean 
 North Korean 
 South Korean 
 Kosovan 
 Kuwaiti 
 Kyrgyz 
 Lao 
 Latvian 
 Lebanese 
 Lesotho 
 Liberian 
 Libyan 
 Liechtensteiner 
 Lithuanian 
 Luxembourg 
 Macedonian 
 Malagasy 
 Malawian 
 Malaysian 
 Sabahan 
 Sarawakian 
 Maldivian 
 Malian 
 Maltese 
 Mauritanian 
 Mauritian 
 Mexican 
 Moldovan 
 Monégasque 
 Mongolian 
 Montenegrin 
 Moroccan 
 Mozambican 
 Namibian 
 Nauruan 
 Nepalese 
 New Zealand 
 Nicaraguan 
 Niger 
 Nigerian 
 Niuean 
 Norwegian 
 Omani 
 Pakistani 
 Palestinian 
 Panamanian 
 Peruvian 
 Polish 
 Portuguese 
 Qatari 
 Romanian  (incl.  Transylvanian Saxon ) 
 Russian 
 Bashkir 
 Chechen 
 Circassian 
 Komi 
 Mordovian 
 Sakha 
 Tatar 
 Udmurt 
 Yamal 
 Rwandan 
 Saint Lucian 
 Salvadoran 
 Sammarinese 
 São Tomé and Príncipe 
 Saudi Arabian 
 Senegalese 
 Serbian 
 Seychellois 
 Sierra Leonean 
 Singaporean 
 Slovak 
 Slovenian 
 Somali 
 South African 
 Spanish 
 Andalusian 
 Asturian 
 Balearic 
 Basque 
 Canarian 
 Cantabrian 
 Catalan 
 Extremaduran 
 Galician 
 Manchegan 
 Valencian 
 Sri Lankan 
 Sudanese 
 Swazi 
 Swedish 
 Swiss 
 Syrian 
 Taiwanese 
 Tajik 
 Tanzanian 
 Zanzibari 
 Thai 
 Togolese 
 Tunisian 
 Turkish 
 Turkmen 
 Trinidadian and Tobagonian 
 Ugandan 
 Ukrainian 
 Uruguayan 
 Uzbek 
 Venezuelan 
 Vietnamese 
 Western Saharan 
 Yemeni 
 Zambian 
 Zimbabwean 
 Ethnic 
 Ainu 
 Arab 
 Indonesian 
 Aromanian 
 Assyrian 
 Balochi 
 Berber 
 Cajun 
 Chinese 
 American 
 Canadian 
 Chifa 
 Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Crimean Tatar 
 Greek American 
 Hazaragi 
 Indian 
 Anglo-Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Indigenous American 
 Inuit 
 Italian American 
 Kurdish 
 Livonian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Malay 
 Ossetian 
 Parsi 
 Pashtun 
 Peranakan 
 Romani 
 Sámi 
 Soul food 
 Sylheti 
 Transylvanian Saxon 
 Yup'ik 
 Religious 
 Buddhist 
 Christian 
 Goan Catholic 
 Mangalorean Catholic 
 Mennonite 
 Hindu 
 Islamic 
 Chinese 
 Ital 
 Jain 
 Jewish 
 American 
 Ashkenazi 
 Bukharan 
 Ethiopian 
 Mizrahi 
 Sephardic 
 Syrian 
 Ritual slaughter 
 Sikh 
 Historical 
 Ancient Egyptian 
 Ancient Greek 
 Ancient Israelite 
 Ancient Roman 
 Antebellum America 
 Aztec 
 Byzantine 
 Early modern European 
 Historical Chinese 
 Historical Indian subcontinent 
 Historical North Indian and Pakistani 
 History of agriculture 
 History of alcoholic drinks 
 History of bread 
 History of seafood 
 History of vegetarianism 
 Historical Argentine 
 Historical Japanese 
 Inca 
 Mayan 
 Muisca 
 Mughal 
 Medieval 
 Ottoman 
 Peasant 
 Soviet 
 Thirteen Colonies 
 Styles 
 Classique 
 Fast food 
 Fusion 
 New American 
 Eurasian 
 Haute 
 Molecular gastronomy 
 Note by Note 
 Nouvelle 
 Lists 
 List of cuisines 
 List of historical cuisines 
 Lists of prepared foods 
 Related 
 Cookbook 
 Cooking 
 Culinary arts 
 Drink 
 Food 
 history 
 Diet 
 Meal preparation 
 
   Food portal 
   Drink portal 
   Category 
   Commons 
   Cookbook 
   WikiProject 
   Outline 
 
 v t e European cuisine Sovereign states European Union 
 Austria 
 Belgium 
 Bulgaria 
 Croatia 
 Cyprus 
 Czech Republic 
 Denmark 
 Estonia 
 Finland 
 France 
 Germany 
 Greece 
 Hungary 
 Republic of Ireland 
 Italy 
 Latvia 
 Lithuania 
 Luxembourg 
 Malta 
 Netherlands 
 Poland 
 Portugal 
 Romania 
 Slovakia 
 Slovenia 
 Spain 
 Sweden 
 Other 
 Albania 
 Andorra 
 Armenia 
 Azerbaijan 
 Belarus 
 Bosnia and Herzegovina 
 Georgia 
 Iceland 
 Kazakhstan 
 Liechtenstein 
 Moldova 
 Monaco 
 Montenegro 
 North Macedonia 
 Norway 
 Russia 
 San Marino 
 Serbia 
 Switzerland 
 Turkey 
 Ukraine 
 United Kingdom 
 Vatican City 
 States with limited recognition 
 Abkhazia 
 Kosovo 
 Nagorno-Karabakh 
 Northern Cyprus 
 South Ossetia 
 Transnistria 
 Dependencies  and other territories 
 Faroe Islands 
 Gibraltar 
 Guernsey 
 Isle of Man 
 Jersey 
 
  
NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw2359
Cached time: 20230311172941
Cache expiry: 1814400
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc, no‐toc‐conversion]
CPU time usage: 0.740 seconds
Real time usage: 0.934 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 17394/1000000
Post‐expand include size: 117898/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 7887/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 12/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 78659/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.312/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 8007936/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/400
 
 
Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  709.393      1 -total
 50.11%  355.449      3 Template:Navbox
 30.45%  216.034      1 Template:Reflist
 20.73%  147.083      1 Template:European_topic
 16.73%  118.704      6 Template:Cite_web
 13.17%   93.434     55 Template:Iso2country
 12.81%   90.890      1 Template:Cuisine
  8.56%   60.729      1 Template:Short_description
  7.37%   52.269      1 Template:Portal_bar
  4.82%   34.214      2 Template:Pagetype
 
  Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:idhash:39488476-0!canonical and timestamp 20230311172940 and revision id 1139894909. Rendering was triggered because: page-view
  
 esi <esi:include src="/esitest-fa8a495983347898/content" />  
 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=List_of_European_cuisines&oldid=1139894909 " 
 Categories :  European cuisine Cuisine by continent Europe-related lists Food- and drink-related lists Hidden categories:  Webarchive template wayback links All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from December 2017 Articles with permanently dead external links CS1 errors: external links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  This page was last edited on 17 February 2023, at 11:57  (UTC) . 
 Text is available under the  Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0 ;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the  Terms of Use  and  Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the  Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. 
 
 
 Privacy policy 
 About Wikipedia 
 Disclaimers 
 Contact Wikipedia 
 Mobile view 
 Developers 
 Statistics 
 Cookie statement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
