
 
 
 Jump to content 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle sidebar 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Create account Log in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Personal tools 
 
 
 
 
   Create account   Log in 
 
 
 
 
		Pages for logged out editors  learn more 
 
 
 Contributions Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Navigation 
 
 
 Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate 
 
 
 
 
 Contribute 
 
 
 Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file 
 
 
 
 
 Tools 
 
 
 What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item 
 
 
 
 
 Print/export 
 
 
 Download as PDF Printable version 
 
 
 
 
 Languages 
 
 On this Wikipedia the language links are at the top of the page across from the article title.  Go to top . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CentralNotice  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Contents 
 move to sidebar 
 hide 
 
 
 
 
 (Top) 
 
 
 
 
 
 1 North American cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 Central American cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 South American cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4 Caribbean cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5 Latin American cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6 See also 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 7 References 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
						Toggle the table of contents
					 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle the table of contents 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 List of cuisines of the Americas 
 
 
 
 
 1 language 
 
 
 
 Azərbaycanca 
 Edit links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Article Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 English 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 More 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
 
 
 
 
 
 This is a  list of cuisines of the Americas .  A  cuisine  is a characteristic style of  cooking  practices and traditions, [1]  often associated with a specific  culture .  The  cuisines found across North and South America  are based on the cuisines of the countries from which the  immigrant  peoples came, primarily  Europe . However, traditional European cuisine has been adapted with the addition of local ingredients, and many techniques have been added to the tradition as well.
 
 
 North American cuisine [ edit ] 
 North American cuisine 
 Canadian cuisine  varies widely from depending on the regions of the country. The former Canadian prime minister  Joe Clark  has been paraphrased to have noted: "Canada has a cuisine of cuisines. Not a stew pot, but a smorgasbord." [2]  The traditional cuisine of  English Canada  related to  British  cuisine while the traditional cuisine of  French Canada  has evolved from 16th-century  French cuisine  and the winter provisions for the  fur traders . Waves of immigration in the 19th, 20th and 21st centuries from  Central Europe ,  Southern Europe ,  Eastern Europe  and  Asia  has affected the cuisines of different regions. Common contenders as the Canadian  national food  include  poutine [3] [4] [5]  and  butter tarts . [6] [7]  The province of Quebec in Canada is the world's largest producer of  maple syrup . [8]  The sugar maple's leaf is depicted on the country's flag. [9] 
 
 Canadian foods and dishes 
 
 
 
 Canadian bacon , or peameal bacon, prepared from center-cut boneless pork loin
 
 
 
 
 
 
 BeaverTail , a fried dough pastry from  Quebec  resembling the tail of a  beaver , a Canadian symbol
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fish and brewis  with scrunchions, a traditional  Newfoundland  meal consisting of  codfish  and  hard bread  or  hard tack 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 A bottle of  maple syrup  from  Quebec , Canada
 
 
 
 
 Cuisine of Quebec  - Quebec is home to many unique dishes and products. Its most famous are its  tourtières  (meat pies),  pea soup ,  baked beans ,  cretons ,  ham  dishes,  maple ,  Pouding chômeur  and "tire Ste-Catherine" ( St. Catherine's taffy ). 
   Québécois   poutine  is made with  french fries ,  curds  and  gravy . 
 Cuisine of the Maritime Provinces  - the  Maritimes  region of Canada has some unique foods from the   Acadians ,  First Nations  and English settlers groups. Many of these dishes use seafood and/or vegetables that were easy to preserve during the winter. 
 Cuisine of Toronto  - Toronto's is a large city with significant multicultural diversity due to recent  immigration . As such, cuisines from around the world can be found there.  [10] [11]  Different ethnic neighborhoods throughout the city focus on specific cuisines. [12] 
 Some of Canada's regional foods: 
 Fish and brewis 
 Flipper pie 
 Jiggs dinner 
 Montreal-style bagel 
 Montreal-style smoked meat 
 Nanaimo bar 
 Oka cheese 
 Oreilles de crisse 
 Poutine 
 Sushi pizza 
 Toutin 
 Yellow pea soup . 
   A  sirloin steak  dinner 
   Creole   Jambalaya  with shrimp, ham, tomato, and Andouille sausage 
   A  New England clam bake 
 American cuisine  (USA) – is cuisine from the United States. The cuisine's history dates back from before the  colonial period  with the  Native Americans , who used diverse cooking styles and ingredients. During the  European colonization  period, the cooking techniques used changed and new ingredients were introduced from  Europe . The cuisine continued to expand and diversify into the 19th and 20th centuries with the influx of immigrants from various nations across the world. This influx has created unique regional cuisines throughout the country. In addition to cookery,  cheese  and wine play an important role in the cuisine. The wine industry is regulated by  American Viticultural Areas  (AVA) (regulated appellation), similar to those laws found in countries such as France and Italy. 
 Midwestern American cuisines  is a regional cuisine of the American  Midwest . It draws its culinary roots most significantly from the cuisines of  Central ,  Northern  and Eastern Europe, and is influenced by regionally and locally grown foodstuffs [13]  and cultural diversity. [14] 
 Cuisine of Chicago 
 Cuisine of North Dakota 
 Cuisine of Omaha 
 St. Louis cuisine 
 Northeastern American cuisines 
 Cuisine of New England  comprises Northeastern U.S. cuisine, including the six states of  Connecticut ,  Maine ,  Massachusetts ,  New Hampshire ,  Rhode Island , and  Vermont . The  American Indians  cuisine became part of the cookery style that the early colonists brought with them. 
 Cuisine of Philadelphia 
 Cuisine of New Jersey 
 Cuisine of New York City  comprises many cuisines belonging to various ethnic groups that have entered the United States through the city. Almost all ethnic cuisines are available in New York City, both in and out of their various  ethnic neighborhoods . 
 Cuisine of the Mid-Atlantic United States 
 Cuisine of Pittsburgh 
 Southern American cuisines  are defined as the historical regional culinary form of states generally south of the  Mason–Dixon line  dividing  Pennsylvania  from  Maryland  and  Delaware  as well as along the  Ohio River , and extending west to Texas. See also:  Soul food  and  Cuisine of Kentucky . 
 Cajun cuisine 
 Floribbean cuisine 
 Louisiana Creole cuisine  is a style of cooking originating in  Louisiana  that blends  French , [15]   Spanish , [15]   Portuguese ,  Italian ,  Greek ,  Asian Indian ,  Native American , [15]   African , [15]  and general Southern cuisine. 
 Lowcountry cuisine 
 Cuisine of Kentucky 
 Cuisine of New Orleans 
 Southwestern American cuisine  is food styled after the rustic cooking of the Southwestern United States. It comprises a fusion of recipes for things that might have been eaten by  Spanish colonial  settlers,  cowboys , Native Americans, [16]  and  Mexicans  throughout the post-Columbian era. there is, however, a great diversity in this type of cuisine throughout the Southwestern states. 
 New Mexican cuisine 
 Texan cuisine 
 Tex-Mex cuisine 
 Western American cuisine  can be distinct in various ways compared to the rest of the U.S. [17]  Those states west of Texas, Kansas, Missouri, and Nebraska would be considered part of this area, as would, in some cases, western parts of adjoining states. [18]  The concept of obtaining foods locally is increasingly influential, as is the concept of  sustainability . [19]  The influence of the Native American cultures of each area, but especially in the Northwest and in Navajo country, [20]  is important in the cuisine picture of the Western United States. [21] 
 California cuisine  is a style of cuisine marked by an interest in  fusion  (integrating disparate cooking styles and ingredients) and in the use of freshly prepared local ingredients. [22]  See also:  Cuisine of California . 
 Cuisine of California 
 Hawaiian cuisine  in modern times is a fusion of many cuisines brought by  multiethnic  immigrants to the  Hawaiian Islands , particularly of  American ,  Chinese ,  Filipino ,  Japanese ,  Korean ,  Polynesian  and  Portuguese  origins, including plant and animal food sources imported from around the world for agricultural use in Hawaii. Many local restaurants serve the ubiquitous  plate lunch  featuring the  Asian  staple, two scoops of rice, a simplified version of American  macaroni salad  (consisting of  macaroni  and  mayonnaise ), and a variety of different toppings ranging from the  hamburger  patty, a fried  egg , and  gravy  of a  Loco Moco , Japanese style  tonkatsu  or the traditional lu'au favorite,  kalua  pig. 
 Pacific Northwest cuisine  is a North American cuisine of the states of  Oregon ,  Washington  and  Alaska , and the provinces of  British Columbia  and the southern  Yukon . The cuisine reflects the ethnic makeup of the region, with noticeable influence from  Asian  and  Native American  traditions. [23] 
 Rocky Mountain cuisine 
 Fusion cuisine 
 Chinese American cuisine 
 Greek-American cuisine 
 Italian-American cuisine 
 Euro-Asian cuisine 
 New American cuisine 
 Pizza in the United States 
 Other 
 Fast food 
 Barbecue 
 Native American cuisine 
 Cuisine of the Pennsylvania Dutch 
 Puerto Rican cuisine 
 Roadkill cuisine 
 Soul food 
 Tailgate party 
 Tlingit cuisine 
 United States military ration 
 Regional foods and cuisines 
 
 California-style pizza 
 Carne asada fries 
 Chicago-style hot dog 
 Chicago-style pizza 
 Cincinnati chili 
 Coney Island hot dog 
 Fish fry 
 Hot dog variations (U.S.) 
 Italian beef 
 Kansas City-style barbecue 
 Lobster roll 
 Lowcountry cuisine , traditionally associated with the  South Carolina Lowcountry  and the Georgia coast 
 Pig roast ,  Pig pickin' 
 Mission burrito 
 Maine lobster 
 Manhattan clam chowder 
 New England boiled dinner 
 New England clam bake 
 New England clam chowder 
 New York-style pizza 
 Philadelphia cheesesteak 
 Santa Maria Style BBQ , Santa Barbara County, California 
 St. Louis-style barbecue 
 St. Louis-style pizza 
 White hot 
 
 
 Additional U.S. foods and dishes 
 
 
 
 Salmon  is widely available in the  Pacific Northwest .
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Chicken, pork and corn cooking in a  barbecue   smoker 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 New England  clam chowder 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Chicago-style deep-dish pizza  from the original  Pizzeria Uno  location
 
 
 
 
 See also:  Maya cuisine  and  Agriculture in Mesoamerica 
   A traditional  chile relleno  stuffed with  jack cheese  and breaded with corn  masa  flour. This is a Mexican dish that originated in the city of  Puebla . 
 Mexican cuisine  - Mexican food varies by region because of  Mexico 's large size [24]  and diversity, [25]  different climates and geography, ethnic differences among the indigenous inhabitants and because different populations were influenced by the Spaniards in varying degrees. The north of Mexico is known for its beef, goat and  ostrich  production and meat dishes, in particular the well-known  arrachera  cut. The food staples of Mexican cuisine are typically corn and beans. Corn is used to make  masa , a dough for  tamales ,  tortillas ,  gorditas , and many other corn-based foods. Corn is also eaten fresh, as  corn on the cob  and as a component of a number of dishes.  Squash  and  chili peppers  also prominent in Mexican cuisine. Honey is an important ingredient in many Mexican dishes, such as the  rosca de miel , a bundt-like cake, and in beverages such as  balché . Mexican cuisine was added by UNESCO to its lists of the world's " Intangible Cultural Heritage of Humanity ". [26] 
 By region 
 Mexico's six regions differ greatly in their cuisines. In the  Yucatán ,  achiote  seasoning is commonly used, which is a sweet red sauce with a slight peppery flavor, made from seeds of the tropical annatto plant and sour orange. [27]  In contrast, the  Oaxacan  region is known for its savory tamales, moles, [28]  and simple  tlayudas , while the mountainous regions of the West ( Jalisco , etc.) are known for goat  birria  (goat in a spicy tomato-based sauce). 
   Tacos  made with  carnitas  filling 
 Central Mexico's cuisine is influenced by the rest of the country, and also has unique dishes such as  barbacoa ,  pozole ,  menudo  and  carnitas . 
 Southeastern Mexico is known for its spicy vegetable and chicken-based dishes. The cuisine of Southeastern Mexico has a considerable Caribbean influence due to its location. Seafood is commonly prepared in states that border the Pacific Ocean or the  Gulf of Mexico , the latter having a famous reputation for its fish dishes,  à la veracruzana . 
 In  pueblos  or villages, there are also more exotic dishes, cooked in the  Aztec  or  Mayan  style (known as  comida prehispánica ) with ingredients ranging from  iguana  to  rattlesnake ,  deer ,  spider monkey ,  chapulines ,  ant  eggs, and other kinds of insects. 
 More recently,  Baja Med  cuisine has developed in  Tijuana  and elsewhere in  Baja California , combining Mexican with Mediterranean flavors. 
 Recently other cuisines of the world have acquired popularity in Mexico, thus adopting a Mexican fusion. For example, sushi in Mexico is often made with a variety of sauces based on  mango  or  tamarind , and very often served with  serrano -chili-blended soy sauce, or complemented with  habanero  and  chipotle  peppers. 
 Regional foods 
 Carne asada , thin or thick pieces of meat, usually beef, that is often marinated and served whole or chopped 
 Chipotle , a smoke-dried  jalapeño  chili pepper 
 Chocolate : The word  chocolate  originated in Mexico's  Aztec  cuisine, derived from the  Nahuatl  word  xocolatl . Chocolate was first drunk rather than eaten. In the past, the  Maya civilization  grew cacao trees [29]  and used the cacao seeds it produced to make a frothy, bitter drink. [30]  The drink, called  xocoatl , was often flavored with  vanilla ,  chili pepper , and achiote (also known as  annatto ). [31]  Chocolate was also historically used as a form of currency. [32]  Today chocolate is used in a wide array of Mexican foods, from  savory  dishes such as  mole  to traditional Mexican style  hot chocolate  and  champurrados , both of which are prepared with a  molinillo . [33] 
 
 Additional Mexican foods and dishes 
 
 
 
 Caldo de res  is a Mexican dish made with corn, green beans, potatoes, carrots, cabbage and  cilantro .
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Chapulines, (roasted  grasshoppers ), for sale in  Oaxaca , Mexico
 
 
 
 
 Mexican wine 
 Central American cuisine [ edit ] 
 See also:  § Latin American cuisine ,  Maya cuisine , and  Agriculture in Mesoamerica 
 
   Sopa de pata  is a popular soup in  El Salvador  made from cow  tripe , plantain, corn, tomatoes, cabbage and spices. 
 Central American cuisine  - some typical foods in Central American cuisine include maize-based dishes, [34]   tortillas , [35]   tamales ,  pupusas , various  salsas  and other condiments, such as  guacamole , [35]   pico de gallo ,  mole ,  chimichurri  and  pebre . 
 Belizean cuisine  is an amalgamation of all the ethnicities in the nation of  Belize , and their respective wide variety of foods. [36]  Culinary influences include Mayan, Garifuna, Spanish, Creole, Chinese, British,  Caribbean , and American. [36]  Beans, tortillas, cheese, chicken, rice and seafood are common in the cuisine. [36] 
 Costa Rican cuisine  - a common dish is  gallo pinto , which is rice and  black beans . [37]  Tortillas, plantains, fish, beef and chicken are part of the cuisine. [37]   Casado  is a traditional dish comprising meat served with tortillas and side items such as black beans and rice, or gallo pinto. [37]   Refrescos  in Costa Rica refers to cold fruit smoothie beverages made with fruit and milk or water. [37] 
 Salvadoran cuisine  consists of food from the  Maya ,  Lenca , and  Pipil people . The cuisine is also influenced by Spanish cuisine. [38]   Empanadas , tamales and  pupusas  are widespread, and seafood is common because of San Salvador's extensive coastline. [38] 
 Guatemalan cuisine  was influenced by the Mayan Empire, Spanish rule and the current modernized country. [35]  Guatemala has 22 departments (or divisions), each of which has varying food varieties. 
 Honduran cuisine  is a fusion of African,  Spanish , and indigenous cuisine.  Coconut  is used in both sweet and savory dishes. Regional specialties include fried fish,  tamales , [39]   carne asada  and  baleadas . Common dishes include grilled meats, tortillas, rice and beans. [39]  Seafood is common in the Bay Islands and on the Caribbean coast. [39] 
 Nicaraguan cuisine  is a mixture of Spanish, Creole, Garifuna and indigenous cuisines and foods. [40]  When the  Spaniards  first arrived in  Nicaragua  they found that the  Creole people  present had incorporated foods available in the area into their  cuisine . [41]  Despite the blending and incorporation of pre-Columbian and Spanish influenced cuisine, traditional cuisine changes from the Pacific to the Caribbean coast. While the Pacific coast's main staple revolves around local fruits and corn, the Caribbean coast's cuisine makes use of seafood and the  coconut . Traditional Nicaraguan foods include beans, corn, plantains, peppers and yucca. [40] 
 Panamanian cuisine  is both unique and rich. As a land bridge between two continents,  Panama  possesses an unusual variety of tropical fruits, vegetables and herbs that are used in native cooking. Panamanian cuisine is a unique mix of African,  Caribbean , Spanish and  Native American  cooking and dishes. [42] 
 Regional foods 
 The  sweet potato  is native to Central America and was domesticated there at least 5,000 years ago. [43] 
 
 Central American foods and dishes 
 
 
 
 Fiambre  is a traditional food from  Guatemala  eaten on November 1 and 2 in celebration of the  Day of the Dead  and  All Saints Day . It is a chilled salad that may be made from over 50 ingredients.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Empanadas 
 
 
 
 
 South American cuisine [ edit ] 
 See also:  § Latin American cuisine 
 
   Arepa  is most popular plate of Venezuelan Cuisine. Ais an earthenware bowl.     Asado  with  achuras  ( offal ) and sausages. Asado is a term for  barbecuing  and the  social event  of having or attending a barbecue in  Argentina , Uruguay,  Paraguay , Chile and southern  Brazil . 
   Paila marina  is a common fish  soup  in Chile and other South American countries. A  paila  is an earthenware bowl. 
 South American cuisine  – Some of the richest food products of  South America  come from the middle of the continent, the  Amazon basin . For example, the Amazon region provides a plethora of fresh fish and  tropical fruits . [44]  In countries like  Peru  there is a strong influence of the  Inca empire  and their  cuisine .  Potatoes  are frequently grown as a result of this, and also plants such as  quinoa . Along the western coast of South America lies the  Pacific Ocean , which provides a large array of  seafood . Many plains also are on this continent, which are rich for growing food in abundance. In the  Patagonia  south of  Chile , many people produce  lamb  and  venison .  King crab  is typically caught at the southern end of the continent.  Antarctic krill  has just recently been discovered and is now another food source.  Tuna  and tropical fish are caught all around the continent;  Easter Island  is one place where they are found in abundance.  Lobster  is also caught in great quantities from  Juan Fernández . In  Brazil  the most traditional dish is the  feijoada . 
 Argentinian cuisine  may be referred to as a cultural blending of indigenous  Mediterranean  influences (such as those exerted by  Italian - Spanish  and  Arabic populations ) with the wide scope of livestock and agricultural products which are abundant in the country. [45] 
 Bolivian cuisine 
 Brazilian cuisine , like  Brazil  itself, varies greatly by  region . The natural crops available in each region add to their singularity. Some typical dishes are  caruru , which consists of okra, onion, dried shrimp and toasted nuts (peanuts or cashews) cooked with  palm oil  until a spread-like consistency is reached and  moqueca  capixaba, consisting of slow-cooked fish, tomato, onion and garlic topped with  cilantro . 
 Chilean cuisine  stems mainly from the combination of Spanish cuisine with traditional  Chilean  ingredients, with later influences from other  European  cuisines, particularly from  Germany ,  Italy ,  Croatia ,  France  and the  Middle East . The food tradition and recipes in Chile stand out due to the varieties in flavors and colors. The country's long coastline and the Chilean peoples' relationship with the  sea  adds an immense array of ocean products to the variety of the food in Chile. The country's waters are home to unique species of fish and shellfish such as the  Chilean sea bass ,  loco  and  picoroco . 
 Colombian cuisine  refers to the cooking traditions and practices of  Colombia . Along with other cultural expressions of national identity, Colombian cuisine varies among its many distinct regions. [46]  Colombians typically eat three meals a day: a large breakfast, a medium lunch between 12-2, and a light dinner. [47]  Colombian  coffee  is well known for its high standards in taste compared to others. 
 Ecuadorian cuisine  is diverse, varying with altitude and associated agricultural conditions.  Pork , chicken, beef, and  cuy  ( guinea pig ) are popular in the mountain regions and are served with a variety of carbohydrate-rich foods, especially rice, corn and potatoes. A popular  street food  in mountain regions is  hornado , consisting of potatoes served with roasted pig. 
 Paraguayan cuisine  is similar to the cuisines in  Uruguay  and the  Falkland Islands . [48]  Cuisine of Paraguay,  Uruguay  and the  Falkland Islands , Guarani and European Influences. [49]  Meats, vegetables,  manioc , [50]   maize [50]  and fruits are common in Paraguayan cuisine. [48]   Barbecuing  is both a cooking technique and often a social event, and are known as  Asados . 
 Cuisine of Asunción 
 Peruvian cuisine  reflects local cooking practices and ingredients—and, through immigration, influences from Spanish, Chinese, Italian, German, West African, and Japanese cuisine. Many traditional foods—such as  quinoa ,  kiwicha ,  chili peppers , and several roots and  tubers  have increased in popularity in recent decades, reflecting a revival of interest in native Peruvian foods and culinary techniques. 
 Peruvian-Chinese cuisine  (chifa) 
 Uruguayan cuisine  is traditionally based on its European roots, in particular, Mediterranean food from Italy, Spain, Portugal and France, but also from countries such as Germany and Britain, along with African and indigenous mixtures. The national drink is the  Grappamiel . 
 Cuisine of Montevideo 
 Venezuelan cuisine  - Due to its location in the world, its diversity of industrial resources and the cultural diversity of the  Venezuelan  people,  Venezuelan cuisine  often varies greatly from one region to another; however, its cuisine, traditional as well as modern, has strong ties to its European ancestry. 
 
 South American foods and dishes 
 
 
 
 Cebiche , a seafood dish popular in  Central  and  South America , especially in  Peru 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 A typical Brazilian  Feijoada , a stew of beans with beef and pork
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "Fish in a box", fresh fish served with Mediterranean vegetables in a  Montevideo , Uruguay restaurant
 
 
 
 
 
 
 A bowl of  fanesca  served in  Quito , Ecuador. It is a traditional soup of Ecuador served around  Easter 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bandeja paisa , a typical meal popular in  Colombian cuisine . Includes  red beans  cooked with  pork , white  rice ,  ground meat ,  chicharon ,  fried egg ,  plantain ,  chorizo ,  arepa ,  hogao  sauce,  morcilla  and  avocado 
 
 
 
 
 Caribbean cuisine [ edit ] 
 See also:  § Latin American cuisine 
 
   Mofongo  is a Caribbean dish made with  plantains . 
   Jamaican jerk spice  chicken, rice, plantain and a honey biscuit 
 As there is no one homogeneous Caribbean, there is also no one Caribbean cuisine, but one based on European historical grouping and colonization. There are two broad based or types of cuisines in the Caribbean area. One is based around Western European colonized groupings such as British, French, Dutch and the other Spanish-based like in Central America and most of South America, or Latin based. Both incorporate a European influence (s) together with an Indigenous (Mayan, Aztec or  Amerindian ), and a  West African  influence as a base. 
 The dishes made in the previously  British  and French Islands and territories in the Caribbean are much more diverse than the islands colonized by  Spanish  due to a history of changing colonial administration or ownership (between British, French, Dutch and Spanish), and the migration of diverse groups brought to work on plantations including Indians from Indian, Chinese and Portuguese (Madeira and Azores).
 There is even much diversity within each previous colonial groupings. While both Trinidad and Jamaica were both British colonies and share similar cooking styles, the scope of dishes in Trinidad are different and more diverse due to a very different population make up. 
The similarities in the larger region lie mostly in the fruits and vegetables consumed and the ingredients used in cooking, with the use of root vegetables, plantains, beans, and rice, fish and seafood being a common denominator. In the post independence and post colonial era, and with globalization in the 1990s cultural and food similarities between the previous British, still French and Dutch Island and territories were magnified.   
 
 Anguillan cuisine 
 Antigua and Barbuda cuisine 
 Aruban cuisine 
 Bahamian cuisine 
 Barbadian cuisine 
 Belizean cuisine 
 Bermudian cuisine 
 British Virgin Islands  cuisine 
 Cayman Islands cuisine 
 Cuban cuisine 
 Cuban sandwich 
 Cuisine of Curaçao 
 Dominican cuisine 
 Dominican Republic cuisine 
 French Guianan cuisine 
 Grenadian cuisine 
 Guadeloupe cuisine 
 Guyanese cuisine 
 Haitian cuisine 
 Jamaican cuisine 
 List of Jamaican dishes and foods 
 Ackee 
 Jamaican jerk spice 
 Martinican cuisine 
 Montserrat cuisine 
 Puerto Rican cuisine 
 St. Kitts and Nevis  cuisine 
 Saint Lucian cuisine 
 Saint Vincent cuisine 
 Surinamese cuisine 
 Trinidad and Tobago cuisine 
 Turks and Caicos cuisine 
 US Virgin Islands cuisine 
 Regional foods 
 
 Black Cake , a derivative of English Christmas pudding, is served in some areas, especially on special occasions. 
 Callaloo 
 Scotch bonnet pepper 
 
 Latin American cuisine [ edit ] 
 Latin American cuisine  – incorporates influences from all over the world. Most came due to colonization and the resulting mixtures among the Native Americans, European immigrants, and African slaves. Different waves of immigration (Some resulting from wars, such as  World War II ) have also had a hand in this mixture, mainly in the form of immigrants from central and eastern Europe and from east Asia (mainly  China  and  Japan ).
 Central American cuisine – see above 
 South American cuisine – see above 
 Caribbean cuisine – see above 
 See also [ edit ] 
 Cuisine of the Americas 
 List of cuisines 
 Portals :   North America   Central America   South America   Mexico   Caribbean   Food   Drink   Society   Wine   Lists 
 References [ edit ] 
 
 
 ^   "Cuisine."   Thefreedictionary.com . Accessed June 2011. 
 
 ^   Pandi, George (April 5, 2008),  "Let's eat Canadian, but is there really a national dish?" ,  The Gazette (Montreal) , archived from  the original  on August 23, 2012  Also published as " Canadian cuisine a smorgasbord of regional flavours " 
 
 ^   Trillin, Calvin (November 23, 2009), "Canadian Journal, "Funny Food," ",  The New Yorker , pp. 68–70 
 
 ^   Wong, Grace (October 2, 2010),  Canada's national dish: 740 calories – and worth every bite? , CNN, archived from  the original  on January 30, 2011 
 
 ^   Sufrin, Jon (April 22, 2010),  "Is poutine Canada's national food? Two arguments for, two against" ,  Toronto Life , archived from  the original  on March 22, 2011 
 
 ^   Baird, Elizabeth (June 30, 2009),  "Does Canada Have a National Dish?" ,  Canadian Living 
 
 ^   DeMontis, Rita (June 21, 2010),  "Canadians butter up to this tart" ,  Toronto Sun 
 
 ^   "Maple Syrup."   Archived  September 8, 2011, at the  Wayback Machine   Ontario Ministry of Agriculture, Food and Rural Affairs . Accessed July 2011. 
 
 ^   "The Maple Leaf" . Canadian Heritage . Retrieved  November 18,  2010 . 
 
 ^   "Toronto's racial diversity" . Toronto.ca . Retrieved  May 24,  2013 . 
 
 ^   "Toronto Restaurants" . Food.ca. 2004 . Retrieved  May 24,  2013 . 
 
 ^   "Toronto | Toronto's Neighbourhoods" . where.ca. Archived from  the original  on February 20, 2010 . Retrieved  August 24,  2010 . 
 
 ^   Crook, Nathan C.  "Foods That Matter: Constructing Place and Community at Food Festivals in Northwest Ohio."   Archived  March 31, 2012, at the  Wayback Machine  (abstract).  The Ohio Library and Information Network . Accessed July 2011. 
 
 ^   "Michigan/Great Lakes Region."   Archived  September 28, 2011, at the  Wayback Machine   Community Based Food and Farming.   Archived  July 20, 2011, at the  Wayback Machine   Sustainable Agriculture and Food Systems at Michigan State University   Archived  July 20, 2011, at the  Wayback Machine . Accessed July 2011. 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   Beggs, Cindy, Gipson, Bridget, Shaw, Sherrie.  "Cajun and Creole Cuisine."   Archived  May 4, 2012, at the  Wayback Machine   University of West Florida . Accessed July 2011. 
 
 ^   "Native Americans."  (cached version).  Ed101.bu.edu   Archived  August 24, 2011, at the  Wayback Machine . Accessed July 2011. 
 
 ^   "Western USA."   Archived  June 7, 2011, at the  Wayback Machine   Allrecipes.com . Accessed July 2011. 
 
 ^   "Cuisine of the West Coast."   Archived  August 21, 2008, at the  Wayback Machine   Allrecipes.com . Accessed July 2011. 
 
 ^   "Pacific Northwest Cuisine."   Lifeintheusa.com  . Accessed July 2011. 
 
 ^   "Navajo Food."   Navajo-arts.com . Accessed July 2011. 
 
 ^   "Native American cuisine goes gourmet."   Archived  September 21, 2004, at the  Wayback Machine   The CBS Interactive Business Network . Accessed July 2011. 
 
 ^   "The birth of California cuisine is generally traced back to Alice Waters in the 1970s and her restaurant Chez Panisse. Waters introduced the idea of using natural, locally grown fresh ingredients to produce her dishes. California cuisine is... local, based like most traditional regional cooking on available ingredients including abundant seafood. Fresh vegetables, lightly cooked, and fresh fruits, berries, and herbs characterize the cuisine generally, but California cooking is also in fact a fusion of cooking from around the world." Benjamin F. Shearer  Culture and Customs of the United States  Greenwood Publishing Group, 2007  ISBN   0-313-33877-9 , 440, page 212 
 
 ^   A taste of Seattle: A Pacific Northwest culinary pilgrimage  Janis Cooke Newman, San Francisco Chronicle, 10-21-01 
 
 ^   "Guide to Traditional Mexican Cooking."   Archived  September 16, 2011, at the  Wayback Machine   Flavoursofmexico.net   Archived  May 31, 2013, at the  Wayback Machine . Accessed July 2011. 
 
 ^   "Eating in Mexico."   Gomexico.about.com . Accessed July 2011. 
 
 ^   "Mexican Cuisine Recognized by UNESCO."   [1] [ permanent dead link ] . Accessed July 2011. 
 
 ^   "Yucatecan Cuisine."   Gomexico.about.com . Accessed July 2011. 
 
 ^   "Oaxacan Food."   Gomexico.about.com . Accessed July 2011. 
 
 ^   "Chocolate: A Mesoamerican Luxury 250–900 C.E. (A.D.) – Obtaining Cacao" .  Field Museum . Retrieved  June 2,  2008 . 
 
 ^   "Chocolate: A Mesoamerican Luxury 250–900 C.E. (A.D.) – Making Chocolate" . Field Museum of Natural History. Archived from  the original  on March 18, 2009 . Retrieved  June 2,  2008 . 
 
 ^   "Achiote (Annatto) Cooking" . las Culturas. Archived from  the original  on May 17, 2008 . Retrieved  May 21,  2008 . 
 
 ^   "A Brief History of Chocolate, Food of the Gods" .  Athena Review . Athena Pub.  2  (2). Archived from  the original  on June 8, 2007 . Retrieved  June 8,  2007 . 
 
 ^   "Chmpurrado."   Mexicanfood.about.com . Accessed July 2011. 
 
 ^   "Maize, the Staple Crop of the Americas."   Mesa Community College . Accessed July 2011. 
 
 ^  a   b   c   "Guatemala."   Foodbycountry.com . Accessed July 2011. 
 
 ^  a   b   c   "Belize Food and Drink."   Gocentralamerica.about.com . Accessed July 2011. 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   "Costa Rica Food and Drink."   Gocentralamerica.about.com . Accessed July 2011. 
 
 ^  a   b   "El Salvador Food and Drink."   Gocentralamerica.about.com . Accessed July 2011. 
 
 ^  a   b   c   "Honduras Food and Drink."   Gocentralamerica.about.com . Accessed July 2011. 
 
 ^  a   b   "Nicaragua Food and Drink."   Gocentralamerica.about.com . Accessed July 2011. 
 
 ^   "Try the culinary delights of Nicaragua cuisine" .  Nicaragua.com . Retrieved  May 8,  2006 . 
 
 ^   "Panama Food and Drink."   Gocentralamerica.about.com . Accessed July 2011. 
 
 ^   Sweet Potato   Archived  February 7, 2005, at the  Wayback Machine , Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research 
 
 ^   "Amazonian Cuisine."   Brazil-travel-guide.com . Accessed July 2011. 
 
 ^   "Argentina - Tourism - Gastronomy" . Archived from  the original  on March 23, 2012 . Retrieved  February 26,  2016 . , 'Argentine Gastronomy', June 6, 2008 
 
 ^   "Colombian culture and contributions to culture" . Mundolatino.com. Archived from  the original  on December 23, 2010 . Retrieved  February 17,  2011 . 
 
 ^   "Culture of Colombia" . Advameg, inc . Retrieved  February 17,  2011 . 
 
 ^  a   b   Cuisine of Paraguay, Uruguay and the Falkland Islands 
 
 ^   Gosouthamerica.about.com . Accessed July 2011. 
 
 ^  a   b   "Paraguay, the Country of Cassava."   Consumer.es . Accessed July 2011.  (in Spanish) 
 
 
 v t e Cuisines Continental 
 African 
 North 
 West 
 list 
 Americas 
 Caribbean 
 North 
 South 
 list 
 Asian 
 Caucasian 
 Central 
 Indian subcontinent 
 Levantine 
 list 
 European 
 Balkan 
 Central 
 Eastern 
 list 
 Oceanic 
 Intercontinental
 Global 
 Latin American 
 Mediterranean 
 Middle Eastern 
 National  and regional 
 Afghan 
 Albanian 
 Algerian 
 American 
 Californian 
 Floribbean 
 Hawaiian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Lowcountry (South Carolina) 
 New England 
 New Mexico 
 Pacific Northwest 
 Pennsylvania Dutch 
 Puerto Rican 
 Southern US 
 Southwest US 
 Texas 
 Angolan 
 Argentine 
 Armenian 
 Australian 
 Austrian 
 Azerbaijani 
 Bahraini 
 Bangladeshi 
 Barbadian 
 Belarusian 
 Belgian 
 Belizean 
 Beninese 
 Bhutanese 
 Bolivian 
 Bosnian-Herzegovinian 
 Botswana 
 Brazilian 
 British 
 Channel Islands 
 English 
 Gibraltarian 
 Northern Irish 
 Saint Helena 
 Scottish 
 Welsh 
 Bruneian 
 Bulgarian 
 Burkinabé 
 Burmese 
 Burundian 
 Cambodian 
 Cameroonian 
 Canadian 
 Acadian 
 Québécois 
 Central African Republic 
 Chadian 
 Chilean 
 Chinese 
 Cantonese 
 Hong Kong 
 Macanese 
 Tibetan 
 Xinjiang 
 Colombian 
 Congolese 
 Corsican 
 Croatian 
 Cuban 
 Cypriot 
 Czech 
 Danish 
 Faroese 
 Greenlandic 
 Djiboutian 
 Dominican 
 Dominican Republic 
 Dutch 
 East Timorese 
 Ecuadorian 
 Egyptian 
 Emirati 
 Equatorial Guinean 
 Eritrean 
 Estonian 
 Ethiopian 
 Fijian 
 Filipino 
 Finnish 
 French 
 Occitan 
 French Guianan 
 Gabonese 
 Gambian 
 Georgian 
 German 
 Ghanaian 
 Greek 
 Cretan 
 Epirotic 
 Greek Macedonian 
 Heptanesean 
 Guatemalan 
 Guinea-Bissauan 
 Guinean 
 Haitian 
 Honduran 
 Hungarian 
 Icelandic 
 Indian 
 Arunachalese 
 Assamese 
 Bengali 
 Bihari 
 Goan 
 Gujarati 
 Himachal Pradesh 
 Kashmiri 
 Jharkhandi 
 Karnataka 
 Kerala 
 Maharashtrian 
 Manipuri 
 Meghalayan 
 Mizo 
 Naga 
 Odia 
 Punjabi 
 Rajasthani 
 Sikkimese 
 Sindhi 
 Tamil 
 Telangana 
 Telugu 
 Indonesian 
 Acehnese 
 Balinese 
 Banjar 
 Batak 
 Betawi 
 Indo 
 Javanese 
 Madurese 
 Makassar 
 Minahasan 
 Minangkabau 
 Palembangese 
 Sundanese 
 Iranian 
 Iraqi 
 Irish 
 Israeli 
 Italian 
 Abruzzese 
 Ligurian 
 Lombard 
 Lucanian 
 Neapolitan 
 Roman 
 Sardinian 
 Sicilian 
 Venetian 
 Ivorian 
 Jamaican 
 Japanese 
 Okinawan 
 Jordanian 
 Kazakh 
 Kenyan 
 Korean 
 North Korean 
 South Korean 
 Kosovan 
 Kuwaiti 
 Kyrgyz 
 Lao 
 Latvian 
 Lebanese 
 Lesotho 
 Liberian 
 Libyan 
 Liechtensteiner 
 Lithuanian 
 Luxembourg 
 Macedonian 
 Malagasy 
 Malawian 
 Malaysian 
 Sabahan 
 Sarawakian 
 Maldivian 
 Malian 
 Maltese 
 Mauritanian 
 Mauritian 
 Mexican 
 Moldovan 
 Monégasque 
 Mongolian 
 Montenegrin 
 Moroccan 
 Mozambican 
 Namibian 
 Nauruan 
 Nepalese 
 New Zealand 
 Nicaraguan 
 Niger 
 Nigerian 
 Niuean 
 Norwegian 
 Omani 
 Pakistani 
 Palestinian 
 Panamanian 
 Peruvian 
 Polish 
 Portuguese 
 Qatari 
 Romanian  (incl.  Transylvanian Saxon ) 
 Russian 
 Bashkir 
 Chechen 
 Circassian 
 Komi 
 Mordovian 
 Sakha 
 Tatar 
 Udmurt 
 Yamal 
 Rwandan 
 Saint Lucian 
 Salvadoran 
 Sammarinese 
 São Tomé and Príncipe 
 Saudi Arabian 
 Senegalese 
 Serbian 
 Seychellois 
 Sierra Leonean 
 Singaporean 
 Slovak 
 Slovenian 
 Somali 
 South African 
 Spanish 
 Andalusian 
 Asturian 
 Balearic 
 Basque 
 Canarian 
 Cantabrian 
 Catalan 
 Extremaduran 
 Galician 
 Manchegan 
 Valencian 
 Sri Lankan 
 Sudanese 
 Swazi 
 Swedish 
 Swiss 
 Syrian 
 Taiwanese 
 Tajik 
 Tanzanian 
 Zanzibari 
 Thai 
 Togolese 
 Tunisian 
 Turkish 
 Turkmen 
 Trinidadian and Tobagonian 
 Ugandan 
 Ukrainian 
 Uruguayan 
 Uzbek 
 Venezuelan 
 Vietnamese 
 Western Saharan 
 Yemeni 
 Zambian 
 Zimbabwean 
 Ethnic 
 Ainu 
 Arab 
 Indonesian 
 Aromanian 
 Assyrian 
 Balochi 
 Berber 
 Cajun 
 Chinese 
 American 
 Canadian 
 Chifa 
 Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Crimean Tatar 
 Greek American 
 Hazaragi 
 Indian 
 Anglo-Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Indigenous American 
 Inuit 
 Italian American 
 Kurdish 
 Livonian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Malay 
 Ossetian 
 Parsi 
 Pashtun 
 Peranakan 
 Romani 
 Sámi 
 Soul food 
 Sylheti 
 Transylvanian Saxon 
 Yup'ik 
 Religious 
 Buddhist 
 Christian 
 Goan Catholic 
 Mangalorean Catholic 
 Mennonite 
 Hindu 
 Islamic 
 Chinese 
 Ital 
 Jain 
 Jewish 
 American 
 Ashkenazi 
 Bukharan 
 Ethiopian 
 Mizrahi 
 Sephardic 
 Syrian 
 Ritual slaughter 
 Sikh 
 Historical 
 Ancient Egyptian 
 Ancient Greek 
 Ancient Israelite 
 Ancient Roman 
 Antebellum America 
 Aztec 
 Byzantine 
 Early modern European 
 Historical Chinese 
 Historical Indian subcontinent 
 Historical North Indian and Pakistani 
 History of agriculture 
 History of alcoholic drinks 
 History of bread 
 History of seafood 
 History of vegetarianism 
 Historical Argentine 
 Historical Japanese 
 Inca 
 Mayan 
 Muisca 
 Mughal 
 Medieval 
 Ottoman 
 Peasant 
 Soviet 
 Thirteen Colonies 
 Styles 
 Classique 
 Fast food 
 Fusion 
 New American 
 Eurasian 
 Haute 
 Molecular gastronomy 
 Note by Note 
 Nouvelle 
 Lists 
 List of cuisines 
 List of historical cuisines 
 Lists of prepared foods 
 Related 
 Cookbook 
 Cooking 
 Culinary arts 
 Drink 
 Food 
 history 
 Diet 
 Meal preparation 
 
   Food portal 
   Drink portal 
   Category 
   Commons 
   Cookbook 
   WikiProject 
   Outline 
 
 v t e North American cuisine Sovereign states 
 Antigua and Barbuda 
 Bahamas 
 Barbados 
 Belize 
 Canada 
 Costa Rica 
 Cuba 
 Dominica 
 Dominican Republic 
 El Salvador 
 Grenada 
 Guatemala 
 Haiti 
 Honduras 
 Jamaica 
 Mexico 
 Nicaragua 
 Panama 
 Saint Kitts and Nevis 
 Saint Lucia 
 Saint Vincent and the Grenadines 
 Trinidad and Tobago 
 United States 
 Dependencies  and other territories 
 Anguilla 
 Aruba 
 Bermuda 
 Bonaire 
 British Virgin Islands 
 Cayman Islands 
 Curaçao 
 Greenland 
 Guadeloupe 
 Martinique 
 Montserrat 
 Puerto Rico 
 Saint Barthélemy 
 Saint Martin 
 Saint Pierre and Miquelon 
 Saba 
 Sint Eustatius 
 Sint Maarten 
 Turks and Caicos Islands 
 United States Virgin Islands 
 
 v t e Cuisine of the United States Historical 
 Cuisine of the Thirteen Colonies 
 Thanksgiving dinner 
 Regional General 
 List of regional dishes of the United States 
 List of regional beverages of the United States 
 Northeast 
 Mid-Atlantic 
 New Jersey 
 New York
 New York City 
 Pennsylvania
 Allentown 
 Philadelphia 
 New England 
 South 
 Appalachia 
 Floribbean 
 Kentucky 
 Louisiana
 Creole 
 New Orleans 
 Lowcountry 
 Texas 
 Barbecue in Texas 
 Tex-Mex 
 Midwest 
 Chicago 
 Cincinnati 
 Kansas City-style barbecue 
 Omaha 
 St. Louis 
 Wisconsin 
 West 
 California 
 Southwestern 
 New Mexican 
 Pacific Northwestern 
 Hawaii 
 Territories 
 Puerto Rico 
 Ethnic 
 Cajun 
 American Cambodian 
 American Chinese 
 Greek American 
 Soul food 
 Mexican 
 Native American 
 New Mexican (Neomexicano and Pueblo) 
 Pennsylvania Dutch 
 Italian American 
 Tejano 
 Tlingit 
 Filipino-American 
 American Jewish 
 List articles 
 American foods 
 American breads 
 American cheeses 
 American desserts 
 American regional and fusion cuisines 
 American sandwiches 
 American breakfast foods 
 Foods of the Southern United States 
 Soul foods and dishes 
 Miscellaneous 
 Barbecue 
 Christmas food 
 Fast food 
 Drinks 
 Sweet tea 
 Root beer 
 Coca-Cola 
 Egg cream 
 Milkshake 
 Shirley Temple 
 Italian soda 
 Pepsi 
 American tea culture 
   Category: American cuisine 
 v t e South American cuisine Sovereign states 
 Argentina 
 Bolivia 
 Brazil 
 Chile 
 Colombia 
 Ecuador 
 Guyana 
 Paraguay 
 Peru 
 Suriname 
 Uruguay 
 Venezuela 
 Dependencies  and other territories 
 Falkland Islands 
 French Guiana 
 South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands 
 
 v t e Latin America and the Caribbean Caribbean 
 Antigua and Barbuda 
 Aruba 
 Bahamas 
 Barbados 
 Cuba 
 Curaçao 
 Dominica 
 Dominican Republic 
 Grenada 
 Haiti 
 Jamaica 
 Puerto Rico 
 Saint Kitts and Nevis 
 Saint Lucia 
 Saint Vincent and the Grenadines 
 Sint Maarten 
 Trinidad and Tobago 
 Central America 
 Costa Rica 
 El Salvador 
 Guatemala 
 Honduras 
 Nicaragua 
 Panama 
 Middle America 
 Mexico 
 South America 
 Argentina 
 Bolivia 
 Brazil 
 Chile 
 Colombia 
 Ecuador 
 Paraguay 
 Peru 
 Uruguay 
 Venezuela 
 Dependencies  not included.      Semi-autonomous territories are in italics. 
  
NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw2286
Cached time: 20230311172902
Cache expiry: 1814400
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc, no‐toc‐conversion]
CPU time usage: 1.022 seconds
Real time usage: 1.273 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 12981/1000000
Post‐expand include size: 169048/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 6898/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 16/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 136396/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.458/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 20701593/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/400
 
 
Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  931.025      1 -total
 43.29%  403.042      1 Template:Reflist
 25.80%  240.169      6 Template:Navbox
 13.57%  126.318      6 Template:Citation
 11.93%  111.064      1 Template:In_lang
 10.91%  101.603      1 Template:Cuisine
  9.56%   88.991      1 Template:North_American_topic
  8.19%   76.281     35 Template:Iso2country
  6.66%   62.007      1 Template:Short_description
  6.41%   59.663      1 Template:Portal_bar
 
  Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:idhash:39488608-0!canonical and timestamp 20230311172901 and revision id 1105948277. Rendering was triggered because: api-parse
  
 esi <esi:include src="/esitest-fa8a495983347898/content" />  
 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=List_of_cuisines_of_the_Americas&oldid=1105948277 " 
 Categories :  Cuisine of the Americas Americas-related lists Cuisine by continent Food- and drink-related lists Hidden categories:  Webarchive template wayback links All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from December 2018 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with Spanish-language sources (es) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from January 2022 Region topic template using suffix 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  This page was last edited on 22 August 2022, at 14:13  (UTC) . 
 Text is available under the  Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0 ;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the  Terms of Use  and  Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the  Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. 
 
 
 Privacy policy 
 About Wikipedia 
 Disclaimers 
 Contact Wikipedia 
 Mobile view 
 Developers 
 Statistics 
 Cookie statement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
