
 
 
 Jump to content 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle sidebar 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Create account Log in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Personal tools 
 
 
 
 
   Create account   Log in 
 
 
 
 
		Pages for logged out editors  learn more 
 
 
 Contributions Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Navigation 
 
 
 Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate 
 
 
 
 
 Contribute 
 
 
 Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file 
 
 
 
 
 Tools 
 
 
 What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item 
 
 
 
 
 Print/export 
 
 
 Download as PDF Printable version 
 
 
 
 
 Languages 
 
 On this Wikipedia the language links are at the top of the page across from the article title.  Go to top . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CentralNotice  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Contents 
 move to sidebar 
 hide 
 
 
 
 
 (Top) 
 
 
 
 
 
 1 Central African cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 East African cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 North African cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4 Southern African cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5 West African cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6 By country 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 7 See also 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8 References 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 9 Further reading 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
						Toggle the table of contents
					 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle the table of contents 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 List of African cuisines 
 
 
 
 
 1 language 
 
 
 
 Français 
 Edit links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Article Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 English 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 More 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
 
 
 List of culinary traditions of Africa 
 This article or section should  specify the language  of its non-English content, using {{ lang }}, {{ transliteration }} for transliterated languages, and {{ IPA }} for phonetic transcriptions, with an appropriate  ISO 639 code . Wikipedia's  multilingual support templates  may also be used.   See why .   ( April 2021 ) 
 
 
 
 This is a  list of African cuisines . A  cuisine  is a characteristic style of  cooking  practices and traditions, [1]  often associated with a specific  culture . The various  cuisines of Africa  use a combination of locally available  fruits ,  cereal grains  and  vegetables , as well as  milk  and  meat  products. In some parts of the continent, the traditional diet features a preponderance of milk,  curd  and  whey  products. The continent's diverse demographic makeup is reflected in the many different eating and drinking habits, dishes, and preparation techniques of its manifold populations. [2] 
 
 
 Central African cuisine [ edit ] 
   Ndolé  is the national dish of  Cameroon . 
   Cossa cossa  is a popular dish in  Kisangani  in DRC. 
 Central Africa  stretches from the  Tibesti Mountains  in the north to the vast  rainforest  basin of the  Congo River , the highlands of Kivu and the savana of Katanga.
 This region has received culinary influence of the  Swahilis  (culture that evolved via the combination of Bantu, Yemeni, Omani and Indian cultures) during the  East African Slave Trade . Swahili culinary influences can be found in dishes such as  mandanzi ,  pilaf  rice,  kachumbari ,  sambsusa , and  kuku paka . [3] 
 Central African cuisine has also been influenced by the Portuguese, by way of the  Kongo  and  Ndongo  Kingdoms. Salt fish was introduced following trade in the late 17th century, and the Kikongo term for  salt fish ,  makayabu , comes from the term  bacalhau  (ba-cal-ha-u). [4] 
 The Portuguese culinary influence is especially prominent in Angola, Sao Tomé and Equatorial Guinea. Central Africa has also been influenced by the cuisine of the regions East, West and Southern Africa because of their close proximity, e.g.  babuté / bobotie  is shared with the south,  nyama choma  with the east and  gombos  with West Africa.
 
   Sakamadesu (Tshakamadesu) is a common dish from Congo made with cassave leaves 
 The main ingredients are  plantains ,  cassava , rice,  kwanga  (cassava dumpling) and yam.  Fufu -like starchy foods are usually made from fermented cassava roots, but they can also be made with plantain, corn maize and yam. Fufu is served buffet style with grilled meat, fish, stews, greens and  piment . A variety of local ingredients are used while preparing other dishes like  spinach  stew cooked with tomato, peppers, chillis, onions, and peanut butter. [5]  Eastern central Africa is also one of the few regions in Africa that uses potatoes as one of its main bases, since potatoes grow easily in the region.
 Cassava plants are also consumed as cooked  greens . Groundnut (peanut) stew is also prepared, containing  chicken ,  okra ,  ginger , and other spices. Beef and chicken are favorite meat dishes, but  game meat  preparations containing  crocodile ,  elephant ,  antelope  and  warthog  are also served occasionally. [6] [7] [8] [9] [10]  Another favorite is  bambara , a  porridge  of rice, peanut butter and sugar.  [11]  A  jomba  is the bundling of foods in fresh green plantain leaves and then cooking them over hot coals or fire. [12] 
 
 Cameroonian cuisine  is one of the most varied in Africa due to its location on the crossroads between the north, west, and center of the continent; added to this is the profound influence of French food, a legacy of the colonial era. 
 Congolese cuisine  (Democratic Republic of the Congo) is one of the most diverse cuisines of the continent since it sits between east and southern Africa and received  culinary influence from the Portuguese and Middle Eastern and Indian influences via the Swahili.  Moambé chicken  is the national dish. 
 Centrafrican cuisine  in the  Central African Republic  includes Middle Eastern and French influences. 
 East African cuisine [ edit ] 
   Injera  bread and several kinds of  wat  (stew) are typical of  Ethiopian  and  Eritrean  cuisine. 
 East African cuisine : East Africa is the eastern region of the African continent, variably defined by  geography  or  geopolitics . In the  UN scheme of geographic regions , 19 territories constitute Eastern Africa: [13]  This is a vast region with many diverse cuisines. 
 Burundian cuisine  -  Burundi  is situated in Eastern Africa and has a territory full of mountains,  savannas  and agricultural fields, with forests in the surrounding of rivers and waters. Agriculture is spread on 80% of the country's surface and it especially includes coffee, tea,  corn , beans and  manioc . 
 Eritrean cuisine  is a  fusion  of  Eritrea 's native culinary traditions, and the area's long history of trade and social interchanges with other regions and cultures. 
 Ethiopian cuisine  and Eritrean cuisine characteristically consist of spicy vegetable and meat dishes, usually in the form of  wat  (or  wot ), a thick stew, served atop  injera , a large  sourdough   flatbread , [14]  which is about 50 centimetres (20 inches) in diameter and made out of fermented  teff  flour. [14]   Ethiopians  eat with their right hands, using pieces of  injera  to pick up bites of entrées and side dishes. [14]  Utensils are rarely used with this dish. 
 Kenyan cuisine  - There is no singular dish that represents all of Kenya. Different communities have their own native foods. Staples are maize and other cereals depending on the region including millet and sorghum eaten with various meats and vegetables. The foods that are universally eaten in Kenya are  ugali ,  sukuma wiki , and  nyama choma . 
 Somali cuisine  varies from region to region and is a  fusion  of native  Somali  culinary traditions with influences from  Yemeni ,  Persian ,  Indian  and  Italian  cuisines. 
 Tanzanian cuisine  - Along the coastal regions ( Dar es Salaam ,  Tanga ,  Bagamoyo ,  Zanzibar  and Pemba), spicy foods are common, and there is also much use of coconut milk. Regions in Tanzania's mainland also have their own unique foods. 
 Ugandan cuisine  consists of traditional and modern cooking styles, practices, foods and dishes in  Uganda , with English,  Arab , Asian and especially Indian influences. Like the cuisines of most countries, it varies in complexity, from the most basic, a  starchy  filler with a sauce of beans or meat, to several-course meals served in upper-class homes and high-end restaurants. 
 Maasai cuisine  - The staple diet of the Maasai consists of cow's milk and maize meal. The cuisine also consists of soups from plants and fruits.  More recently, the Maasai have grown dependent on food produced in other areas such as maize meal, rice, potatoes, and cabbage (known to the Maasai as "goat leaves"). 
 North African cuisine [ edit ] 
   Nile perch  are one of the world's largest  freshwater fish  and a significant food source. [15]  It reaches a maximum length of over six feet, weighing up to 440  lbs , [16]  although many fish are caught before growing this large. [17]  It is widespread throughout much of the  Afrotropical realm . 
 North African cuisine  includes cuisines from regions along the Mediterranean Sea, [18]  inland areas and includes several nations, including  Algeria ,  Egypt ,  Libya ,  Morocco , and  Tunisia .  In North African cuisine, the most common staple foods are meat, seafood, goat,  lamb , beef,  dates ,  almonds ,  olives , various vegetables and fruit.   Because the region is predominantly Muslim,  halal  meats are usually eaten. The best-known North African/Berber dishes abroad are surely  couscous  and  tajine . [19] 
 Algerian cuisine  is a distinct fusion of  Berber ,  Arab ,  Ottoman  and  French cuisines . 
 Algerian wine 
 Egyptian cuisine  consists of the local culinary traditions of  Egypt . Egyptian cuisine makes heavy use of  legumes  and vegetables, as Egypt's rich  Nile Valley  and  Delta  produce large quantities of high-quality crops. 
 Egyptian wine 
 Libyan cuisine  is the cooking traditions, practices, foods and dishes associated with the country of  Libya . The cuisine derives much from the  culinary traditions of the Mediterranean  and  North Africa , with an  Italian  influence, a legacy from the days when  Libya  was an Italian colony. 
 Moroccan cuisine  is extremely diverse, thanks to  Morocco 's interaction with other cultures and nations over the centuries. Moroccan cuisine has been subject to  Berber ,  Moorish ,  Mediterranean , and Middle Eastern influences. The cooks in the royal kitchens of  Fez ,  Meknes ,  Marrakesh ,  Rabat  and  Tetouan  refined it over the centuries and created the basis for what is known as Moroccan cuisine today. 
 Moroccan wine 
 Sudanese cuisine  varies by region and has been influenced by the cross-cultural influences upon Sudan throughout history. In addition to the indigenous African peoples, the cuisine was influenced by Arab traders and settlers during the  Ottoman Empire , who introduced spices such as  red pepper  and  garlic . 
 Tunisian cuisine  is the cuisine of  Tunisia , a blend of  Mediterranean  and desert dwellers' culinary traditions. Its distinctive spicy fieriness comes from neighboring Mediterranean countries and the many civilizations which have ruled the land now known as Tunisia:  Phoenicians ,  Romans ,  Arabs , Ottoman Empire, French, and the native  Berber people . 
 Southern African cuisine [ edit ] 
 South African cuisine  is sometimes referred to as "rainbow cuisine" [20]  because it is based on multicultural and various indigenous cuisines.  Curried  dishes are popular with lemon juice in South Africa among people of all ethnic origins; many dishes came to the country with the thousands of  Indian  laborers brought to South Africa in the nineteenth century. South African cuisine can be defined as cookery practiced by  indigenous people  of South Africa such as the  Khoisan  and  Xhosa ,  Zulu - and  Sotho -speaking people, and settler cookery that emerged from several waves of immigration introduced during the colonial period by people of Indian and  Afrikaner  and British descent and their slaves and servants. 
 Botswana cuisine  is unique but also shares some characteristics with other cuisine of  Southern Africa . Examples of  Botswana  food include  pap ,  samp ,  vetkoek  and  mopane worms . A food unique to Botswana includes  seswaa , heavily  salted  mashed-up meat. 
 Malagasy cuisine  is the cuisine of the island country of  Madagascar , located in the Indian Ocean off the south-eastern coast of Africa. Malagasy are mostly of Malayan Polynesian, along with African, Arab, Indian and European descent. [21]  Rice is a common staple food, and fruits and vegetables are prominent in the cuisine.  Pineapples ,  mangoes ,  peaches , grapes,  avocados  and  lychee  are grown on the island. [21]  Meats include chicken, beef and fish, and curry dishes are common. [21]  A common food is  laoka , a mixture of cooked foods served with rice. Laoka are most often served in some kind of sauce: in the highlands, this sauce is generally tomato-based, while in coastal areas coconut milk is often added during cooking. [22] 
 Malagasy cuisine : Two common  Madagascan   laokas : bambara groundnut and pork (left) and potato leaves with dried shrimp (center), usually served atop rice. On the right are bottles of lemon and mango sauces ( achards ), which are common in the northwestern coastal regions of Madagascar. [23] 
 Mauritian cuisine 
 Namibian cuisine  is the cuisine of  Namibia . It is influenced by the cookery practiced by  indigenous people  of Namibia and settler cookery introduced during the  colonial  period by people of German,  Afrikaner  and British descent. 
 Namibian wine 
 South African cuisine  is sometimes called "rainbow cuisine", as it has had a variety of multicultural sources and stages. Influences include indigenous practices and settler cookery that immigrants practiced. Their staple food is  pap  this is made using cornmeal and boiled water, South Africans also enjoy this dish served with  braai  meat. This is usually served at social gatherings. 
 South African wine 
 Western Cape wine 
 Zimbabwean cuisine  - Like in many African countries, the majority of Zimbabweans depend on a few staple foods. "mealie meal", also known as  cornmeal , is used to prepare  sadza  or  isitshwala  and  porridge  known as  bota  or  ilambazi . Zimbabwean cuisine also includes fruits and vegetables such as imbhida also known as African kale. Corn is also used to make dishes such as  umxhanxa,  which is made using boiled pumpkin and corn. 
 West African cuisine [ edit ] 
   Yassa  is a popular dish throughout West Africa prepared with chicken or  fish . Chicken  yassa  is pictured. 
 West African cuisine  refers to many distinct regional and ethnic cuisines in West African nations, a large geographic area with climates ranging from desert to tropical. [24]  Some of the region's indigenous plants, such as  Hausa groundnuts ,  pigeon peas  and  cowpeas , provide dietary protein for both people and livestock. [25]  Many significant spices, stimulants and medicinal herbs originated in the evergreen and deciduous forests of Western Africa. [25]  Ancient Africans domesticated the  kola nut  and coffee, now used globally in beverages. [25] 
 Burkinabe cuisine  is the cuisine of  Burkina Faso . It is similar to the cuisines in many parts of  West Africa , and is based around  staple foods  of  sorghum ,  millet , rice, maize,  peanuts ,  potatoes ,  beans ,  yams  and  okra . [26]  Grilled meat is common, particularly  mutton ,  goat ,  beef  and fish. [27] 
 Ghanaian cuisine  is the cuisine of  Ghana . There are diverse traditional dishes. Foods also vary according to the season, time of the day and occasion. 
 Ivorian cuisine  is the traditional cuisine of  Côte d'Ivoire , or the Ivory Coast, and is based on  tubers ,  grains , chicken, seafood, fish, fresh fruits, vegetables and spices and is very similar to that of neighboring countries in west Africa. Common staple foods include grains and tubers. Côte d'Ivoire is one of the largest  cocoa  producers in the world, and also produces  palm oil  and  coffee . 
 Nigerian cuisine  - Like other  West African cuisines , it uses  spices  and  herbs  in conjunction with  palm oil  or  groundnut oil  to create deeply flavored sauces and soups often made very hot with  chili peppers . Nigerian feasts are colorful and lavish, while aromatic market and roadside snacks cooked on barbecues or fried in oil are plentiful and varied. [28] 
 Sierra Leonean cuisine  refers to the cuisine and eating styles found in  the Republic of Sierra Leone , a country in  West Africa . Sierra Leonean cuisine includes  cassava bread , fried fish, and  okra  soup. 
 Senegalese cuisine  has been influenced by nations like France, Portugal, and those of North Africa, and also by many ethnic groups, the largest being the  Wolof ; Islam, which first penetrated the region in the 11th century; and various European cultures, especially the French, who held the country as a colony until 1960. 
 
 African foods and dishes 
 
 
 
 Traditional South African cuisine
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ndolé  is the national dish of  Cameroon .
 
 
 
 
 
 
 A woman carrying bananas in the  Democratic Republic of the Congo 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Central market of Léo,  Burkina Faso 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Okra soup, Cameroon
 
 
 
 
 By country [ edit ] 
   Spices at central market in  Agadir , Morocco 
   A map of Africa 
 North African cuisine 
 Algerian cuisine 
 Egyptian cuisine 
 Libyan cuisine 
 Mauritanian cuisine 
 Moroccan cuisine 
 Sudanese cuisine 
 Tunisian cuisine 
 Western Saharan cuisine 
 East African cuisine 
 Burundian cuisine 
 Djiboutian cuisine 
 Ethiopian cuisine 
 Eritrean cuisine 
 Kenyan cuisine 
 Rwandan cuisine  is based on local staple foods produced by the traditional  subsistence-level agriculture  and has historically varied between the country's different ethnic groups. [29] 
 Somali cuisine 
 South Sudanese cuisine 
 Tanzanian cuisine 
 Zanzibari cuisine 
 Ugandan cuisine 
 Central African cuisine 
 Angolan cuisine  is the cuisine of  Angola , a country in south-central Africa. Because Angola was a  Portuguese colony  for centuries,  Portuguese cuisine  has significantly influenced Angolan cuisine, with many foods imported into Angola by the Portuguese. [30] 
 Cameroonian cuisine 
 Centrafrican cuisine  is the cooking traditions, practices, foods and dishes associated with the  Central African Republic . The diet is heavy on staple starches such as millet and sorghum, and utilizes a significant amount of  vegetables  and  sauces . [31] 
 Chadian cuisine  is the cooking traditions, practices, foods and dishes associated with the  Republic of Chad . Chadians utilize a variety of grains, vegetables, fruits and meats. Commonly consumed grains include millet, sorghum and rice as staple foods. 
 Democratic Republic of the Congo cuisine 
 The Republic of the Congo cuisine 
 Equatorial Guinean cuisine 
 Gabonese cuisine  is the cooking traditions, practices, foods and dishes associated with the sovereign state of  Gabon . French cuisine is prevalent as a notable influence, and in larger cities various French specialties are available. [32]  In rural areas, food staples such as cassava, rice and yams are commonly used. [31] [33] 
 São Tomé and Príncipe cuisine 
 Southern African cuisine 
 Botswana cuisine 
 Comoros cuisine [ clarification needed ] 
 Cuisine of Lesotho 
 Malagasy cuisine  encompasses the many diverse culinary traditions of the Indian Ocean island of  Madagascar . 
 Cuisine of Malawi 
 Mauritian cuisine 
 Mozambique cuisine  - Present for nearly 500 years, the Portuguese greatly impacted the cuisine of Mozambique. Crops such as cassava (a starchy root) and cashew nuts (Mozambique was once the largest producer of these nuts), and pãozinho (pronounced pow-zing-yo; Portuguese-style bread rolls) were brought in by the Portuguese. 
 Namibian cuisine 
 Seychellois cuisine 
 South African cuisine 
 Eswatini cuisine  is largely determined by the  seasons  and the  geographical region . Staple foods in Eswatini include sorghum and maize, [34]  often served with goat meat, a very popular livestock there. [35] 
 Zambian cuisine  - The Zambian staple diet is based on maize. It is normally eaten as a thick porridge, called  nshima  (Nyanja word), prepared from maize flour commonly known as  mealie meal . This may be eaten with a variety of vegetables, beans, meat, fish or sour milk depending on geographical location/origin. 
 Zimbabwean cuisine 
 West African cuisine 
 Benin cuisine  is known in Africa for its and exotic ingredients and flavorful dishes. Beninese cuisine involves many fresh meals served with a variety of sauces. Meat is usually quite expensive, and meals are generally light on meat and generous on  vegetable fat . 
 Burkinabé cuisine 
 Cape Verde cuisine  - The Cape Verde diet is mostly based on fish and staple foods like corn and rice. Vegetables available during most of the year are potatoes,  onions ,  tomatoes ,  manioc ,  cabbage ,  kale , and dried beans. Fruits such as  banana  and  papayas  are available year-round, while others like  mangos  and  avocados  are seasonal. 
 The  Cuisine of Niger  reflects many traditional African cuisines, and a significant amount of  spices  are used in dishes. Grilled meats, seasonal vegetables, salads and various sauces are some of the foods consumed. 
 Gambian cuisine 
 Ghanaian cuisine 
 Guinean cuisine 
 Guinea-Bissauan cuisine 
 Ivorian cuisine 
 Liberian cuisine 
 Mali cuisine 
 Nigerian cuisine 
 Senegalese cuisine 
 Sierra Leone cuisine 
 Togolese cuisine  is the cuisine of the  Togolese Republic , a country in  Western Africa . It is often a combination of African,  French  and  German cuisines . [36]  The cuisine has many sauces and  pâtés , many of which are made from  eggplant , tomato,  spinach  and fish. 
 See also [ edit ] 
 List of African dishes 
 List of cuisines 
 Canarian cuisine 
 Portals :   Africa   Food   Drink   Society   Wine   Lists 
 References [ edit ] 
 
 
 ^   "Cuisine."   Thefreedictionary.com . Accessed June 2011. 
 
 ^   Bea Sandler (1993).  The African Cookbook . Diane and Leo Dillon (Illust.). Carol Publishing Group.  ISBN   0-8065-1398-5 . Archived from  the original  on 16 December 2008 . Retrieved  18 December  2008 . 
 
 ^   Coquery-Vidrovitch, Catherine; Mésnard, Éric (2013).  L'esclavage intégré en Afrique (fin du xviiie-xixe siècle) . Cahiers Libres. 
 
 ^   Thronton, John (1981). "Early Kongo-Portuguese Relations: A New Interpretation".  History in Africa .  VIII  (I): 22. 
 
 ^   Newton, A. (1994).  Central Africa: a travel survival kit . Lonely Planet travel survival kit. Lonely Planet. p. 77.  ISBN   978-0-86442-138-8 . Retrieved  30 November  2017 . 
 
 ^   Huchzermeyer, F.W. (2003).  Crocodiles: Biology, Husbandry and Diseases . CABI. p. 130.  ISBN   978-0-85199-798-8 . Retrieved  30 November  2017 . 
 
 ^   Elephant meat trade in Central Africa : Republic of Congo case study . Iucn. p. 36.  ISBN   978-2-8317-1419-6 . Retrieved  30 November  2017 . 
 
 ^   Stiles, D. (2011).  Elephant Meat Trade in Central Africa: Summary Report . IUCN. p. 25.  ISBN   978-2-8317-1393-9 . Retrieved  30 November  2017 . 
 
 ^   Whitford, J. (1877).  Trading Life in Western and Central Africa . "Porcupine" Office. p. 212 . Retrieved  30 November  2017 . 
 
 ^   Gibbons, A.S.H. (1898).  Exploration and Hunting in Central Africa 1895-96 . Methuen & Company. p. 223 . Retrieved  30 November  2017 . 
 
 ^   "Food in Africa."   World-food-and-wine.com . Accessed July 2011. 
 
 ^   Robert, Nassau Hamill (1904).  "Fetichism in West Africa: Forty Years' Observation of Native Customs and Superstitions."   Congocookbook.com . Accessed July 2011. 
 
 ^   United Nations Statistics Division – Standard Country and Area Codes Classifications 
 
 ^  a   b   c   Javins, Marie.  "Eating and Drinking in Ethiopia."   Archived  31 January 2013 at the  Wayback Machine   Gonomad.com . Accessed July 2011. 
 
 ^   "Nile Perch."   Aquaticcommunity.com . Accessed July 2011. 
 
 ^   Kaufman, Les . "Catastrophic Change in Species-Rich Freshwater Ecosystems: The lessons of Lake Victoria".  BioScience .  42  (11).  doi : 10.2307/1312084 .  JSTOR   1312084 . 
 
 ^   Wood (1983).  The Guinness Book of Animal Facts and Feats . Sterling Pub Co Inc.  ISBN   978-0-85112-235-9 . 
 
 ^   "Northern Africa."   Foodspring.com . Accessed June 2011. 
 
 ^   Mourad, Mazouz.  "The Momo Cookbook."   Archived  19 September 2011 at the  Wayback Machine   The Globalist . Accessed June 2011. 
 
 ^   "Rainbow Cuisine in South Africa."   Road Travel – Travel Group . Accessed July 2011. 
 
 ^  a   b   c   "Madagascar."   Archived  4 May 2011 at the  Wayback Machine   African Studies Center, University of Pennsylvania . Accessed July 2011. 
 
 ^   Bradt, Hilary (2011).  Madagascar  (10th ed.). Guilford, Connecticut: The Globe Pequot Press Inc. pp. 12–14.  ISBN   978-1-84162-341-2 . 
 
 ^   Espagne-Ravo, Angéline (1997).  Ma Cuisine Malgache: Karibo Sakafo  (in French). Paris: Edisud.  ISBN   2-85744-946-1 . 
 
 ^   "Africa Climate."   Backpack Traveller . Accessed July 2011. 
 
 ^  a   b   c   "Food and the African Past."   Archived  10 October 2012 at the  Wayback Machine   Ucpress.edu . p. 14. 
 
 ^   "Oxfam's Cool Planet - Food in Burkina Faso" .  Oxfam . Archived from  the original  on 17 May 2012 . Retrieved  21 May  2008 . 
 
 ^   Marchais, p. 99 
 
 ^   H.O. Anthonio & M. Isoun: "Nigerian Cookbook." Macmillan, Lagos, 1982. 
 
 ^   Adekunle, p.81 
 
 ^   Adebayo Oyebade,  Culture and Customs of Angola  (2007). Greenwood, p. 109. 
 
 ^  a   b   "Foodspring® - finest fitness food" . Archived from the original on 16 August 2011 . Retrieved  17 June  2011 . {{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown ( link ) 
 
 ^   "Foodspring® - finest fitness food" . Archived from the original on 16 August 2011 . Retrieved  29 November  2017 . {{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown ( link ) . 
 
 ^   "Gabon."   Archived  15 October 2011 at the  Wayback Machine   Worldtraveltips.net . Accessed June 2011. 
 
 ^   "Food habits of rural Swazi households"   (PDF) . Archived from  the original   (PDF)  on 6 June 2011. 
 
 ^   "Swaziland Food and Drink" . Archived from  the original  on 19 September 2008. 
 
 ^   "Sharing the Secrets of Togo's Cuisine."   Madison.com . Accessed July 2011. 
 
 
 Further reading [ edit ] 
 Adekunle, Julius (2007).  Culture and Customs of Rwanda .  Greenwood Publishing Group .  ISBN   978-0-313-33177-0 . 
 v t e Cuisines Continental 
 African 
 North 
 West 
 list 
 Americas 
 Caribbean 
 North 
 South 
 list 
 Asian 
 Caucasian 
 Central 
 Indian subcontinent 
 Levantine 
 list 
 European 
 Balkan 
 Central 
 Eastern 
 list 
 Oceanic 
 Intercontinental
 Global 
 Latin American 
 Mediterranean 
 Middle Eastern 
 National  and regional 
 Afghan 
 Albanian 
 Algerian 
 American 
 Californian 
 Floribbean 
 Hawaiian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Lowcountry (South Carolina) 
 New England 
 New Mexico 
 Pacific Northwest 
 Pennsylvania Dutch 
 Puerto Rican 
 Southern US 
 Southwest US 
 Texas 
 Angolan 
 Argentine 
 Armenian 
 Australian 
 Austrian 
 Azerbaijani 
 Bahraini 
 Bangladeshi 
 Barbadian 
 Belarusian 
 Belgian 
 Belizean 
 Beninese 
 Bhutanese 
 Bolivian 
 Bosnian-Herzegovinian 
 Botswana 
 Brazilian 
 British 
 Channel Islands 
 English 
 Gibraltarian 
 Northern Irish 
 Saint Helena 
 Scottish 
 Welsh 
 Bruneian 
 Bulgarian 
 Burkinabé 
 Burmese 
 Burundian 
 Cambodian 
 Cameroonian 
 Canadian 
 Acadian 
 Québécois 
 Central African Republic 
 Chadian 
 Chilean 
 Chinese 
 Cantonese 
 Hong Kong 
 Macanese 
 Tibetan 
 Xinjiang 
 Colombian 
 Congolese 
 Corsican 
 Croatian 
 Cuban 
 Cypriot 
 Czech 
 Danish 
 Faroese 
 Greenlandic 
 Djiboutian 
 Dominican 
 Dominican Republic 
 Dutch 
 East Timorese 
 Ecuadorian 
 Egyptian 
 Emirati 
 Equatorial Guinean 
 Eritrean 
 Estonian 
 Ethiopian 
 Fijian 
 Filipino 
 Finnish 
 French 
 Occitan 
 French Guianan 
 Gabonese 
 Gambian 
 Georgian 
 German 
 Ghanaian 
 Greek 
 Cretan 
 Epirotic 
 Greek Macedonian 
 Heptanesean 
 Guatemalan 
 Guinea-Bissauan 
 Guinean 
 Haitian 
 Honduran 
 Hungarian 
 Icelandic 
 Indian 
 Arunachalese 
 Assamese 
 Bengali 
 Bihari 
 Goan 
 Gujarati 
 Himachal Pradesh 
 Kashmiri 
 Jharkhandi 
 Karnataka 
 Kerala 
 Maharashtrian 
 Manipuri 
 Meghalayan 
 Mizo 
 Naga 
 Odia 
 Punjabi 
 Rajasthani 
 Sikkimese 
 Sindhi 
 Tamil 
 Telangana 
 Telugu 
 Indonesian 
 Acehnese 
 Balinese 
 Banjar 
 Batak 
 Betawi 
 Indo 
 Javanese 
 Madurese 
 Makassar 
 Minahasan 
 Minangkabau 
 Palembangese 
 Sundanese 
 Iranian 
 Iraqi 
 Irish 
 Israeli 
 Italian 
 Abruzzese 
 Ligurian 
 Lombard 
 Lucanian 
 Neapolitan 
 Roman 
 Sardinian 
 Sicilian 
 Venetian 
 Ivorian 
 Jamaican 
 Japanese 
 Okinawan 
 Jordanian 
 Kazakh 
 Kenyan 
 Korean 
 North Korean 
 South Korean 
 Kosovan 
 Kuwaiti 
 Kyrgyz 
 Lao 
 Latvian 
 Lebanese 
 Lesotho 
 Liberian 
 Libyan 
 Liechtensteiner 
 Lithuanian 
 Luxembourg 
 Macedonian 
 Malagasy 
 Malawian 
 Malaysian 
 Sabahan 
 Sarawakian 
 Maldivian 
 Malian 
 Maltese 
 Mauritanian 
 Mauritian 
 Mexican 
 Moldovan 
 Monégasque 
 Mongolian 
 Montenegrin 
 Moroccan 
 Mozambican 
 Namibian 
 Nauruan 
 Nepalese 
 New Zealand 
 Nicaraguan 
 Niger 
 Nigerian 
 Niuean 
 Norwegian 
 Omani 
 Pakistani 
 Palestinian 
 Panamanian 
 Peruvian 
 Polish 
 Portuguese 
 Qatari 
 Romanian  (incl.  Transylvanian Saxon ) 
 Russian 
 Bashkir 
 Chechen 
 Circassian 
 Komi 
 Mordovian 
 Sakha 
 Tatar 
 Udmurt 
 Yamal 
 Rwandan 
 Saint Lucian 
 Salvadoran 
 Sammarinese 
 São Tomé and Príncipe 
 Saudi Arabian 
 Senegalese 
 Serbian 
 Seychellois 
 Sierra Leonean 
 Singaporean 
 Slovak 
 Slovenian 
 Somali 
 South African 
 Spanish 
 Andalusian 
 Asturian 
 Balearic 
 Basque 
 Canarian 
 Cantabrian 
 Catalan 
 Extremaduran 
 Galician 
 Manchegan 
 Valencian 
 Sri Lankan 
 Sudanese 
 Swazi 
 Swedish 
 Swiss 
 Syrian 
 Taiwanese 
 Tajik 
 Tanzanian 
 Zanzibari 
 Thai 
 Togolese 
 Tunisian 
 Turkish 
 Turkmen 
 Trinidadian and Tobagonian 
 Ugandan 
 Ukrainian 
 Uruguayan 
 Uzbek 
 Venezuelan 
 Vietnamese 
 Western Saharan 
 Yemeni 
 Zambian 
 Zimbabwean 
 Ethnic 
 Ainu 
 Arab 
 Indonesian 
 Aromanian 
 Assyrian 
 Balochi 
 Berber 
 Cajun 
 Chinese 
 American 
 Canadian 
 Chifa 
 Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Crimean Tatar 
 Greek American 
 Hazaragi 
 Indian 
 Anglo-Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Indigenous American 
 Inuit 
 Italian American 
 Kurdish 
 Livonian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Malay 
 Ossetian 
 Parsi 
 Pashtun 
 Peranakan 
 Romani 
 Sámi 
 Soul food 
 Sylheti 
 Transylvanian Saxon 
 Yup'ik 
 Religious 
 Buddhist 
 Christian 
 Goan Catholic 
 Mangalorean Catholic 
 Mennonite 
 Hindu 
 Islamic 
 Chinese 
 Ital 
 Jain 
 Jewish 
 American 
 Ashkenazi 
 Bukharan 
 Ethiopian 
 Mizrahi 
 Sephardic 
 Syrian 
 Ritual slaughter 
 Sikh 
 Historical 
 Ancient Egyptian 
 Ancient Greek 
 Ancient Israelite 
 Ancient Roman 
 Antebellum America 
 Aztec 
 Byzantine 
 Early modern European 
 Historical Chinese 
 Historical Indian subcontinent 
 Historical North Indian and Pakistani 
 History of agriculture 
 History of alcoholic drinks 
 History of bread 
 History of seafood 
 History of vegetarianism 
 Historical Argentine 
 Historical Japanese 
 Inca 
 Mayan 
 Muisca 
 Mughal 
 Medieval 
 Ottoman 
 Peasant 
 Soviet 
 Thirteen Colonies 
 Styles 
 Classique 
 Fast food 
 Fusion 
 New American 
 Eurasian 
 Haute 
 Molecular gastronomy 
 Note by Note 
 Nouvelle 
 Lists 
 List of cuisines 
 List of historical cuisines 
 Lists of prepared foods 
 Related 
 Cookbook 
 Cooking 
 Culinary arts 
 Drink 
 Food 
 history 
 Diet 
 Meal preparation 
 
   Food portal 
   Drink portal 
   Category 
   Commons 
   Cookbook 
   WikiProject 
   Outline 
 
 v t e African cuisine National cuisines 
 Algeria 
 Angola 
 Benin 
 Botswana 
 Burkina Faso 
 Burundi 
 Cameroon 
 Cape Verde 
 Central African Republic 
 Chad 
 Comoros 
 Democratic Republic of the Congo 
 Djibouti 
 Egypt 
 Equatorial Guinea 
 Eritrea 
 Eswatini (Swaziland) 
 Ethiopia 
 Gabon 
 Gambia 
 Ghana 
 Guinea 
 Guinea-Bissau 
 Ivory Coast 
 Kenya 
 Lesotho 
 Liberia 
 Libya 
 Madagascar 
 Malawi 
 Mali 
 Mauritania 
 Mauritius 
 Morocco 
 Mozambique 
 Namibia 
 Niger 
 Nigeria 
 Republic of the Congo 
 Rwanda 
 Saint Helena 
 São Tomé and Príncipe 
 Senegal 
 Seychelles 
 Sierra Leone 
 Somalia 
 South Africa 
 South Sudan 
 Sudan 
 Tanzania 
 Togo 
 Tunisia 
 Uganda 
 Western Sahara 
 Zambia 
 Zimbabwe 
 Ethnic and regional cuisines 
 Arab 
 Berber 
 Jewish 
 Ethiopian 
 Mizrahi 
 Sephardi 
 Mediterranean 
 North African 
 West African 
 Zanzibar 
 Lists 
 List of African cuisines 
 List of African dishes 
 
   Category 
 
  
NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw2326
Cached time: 20230311173335
Cache expiry: 1814400
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc, no‐toc‐conversion]
CPU time usage: 0.616 seconds
Real time usage: 0.790 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2179/1000000
Post‐expand include size: 115179/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1236/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 9/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 88263/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.301/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 9791609/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/400
 
 
Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  555.702      1 -total
 33.53%  186.312      1 Template:Reflist
 20.01%  111.194     12 Template:Cite_book
 17.78%   98.807      2 Template:Navbox
 17.74%   98.595      1 Template:Cuisine
  9.79%   54.410      1 Template:Short_description
  9.01%   50.066      1 Template:Cleanup_lang
  8.73%   48.526      1 Template:Subject_bar
  8.30%   46.123      1 Template:Ambox
  5.25%   29.192      2 Template:Pagetype
 
  Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:idhash:39488286-0!canonical and timestamp 20230311173334 and revision id 1120955604. Rendering was triggered because: api-parse
  
 esi <esi:include src="/esitest-fa8a495983347898/content" />  
 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=List_of_African_cuisines&oldid=1120955604 " 
 Categories :  African cuisine Africa-related lists Cuisine by continent Food- and drink-related lists Hidden categories:  Webarchive template wayback links CS1 French-language sources (fr) CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages with non-English text lacking appropriate markup and no ISO hint Pages with non-English text lacking appropriate markup from April 2021 Use dmy dates from September 2022 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from March 2021 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  This page was last edited on 9 November 2022, at 18:50  (UTC) . 
 Text is available under the  Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0 ;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the  Terms of Use  and  Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the  Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. 
 
 
 Privacy policy 
 About Wikipedia 
 Disclaimers 
 Contact Wikipedia 
 Mobile view 
 Developers 
 Statistics 
 Cookie statement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
