
 This is a list of Asian cuisines, by region. A cuisine is a characteristic style of cooking practices and traditions,[1] usually associated with a specific culture or region. Asia, being the largest, most populous and culturally diverse continent, has a great diversity of cuisines associated with its different regions.
 Horse meat platter. Kazakh cuisine revolves around mutton, horse meat and various milk products.
 A Tajik feast
 Sturgeon kebabs cooking in Turkmenistan
 Uzbek manti
 East Asian cuisine has evolved with common usage of oils, fats and sauces in the preparation of dishes.
 Due to Guangdong's location on the southern coast of China, fresh live seafood is a specialty in Cantonese cuisine.
 Sichuan cuisine – A Chengdu-style, hot-pot stew.
 Khorkhog, a barbecue dish consumed in Mongolia
 Many flavors of Taiwanese sausages are sold by night market vendors.
 South Asian cuisine includes the cuisines from the Indian subcontinent and when included in the definition, also that of Afghanistan. It has roots in South Asia, including practices taken from the Hindu beliefs practiced by the large population found in the region, alongside in some regional cuisines, certain influences from neighboring regions and cultures, particularly from Muslim cultures of the Middle East and Central Asia. Dishes in this area of the world are known for their use of hot peppers, black pepper, cloves, and other strong spices along with the flavored butter ghee. Common meats include lamb, goat and chicken; beef is not as common as in western cuisines because the tenets of the Hindu faith prohibit its consumption. Other staples of many of the cuisines include rice, chapati made from wheat and barley, and beans.[21] The cuisine of South Asia has mostly indigenous roots, as well as influences practices taken from foreign origin empires.
 Naan, a type of flat bread from the former regions, is a common part of meals in many parts of South Asia.
 Some of the popular Afghan dishes, from left to right: 1. Lamb grilled kebab (seekh kabab); 2. Kabuli palaw and salad; 3. Tandoori chicken; and 4. Mantu (dumplings).
 Traditional Bangladeshi meal: mustard seed ilish curry, Dhakai biryani and pitha; similar to East Indian cuisine.
 South Indian style vegetarian thali.
 North Indian style vegetarian thali.
 Pork vindaloo is a popular curry dish from the Indian state of Goa and around the world.
 Southeast Asian cuisine emphasizes lightly prepared dishes with strong aromas, featuring such flavors as lemongrass, fermented fish sauce and pastes, and ginger.[34] Ingredients in the region contrast with the ones in the Eastern Asian cuisines, substituting fish sauces for soy sauce and including such ingredients as galangal, tamarind and lemongrass. Cooking methods include stir frying, boiling and steaming.[21]
 Cambodian Samlar kako
 Personal serving of Nasi Bali, in Indonesia, rice surrounded by numbers of side dishes including sate lilit.
 Thai Kaeng phet pet yang: roast duck in red curry.
 Philippine adobo is a popular Filipino dish and cooking process in Filipino cuisine.
 Malaysian nasi lemak, is served with anchovies, peanuts, boiled egg, lamb curry, cucumber, and sambal.
 Food stall in Chiang Mai, Thailand selling ready-cooked food.
 Bò 7 món (literally "seven courses of beef" in Vietnamese) is a set selection of beef dishes in Vietnamese cuisine.
 Kabsa is a traditional Yemeni dish.
 Hummus with pine nuts at the Maxim restaurant in Haifa, Israel.
 Syrians are renowned for producing dried apricot paste
 Chicken Fesenjān with Persian rice, an Iranian dish
 Fatayer is a meat pie or pastry that can alternatively be stuffed with spinach (sabaneq), or cheese (jibnah). It is eaten in Turkey, Syria, Lebanon, Jordan and other countries in West Asia.
 Fahsa is a famous Yemeni dish, containing beef or lamb meat cooked in a stony pot called Madara.
 Falafel balls
 Doner kebab, Istanbul, Turkey
 Adjarian Khachapuri from Georgia
 Armenian Ghapama made with butternut squash, instead of pumpkin
 Light snacks of Azerbaijani cuisine
