
 
 
 Jump to content 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle sidebar 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Create account Log in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Personal tools 
 
 
 
 
   Create account   Log in 
 
 
 
 
		Pages for logged out editors  learn more 
 
 
 Contributions Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Navigation 
 
 
 Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate 
 
 
 
 
 Contribute 
 
 
 Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file 
 
 
 
 
 Tools 
 
 
 What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item 
 
 
 
 
 Print/export 
 
 
 Download as PDF Printable version 
 
 
 
 
 In other projects 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons 
 
 
 
 
 Languages 
 
 On this Wikipedia the language links are at the top of the page across from the article title.  Go to top . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CentralNotice  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Contents 
 move to sidebar 
 hide 
 
 
 
 
 (Top) 
 
 
 
 
 
 1 Central Asian cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 East Asian cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 South Asian cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4 Southeast Asian cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5 West Asian cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6 See also 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 7 References 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8 External links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
						Toggle the table of contents
					 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle the table of contents 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 List of Asian cuisines 
 
 
 
 
 2 languages 
 
 
 
 Bahasa Melayu 日本語 
 Edit links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Article Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 English 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 More 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
 
 
 
 
   Location of the continent of  Asia . 
 This is a  list of Asian cuisines , by region. A cuisine is a characteristic style of  cooking  practices and traditions, [1]  usually associated with a specific  culture  or region. Asia, being the largest, most populous and culturally diverse  continent , has a great diversity of cuisines associated with its different regions.
 
 
 Central Asian cuisine [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Central Asian cuisine 
   Location of  Central Asia . In some definitions, it also includes  Afghanistan  (south of area shown). 
 Central Asian cuisine includes food from  Kazakhstan ,  Kyrgyzstan ,  Tajikistan ,  Turkmenistan  and  Uzbekistan .
 Bukharan Jewish cuisine  - cuisine of the  Bukharan Jews  with great influence from Uzbek cuisine. 
 Kazakh cuisine  – cuisine of  Kazakhstan . Traditional Kazakh cuisine revolves around  mutton  and  horse meat , as well as various  milk products . For hundreds of years, Kazakhs were herders who raised fat-tailed sheep, Bactrian camels, and horses, relying on these animals for transportation, clothing, and food. [2] 
 Kazakh wine 
 Kyrgyz cuisine  – originating in  Kyrgyzstan , is similar in many respects to that of its neighbors, particularly Kazakh cuisine. Traditional Kyrgyz food includes mutton and horse meat, as well as milk products. The cooking techniques and major ingredients have been strongly influenced by the nation's nomadic way of life. 
 Tajik cuisine  – traditional cuisine of  Tajikistan , has much in common with Afghan, Russian, and Uzbek cuisines.  Plov , also called  osh , is the national dish in Tajikistan, as in other countries in the region. It consists of chunks of mutton,  carrots  and rice fried in a large cast-iron cauldron similar to a  Dutch oven .  Green tea  is the national drink. Traditional Tajik meals start with a spread of dried fruit, nuts,  halva , and other sweets arrayed on the table in small dishes, and then progress to soup and meat, before finishing with plov. 
 Turkmen cuisine  – cuisine of  Turkmenistan . It is similar to that of the rest of  Central Asia . Plov is the staple, everyday food, which is also served at celebrations. Turkmenistan is perhaps most famous for its  melons , especially in the former  Soviet Union , where it was once the major supplier. Meals are almost always served with  naan , Central Asian  flat bread , known locally as "çörek". 
 Uzbek cuisine  – cuisine influenced by local  agriculture , as in most nations. There is a great deal of grain farming in Uzbekistan, so bread and noodles are of importance, and Uzbek cuisine has been characterized as "noodle-rich". [3]  Mutton is a popular variety of meat due to the abundance of sheep in the country and it is a part of various Uzbek dishes. Uzbekistan's signature dish is  palov  ( osh ) made with rice, pieces of meat, grated carrots and onions. 
 
 Central Asian cuisine 
 
 
 
 Horse meat  platter.  Kazakh cuisine  revolves around mutton, horse meat and various  milk products .
 
 
 
 
 
 
 A  Tajik  feast
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sturgeon   kebabs  cooking in  Turkmenistan 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Uzbek   manti 
 
 
 
 
 East Asian cuisine [ edit ] 
   Location of  East Asia . 
 East Asian cuisine has evolved with common usage of oils, fats and sauces in the preparation of dishes.
 
 An assortment of Hong Kong  dim sum  delicacies Hot pot  featuring a simmering soup stock involving a variety of Chinese foodstuffs and ingredients that are served beside the pot for the diners to put in. 
 Chinese cuisine  – Traditional  Chinese cuisines  include  Anhui ,  Cantonese ,  Fujian ,  Hunan ,  Jiangsu ,  Shandong ,  Sichuan , and  Zhejiang , [4]  all of which are defined and termed per the respective regions within China where they developed. A number of different styles contribute to Chinese cuisine, but perhaps the best known and most influential are the Sichuan, Shandong, Jiangsu and Guangdong cuisines. [5]  These styles are distinctive from one another due to factors such as available resources,  climate ,  geography ,  history , cooking techniques and lifestyle. Many Chinese traditional regional cuisines rely on basic methods of  food preservation  such as  drying ,  salting ,  pickling  and  fermentation . [6] 
 Chinese cuisine originated in what is known as the Eight Great Traditions, though it can be generalized into northern styles that feature oils and strong flavors derived from ingredients such as vinegar and garlic, while southern styles tend to favor fresh ingredients that are lightly prepared. It has become widespread throughout many other parts of the world — from  Asia  to the  Americas , Australia,  Western Europe  and  Southern Africa . In recent years, connoisseurs of Chinese cuisine have also sprouted in  Eastern Europe  and  South Asia .  American Chinese cuisine  and  Canadian Chinese food  are popular examples of local varieties. Local ingredients would be adopted while maintaining the style and preparation technique. 
 Wine in China 
 Great Traditions
 Eight Great Traditions – Regional cultural differences vary greatly amongst the different regions of China, giving rise to eight main regional  cuisines , or Eight Great Traditions (八大菜系, Bā Dà Cài Xì)
 Anhui  is derived from the native cooking styles of the  Huangshan Mountains  region in China and is similar to Jiangsu cuisine. It is known for the use of wild herbs, from both land and sea, and simple methods of preparation. 
 Cantonese  comes from  Guangdong Province  in southern China. [7]  Due to  Guangdong 's location on the southern coast of China, fresh live seafood is prominent in Cantonese cuisine. Canton has long been a trading port and many imported foods and ingredients are used in Cantonese cuisine.  Char siu  is a popular way to flavor and prepare pork in Cantonese cuisine. [8] 
 Fujian  is one of the native Chinese cuisines derived from the native cooking style of the  province  of  Fujian , China. Many diverse  seafoods  and woodland delicacies are used, including a myriad of fish, shellfish and turtles, along with  edible mushrooms  and  bamboo shoots , provided by the coastal and mountainous regions of Fujian. [9] 
 Hunan , sometimes called  Xiang cuisine , consists of the cuisines of the  Xiang River  region,  Dongting Lake  and western  Hunan  Province, in China. The cuisine is well known for its hot spicy flavor, fresh aroma and deep color. Common cooking techniques include stewing, frying, pot-roasting, braising, and smoking. Due to the high agricultural output of the region, ingredients for Hunan dishes are many and varied. 
 Jiangsu  is derived from the native cooking styles of the  Jiangsu  region in China. Food texture is often soft, but not to the point of mushy or falling apart. Other characters include the strict selection of ingredients according to the seasons, emphasis on the matching color and shape of each dish and emphasis on using soup to improve the flavor. 
 Shandong  in Chinese is more commonly known as  Lu cuisine , and is derived from the native cooking styles of  Shandong , an eastern coastal province of China. Possibly Shandong's greatest contribution to Chinese cuisine has been in the area of brewing vinegar. Hundreds of years of experience combined with unique local methods have led to Shandong's prominence as one of the premier regions for vinegar production in China. 
 Sichuan  is a style of Chinese cuisine originating in the  Sichuan Province  of southwestern China famed for bold flavors, particularly the pungency and spiciness resulting from liberal use of  garlic  and  chili peppers , as well as the unique flavor of the  Sichuan peppercorn  (花椒).  Peanuts ,  sesame paste , and  ginger  are also prominent ingredients in Sichuan cooking. [10] 
 Zhejiang  is derived from the native cooking styles of the  Zhejiang  region in China. Food made in the Zhejiang style is not greasy, having instead a fresh and soft flavor with a mellow fragrance. [11] 
 Four Great Traditions – often considered the standouts of Chinese cuisine and due to their influence are proclaimed as the Four Great Traditions (四大菜系, Sì Dà Cài Xì).
 Cantonese 
 Sichuan 
 Shandong 
 Huaiyang cuisine  – often viewed as the representation of the entire Jiangsu cuisine. 
 Chinese cultural subcuisines
 Chinese Buddhist cuisine 
 Chinese Islamic cuisine 
 Chinese cuisines, by region
 Anhui cuisine 
 Beijing cuisine 
 Chinese aristocrat cuisine 
 Chinese imperial cuisine 
 Liaoning cuisine 
 Cantonese cuisine 
 Chaozhou cuisine 
 Chiuchow cuisine 
 Fujian cuisine 
 Guizhou cuisine 
 Hainan cuisine 
 Hakka cuisine 
 Henan cuisine 
 Hubei cuisine 
 Hunan cuisine 
 Jiangsu cuisine 
 Huaiyang cuisine 
 Jiangxi cuisine 
 Northeastern Chinese cuisine 
 Shaanxi cuisine 
 Shandong cuisine 
 Shanghai cuisine 
 Shanxi cuisine 
 Sichuan cuisine  (Sichuan) 
 Tianjin cuisine 
 Tibetan cuisine 
 Xinjiang cuisine  (Uyghur) 
 Yunnan cuisine 
 Zhejiang cuisine 
 Hong Kong cuisine  is mainly influenced by Cantonese cuisine, non-Cantonese Chinese cuisine (especially Teochew, Hakka, Hokkien and the Jiangsu & Zhejiang), the Western world, Japan, and Southeast Asia, due to Hong Kong's past as a British colony and long history of being an international city of commerce.  Fish balls ,  Wonton noodle ,  Egg waffle , and  milk tea  are some of the most notable dishes, snacks, and drinks. 
 Macau cuisine 
 Different varieties of nigiri- sushi Kaiseki  is a traditional multi-course  Japanese  dinner. The term also refers to the collection of skills and techniques used in the preparation of such meals, and are analogous to Western  haute cuisine . [12] 
 Japanese cuisine  is known for its emphasis on  seasonality of food  ( 旬 ,  shun ), [13]  quality of ingredients and presentation.  Japanese regional cuisine  includes a vast array of regional specialties known as  kyōdo ryōri  in Japanese, many of them originating from dishes prepared using local ingredients and traditional recipes. [14]   Sushi  and  sashimi  are both part of the cuisine of the island nation. The  Michelin Guide  has awarded Japanese cities by far the most Michelin stars of any country in the world (for example, Tokyo alone has more Michelin stars than Paris, Hong Kong, New York, LA and London combined). [15] [16] 
 Traditional cooking methods eschew the use of oils and fats, with a focus on featuring the delicate flavors of the natural ingredients. Due to an abundant seafood supply, the traditional Japanese diet featured minimal use of meat; however, modern Japanese cuisine includes an extensive variety of popular meat dishes. Japanese cuisine offers a vast array of regional specialties that use traditional recipes and local ingredients. 
 Japanese wine 
 Okinawan cuisine  is the cuisine of the Japanese  island of Okinawa . Due to the difference in culture, climate, vegetables and other ingredients between Okinawa and mainland Japan, Okinawan cuisine is very different from Japanese cuisine. The cuisine incorporated influence from Chinese cuisine and  Southeast Asian  cuisine due to trade. The  sweet potato , introduced in Okinawa in 1605, became a staple food there until the beginning of the 20th century. An article about Okinawan food written by  Kikkoman  stated that Goya ( bitter melon ) and Nabera ( luffa  or towel gourd) were "likely" introduced to Okinawa from Southeast Asia. Since  Ryūkyū  had served as a tributary state to China, Okinawan cooks traveled to  Fujian Province  to learn how to cook Chinese food; Chinese influence seeped into Okinawa in that manner. The same Kikkoman article states that the method of  distillation  of  awamori  likely originated from  Siam  ( Thailand ) and traveled to Okinawa during the 15th century. After the lord of the  Kagoshima  Domain subjugated Ryūkyū, Okinawan cooks traveled to Japan to study  Japanese cuisine , causing that influence to seep into Okinawan cuisine. [17] 
 Nagoya cuisine 
 Ainu cuisine 
 Hanjeongsik , a full-course Korean meal with an array of  banchan  (side dishes) [18] Bibimbap , a Korean rice dish filled with white rice topped with  namul  or  kimchi  and  gochujang ,  doenjang   commonly added by a raw or fried egg and sliced meat on top. 
 Korean cuisine  originated from ancient  prehistoric traditions  in the  Korean peninsula , evolving through a complex interaction of environmental, political, and cultural trends. [19]  Korean cuisine is largely based upon rice, vegetables, and meats. Traditional Korean meals are noted for the number of  side dishes  ( banchan ) that accompany steam-cooked short-grain rice.  Kimchi  is served often, sometimes at every meal. Commonly used ingredients include  sesame oil ,  doenjang  ( fermented bean paste ),  soy sauce , salt, garlic, ginger,  pepper  flakes, and  gochujang  (fermented red chili paste).  Korean regional cuisine  (Korean:  hyangto eumsik , literally "native local foods"), [20]  is characterized by local specialties and distinctive styles within Korean cuisine. The divisions reflected historical boundaries of the provinces where these food and culinary traditions were preserved until modern times.  Korean barbecue , or  gogi gui , refers to the Korean method of  grilling  beef, pork, chicken, or other types of meat. Such dishes are often prepared at the diner's table on gas or charcoal grills that are built into the center of the table itself. It features cooking methods such as  sautéing  and what is known in the West as barbecue. Strong flavors featuring spices derived from chili peppers can also be found in dishes such as  kimchi . [21] 
 North Korean cuisine 
 South Korean cuisine 
 Mongolian cuisine  – local culinary traditions of  Mongolia  and  Mongolian  styled dishes. The extreme  continental climate  has affected the traditional diet, so the Mongolian cuisine primarily consists of  dairy products ,  meat , and animal fats. Use of  vegetables  and  spices  are limited. 
 Taiwanese cuisine  – Majority  Han Taiwanese  cuisine and the  Aboriginal Taiwanese  cuisine,  however mixed with part of Japanese cuisine due to Imperial Japanese colonial legacies. 
 East Asian cuisine 
 
 
 
 Due to  Guangdong 's location on the southern coast of China, fresh live seafood is a specialty in  Cantonese cuisine .
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sichuan cuisine  – A Chengdu-style, hot-pot stew.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Khorkhog , a barbecue dish consumed in  Mongolia 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Many flavors of Taiwanese sausages are sold by night market vendors.
 
 
 
 
 South Asian cuisine [ edit ] 
 See also:  Cuisine of the Indian subcontinent 
   Location of  South Asia . 
 South Asian cuisine  includes the  cuisines  from the  Indian subcontinent  and when included in the definition, also that of  Afghanistan . It has roots in South Asia, including practices taken from the  Hindu  beliefs practiced by the large population found in the region, alongside in some regional cuisines, certain influences from neighboring regions and cultures, particularly from Muslim cultures of the Middle East and Central Asia. Dishes in this area of the world are known for their use of hot peppers, black pepper, cloves, and other strong spices along with the flavored butter  ghee . Common meats include lamb, goat and chicken; beef is not as common as in western cuisines because the tenets of the Hindu faith prohibit its consumption. Other staples of many of the cuisines include rice,  chapati  made from wheat and barley, and beans. [21]  The cuisine of South Asia has mostly indigenous roots, as well as influences practices taken from foreign origin empires.
 Naan , a type of  flat bread  from the former regions, is a common part of meals in many parts of South Asia.
 
 Afghan cuisine  – cuisine of the Afghan people, largely based upon Afghanistan's chief crops: cereals like  wheat ,  maize ,  barley  and rice. Accompanying these staples are dairy products ( yogurt  and  wheat ), various nuts, and native vegetables, as well as fresh and dried fruits. Lamb is the primary meat for many Afghans, although Turkic peoples also eat horse. Afghanistan is also well known for its  grapes . 
 Bangladeshi cuisine  is dominated by  Bengali cuisine  and has been shaped by the diverse  history  and riverine  geography of Bangladesh . The country has a  tropical monsoon climate .  Rice  is the main  staple food  of Bangladeshi people and it is served with a wide range of  curries .  Sublime  Bangladeshi dishes exhibit strong  aromatic  flavours; and often include  eggs ,  potatoes ,  tomatoes  and  aubergines . A variety of  spices  and  herbs , along with  mustard oil  and  ghee , is used in Bangladeshi cooking. The main breads are  naan ,  porota ,  roti ,  bakarkhani  and  luchi .  Dal  is the second most important staple food which is served with rice/porota/luchi.  Fish  is a staple in Bangladeshi cuisine, especially  freshwater fish , which is a distinctive feature of the country's gastronomy. Major fish dishes include  ilish  ( hilsa ) ,  pabda  ( butterfish ),  rui  ( rohu ),  pangash  ( pangas catfish ),  chitol  ( clown knifefish ),  magur  ( walking catfish ),  bhetki  ( barramundi ) and  tilapia . Meat consumption includes  beef ,  lamb ,  venison ,  chicken ,  duck ,  squab  and  koel . Vegetable dishes, either mashed ( bhorta ), boiled ( sabji ), or leaf-based ( saag ), are widely served. Seafood such as  lobsters  and  shrimps  are also often prevalent. 
 Bhutanese cuisine  employs a lot of red rice (like brown rice in texture, but with a nutty taste, the only variety of rice that grows at high altitudes), buckwheat, and increasingly maize. The diet in the hills also includes chicken, yak meat, dried beef, pork, pork fat, and mutton. When offered food, one says  meshu meshu , covering one's mouth with the hands in refusal according to Bhutanese manners, and then gives in on the second or third offer. 
 Hazaragi cuisine  refers to the food and cuisine of the  Hazara people  in Afghanistan and western Pakistan (Balochistan province). The food of the Hazara people is strongly influenced by Central Asian, South Asian and Persian cuisines and shares similarities with neighboring regional cuisines in Afghanistan and Central Asia, however, there are certain dishes, culinary methods and styles of cooking that are unique to the Hazara people. It is largely centered on bread, meats and dairy products, and uses a large amount of oil in its cooking. 
 Indian cuisine  is characterized by its sophisticated and subtle use of many  Indian spices [22]  and  vegetables ,  herbs , and  fruits  grown across India. [22]  There is also the widespread practice of  vegetarianism  across its society. Considered by some to be one of the world's most diverse cuisines, each family of this cuisine is characterized by a wide assortment of dishes and cooking techniques. As a consequence, Indian cuisine varies from region to region, reflecting the  varied demographics  of the ethnically diverse  Indian subcontinent . [23]  India's  religious beliefs  and  culture  has played an influential role in the evolution of its cuisine. However, cuisine across India has also evolved with the Indian subcontinent's cross-cultural interactions with the neighboring  Middle East ,  Southeast Asia ,  East Asia , and  Central Asia , making it a unique blend of various cuisines across  Asia . [24] [25]  The  colonial period  introduced European cooking styles to India adding to its flexibility and diversity. [26] [27]  Indian cuisine has also influenced cuisines across the world, especially those from  Southeast Asia . [28] [29] [30]  In particular,  curry  has been widely adopted in cuisines around the world.
 Indian wine 
 North Indian cuisines 
 Awadhi cuisine 
 Punjabi cuisine 
 Cuisine of Uttar Pradesh 
 Rajasthani cuisine 
 Mughlai cuisine 
 Bhojpuri cuisine 
 Bihari cuisine 
 Kashmiri cuisine 
 South Indian cuisines 
 Kerala cuisine  -  Sadhya  means "banquet" in  Malayalam . It is a typical feast of the people of Kerala. 
 Tamil cuisine 
 Andhra cuisine 
 Cuisine of Karnataka 
 Telangana - Hyderabadi cuisine 
 East Indian cuisines 
 Bengali cuisine  is a style of food preparation originating in  Bengal , a region in eastern  South Asia  which is now divided between the Indian states of  West Bengal ,  Tripura , and  Barak Valley  of  Assam  and the independent country of Bangladesh. Bengali food has inherited a large number of influences, both foreign and South Asian, arising from historical and strong trade links with many parts of the world. 
 Cuisine of Jharkhand 
 Oriya cuisine 
 North East Indian cuisines 
 Sikkimese cuisine 
 Assamese cuisine 
 Tripuri cuisine 
 Naga cuisine 
 West Indian cuisines
 Maharashtrian cuisine 
 Malvani cuisine 
 East Indian Cuisine ( East Indians  are an ethnic group from Bombay in the West of India) The East Indian cuisine [31]  is distinct to the community and includes delicacies such as the vajri curry or goat tripe curry, [32]  chicken tope, [33]  sorpotel, khudi curries and many more. 
 Goan cuisine 
 Parsi cuisine 
 Gujarati cuisine 
 Rajasthani cuisine 
 Other Indian cuisines
 Indian Chinese cuisine 
 Jain (Satvika) 
 Sindhi cuisine 
 Chettinad cuisine 
 Udupi cuisine 
 Indian fast food 
 Maithil cuisine 
 Maldivian cuisine 
 Nepalese cuisine 
 Newari cuisine 
 Pakistani cuisine 
 Balochi cuisine 
 Kashmiri cuisine 
 Pashtun cuisine 
 Muhajir cuisine 
 Punjabi cuisine 
 Lahori cuisine 
 Mughlai cuisine 
 Sindhi cuisine 
 Sri Lankan cuisine 
 
 South Asian cuisine 
 
 
 
 Some of the popular Afghan dishes, from left to right: 1. Lamb grilled kebab ( seekh kabab ); 2.  Kabuli palaw  and salad; 3.  Tandoori chicken ; and 4.  Mantu  (dumplings).
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Traditional Bangladeshi meal:  mustard seed   ilish   curry , Dhakai  biryani  and  pitha ; similar to  East Indian  cuisine.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 South Indian style  vegetarian  thali .
 
 
 
 
 
 
 North Indian style  vegetarian  thali .
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pork  vindaloo  is a popular curry dish from the  Indian state  of  Goa  and around the world.
 
 
 
 
 Southeast Asian cuisine [ edit ] 
   Location of  Southeast Asia . 
 Southeast Asian cuisine emphasizes lightly prepared dishes with strong aromas, featuring such flavors as  lemongrass ,  fermented fish sauce  and  pastes , and  ginger . [34]  Ingredients in the region contrast with the ones in the Eastern Asian cuisines, substituting  fish sauces  for soy sauce and including such ingredients as  galangal ,  tamarind  and  lemongrass . Cooking methods include  stir frying , boiling and steaming. [21] 
 
 Bruneian cuisine  is similar to, and heavily influenced by, the cuisine of neighboring  Malaysia , Singapore, [35]  and Indonesia, with additional influences from China, India and Arab. 
 Burmese cuisine  has been influenced greatly by China, India and Thailand. However, Burmese cuisine has retained unique preparation techniques and distinct flavors, and there are many regional variations of "standard" dishes. The Burmese eat with their right hand, forming rice into a small ball with only the fingertips and mixing this with various morsels before popping it into their mouths. The Burmese eat a great variety of vegetables and fruits, and a variety of meat. A very popular vegetable is the  danyin thi , which is usually boiled or roasted and dipped in salt, oil and sometimes, cooked coconut fat. 
 Cambodian cuisine  encompasses the cuisines of all  ethnic groups in Cambodia , whereas  Khmer cuisine  refers specifically to the cuisine of the ethnic  Khmers . Over time, Khmer cuisine has absorbed elements from Indian, Chinese and more recently French cuisine, and due to historic interaction and shared influences, Cambodian cuisine has many similarities with neighboring Thai, Vietnamese, and Lao cuisines. 
 Christmas Island cuisine  has influences from both Australian cuisine and other Asian cuisines, particularly Malaysian and Indonesian. 
 Cuisine of East Timor  is the cuisine of one of the newest Southeast Asian countries. 
 Filipino cuisine  has evolved over several centuries from its  Austronesian  origins to a mixed cuisine with many Hispanic, Chinese, American, and other Asian influences adapted to indigenous ingredients and the local palate. [36] [37] [38] [39]  For more information refer to:  Filipino cuisine; regional specialties .
 Kapampangan cuisine  is the cuisine native to the  Kapampangan people  originating from the province of  Pampanga , in  Central Luzon . One of the best examples of Kapampangan dish is  sisig , which is a popular dish across the Philippines. 
 Bicol 's cuisine is noted for its gastronomic appetite for the fiery or chili-hot dishes and coconut milk dishes. Perhaps the most well-known Bicolano dish is the very spicy  Bicol Express . The region is also the well-known home of  natong  also known as  laing  or  pinangat  (pork or fish stew in  taro  leaves). 
 Being surrounded by waters and rich land, Visayas is abundant in marine and land products as indicated in various  Visayan cuisines . Few examples of famous Visayan foods include  Cebu 's  Lechon  variant,  Iloilo 's  La Paz batchoy ,  Bacolod 's  inasal  and  piaya , and  Leyte 's  roscas ,  humba ,  moron , and  bukayo . 
 Mindanao cuisine's dishes are richly flavored with the spices common to  Southeast Asia . Some parts of Mindanao are predominantly  Muslim , where pork is rarely consumed. Most notable dishes in Mindanao cuisine are:  Satti ,  Sambal ,  Tiyula itum , and  Zamboanga 's  Alfajor , curacha, and rebosao. 
 Indonesian cuisine  is diverse, in part because Indonesia is composed of approximately 6,000 populated islands. [40]  Many regional cuisines exist, often based upon  cultural  and foreign influences. [40] [41] [42]  For example,  Sumatran  cuisine often has Middle Eastern and Indian influences, featuring curried meat and vegetables, while  Javanese cuisine  and  Sundanese cuisine  are more indigenous. [40] 
 Acehnese cuisine  is the cuisine of the  Acehnese people  of  Aceh  in most western  Sumatra . 
 Balinese cuisine  is the cuisine and culinary traditions of  Balinese people  from the volcanic island of  Bali . 
 Banjar cuisine :  is the cooking tradition and cuisine of  Banjar people  of  South Kalimantan  in  Indonesia . 
 Batak cuisine  is the cuisine and cooking traditions of  Batak ethnic groups , predominantly found in  North Sumatra  region. 
 Indo cuisine  is a  fusion  cooking and cuisine tradition, mainly existing in  Indonesia  (nationwide) and the  Netherlands , as well as  Belgium ,  South Africa  and  Suriname . 
 Indonesian Arab cuisine  is characterized by the mixture of  Middle Eastern cuisine  with local  Indonesian style .  Indonesian Arabs  brought their legacy of Arab cuisine originally from  Hadhramaut ,  Hejaz  and  Egypt . 
 Indonesian Chinese cuisine  is characterized by the mixture of  Chinese  with local  Indonesian style .  Chinese Indonesians  bring their Chinese cuisine legacy. 
 Indonesian Indian cuisine  is characterized by the mixture of  Indian cuisine  with local  Indonesian style .  Indian Indonesians  bring their Indian cuisine legacy. 
 Javanese cuisine  is the cuisine of  Javanese people . In wider sense, Javanese cuisine might also refer to the cuisine of the whole people of  Java  Island, Indonesia; which also includes Sundanese in West Java,  Betawi  in  Jakarta  and  Madurese  on  Madura Island  off East Java.
 Betawi cuisine  is rich, diverse and eclectic cuisine of  Betawi people  in  Jakarta  due to the Betawi people that create them were composed from numbers of regional immigrants that came from various places in the archipelago. 
 Madurese cuisine  is the cuisine tradition of  Madurese people  in  Madura island  on the northeastern coast of  Java . 
 Sundanese cuisine  is the cuisine of  Sundanese people  of  West Java , Indonesia. In Sundanese restaurants, it is common to eat with one's hands. They usually serve  kobokan , a bowl of tap water with a slice of lime for handwashing. 
 Makassar cuisine  is the cuisine of the  Buginese people  and  Makassar people  in  South Sulawesi . 
 Malay cuisine  is the cuisine of  Malay people  with many regional and foreign influences. 
 Manado cuisine   is the cooking tradition of the  Minahasan people  of North Sulawesi. This cuisine has influences by  Eurasian cuisine , especially  Dutch cuisine . 
 Padang food , also known as Minangkabau cuisine, is the cuisine of the  Minangkabau people  of  West Sumatra , Indonesia. It is among the most popular food in  Maritime Southeast Asia . It is known across Indonesia as  masakan Padang . 
 Palembang cuisine  is the cuisine of the  Palembang people  in  South Sumatra . 
 Peranakan cuisine  combines  Chinese ,  Malay ,  Javanese  and other influences into a unique blend. 
 Laotian cuisine  is the  cuisine  of  Laos , which is distinct from other Southeast Asian cuisines. Laos shares borders with neighboring countries and as a result, Lao cuisine has strongly influenced the neighboring cuisine of Northeastern Thailand ( Isan ) and some Lao culinary influences have also reached Cambodia [43]  and Northern Thailand ( Lanna ). [44] 
 Hmong cuisine  is the cuisine of the  Hmong people  of  China ,  Southeast Asia  and the  Hmong American  community in the United States. 
 Malaysian cuisine  reflects the multicultural aspects of  Malaysia . Malaysia is an amalgamation of three major races, Malay, Chinese and Indian, as well as a myriad of ethnic groups from Sabah and Sarawak. The potpourri is enriched further with the influence of the Thai from the north, Indonesian from the south, Filipino from the east, and British, Dutch and Portuguese through hundred years of colonization. [45] 
 Malay cuisine  is the cuisine of  Malay people  with many regional and foreign influences. For examples, cuisine of  Johor  often has Middle Eastern and Javanese influences while cuisine of  Kelantan  often has Thai influences. 
 Malaysian Chinese cuisine  is characterized by the mixture of  Chinese  with local ingredients. 
 Malaysian Indian cuisine  is characterized by the mixture of  Indian  with local ingredients. 
 Sarawakian cuisine  is the cuisine of Sarawak, Malaysia 
 Sabahan cuisine  is the cuisine of Sabah, Malaysia with influences from  Filipino cuisine  and  Indonesian cuisine 
 Peranakan cuisine  combines Chinese,  Malay  and other influences into a unique blend. Peranakan in  Penang  often has Thai influences while  Melaka  and  Singapore  often has Indonesian influences. 
 Eurasian cuisine  combines  Kristang ,  Dutch ,  British ,  Malay  and other influences into a unique blend, predominantly found in  Melaka 
 Singaporean cuisine  is similar to, and heavily influenced by the cuisine of neighboring  Malaysia , as a product of centuries of cultural interaction owing to Singapore's strategic location. [46]  The predominant cuisine in Singapore is  Chinese , [46]  along with  Malay ,  Indian [46]  and  English  traditions since the founding of Singapore by the British in the early 19th century. 
 Thai cuisine  can be described as four regional cuisines corresponding to the four main regions of the country:  Northern , Northeastern (or  Isan ),  Central , and  Southern . [47]  A fifth cuisine is Thai royal cuisine, based on the palace cuisine of the  Ayutthaya kingdom  (1351–1767 CE), which was influential upon the cuisine of the Central Thai plains. [47]  Each cuisine has similarities to foods and cuisines in neighboring countries and regions, including the  Cuisine of Burma ,  Yunnan cuisine ,  Lao cuisine ,  Cambodian cuisine  and  Malaysian cuisine . [47] 
 Vietnamese cuisine  is a style of cooking derived from Vietnam with Chinese and French influence.  Fish sauce , soy sauce, rice, fresh  herbs , fruits and vegetables are commonly used. Vietnamese recipes utilize a diverse range of herbs, including  lemongrass ,  mint ,  Vietnamese mint ,  long coriander  and  Thai basil  leaves.
 Vietnamese wine 
 
 Southeast Asian cuisine 
 
 
 
 Cambodian   Samlar kako 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Personal serving of  Nasi   Bali , in  Indonesia , rice surrounded by numbers of side dishes including  sate lilit .
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Thai   Kaeng phet pet yang : roast  duck  in  red curry .
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Philippine adobo  is a popular Filipino dish and cooking process in  Filipino cuisine .
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Malaysian   nasi lemak , is served with anchovies, peanuts, boiled egg, lamb curry, cucumber, and  sambal .
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Food stall in  Chiang Mai ,  Thailand  selling ready-cooked food.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bò 7 món  (literally "seven courses of  beef " in  Vietnamese ) is a set selection of beef dishes in  Vietnamese cuisine .
 
 
 
 
 West Asian cuisine [ edit ] 
 Main article:  West Asian cuisine 
 See also:  Levantine cuisine 
   Location of  Western Asia . 
 West Asian cuisine , is the cuisine of the various countries and peoples of  West Asia . Despite their similarities, there are considerable differences in  climate  and  culture , so the term is not definitive. The cuisine of the region is diverse while having a degree of homogeneity. [48]  Many West Asian dishes are made with a paste called  tahini . Tahini is a  sesame  paste made with hulled seeds, unlike its East Asian counterpart. It is used to make such popular  meze , or appetizers, as  baba ghanoush  and  hummus  along with pungent dipping sauces served with  falafel ,  keftes  or  kofta  and vegetables. [49]  Hummus is made from  chickpeas , which are staples of the diet. Some commonly used ingredients include  olives  and  olive oil , lamb, [48]   pitas ,  honey , sesame seeds,  dates , [48]   sumac ,  chickpeas ,  mint  and  parsley . Some popular dishes include  kibbeh [50]  and  shawarma . [51] 
 Arab cuisine of the Persian Gulf  - Arab cuisine of the  Persian Gulf  today is the result of combination of diverse cuisines, incorporating Levantine, Indian, Chinese, and Persian cooking styles, and many items not originally indigenous to the  Persian Gulf  region, which were most probably imported on the  dhows  and the  caravans . 
 Assyrian cuisine 
 Bahraini cuisine  refers to the cuisine of  The Kingdom of Bahrain , a small  island  state near the western shores of the  Persian Gulf . Bahrain produces only a small amount of its food requirements due to limited land space, and imports much of its food. [52]  Its primary crops are  dates ,  bananas ,  citrus fruits ,  pomegranates ,  mangoes ,  cucumbers  and tomatoes. [52] 
 Cypriot cuisine 
 Egyptian cuisine 
 Emirati cuisine 
 Iranian cuisine  - Persian cuisine is diverse, with each province featuring dishes, culinary traditions and styles distinct to its region.
 Abgoosht  is an Iranian stew usually made with lamb and vegetables 
 Caspian cuisine 
 Iraqi cuisine  or  Mesopotamian cuisine , has a long history going back some 10,000 years - to the  Sumerians ,  Babylonians  and  Assyrians . [53]   Tablets  found in ancient ruins in Iraq show recipes prepared in the temples during religious festivals - the first cookbooks in the world. [53] 
 Kurdish cuisine  consists of a wide variety of foods prepared by the  Kurdish people  that have got many traditions from their homeland,  Kurdistan . 
 Kuwaiti cuisine  - the  national dish  of Kuwait known as  machboos  ( Arabic :  مكبوس ) consists mainly of mutton or  chicken  placed over or mixed in a large mass of well-cooked and prepared rice. 
 Mizrahi Jewish cuisine  is based largely on fresh ingredients, as marketing was done in the local  souq . 
 Omani cuisine  is generally very simple, with the aid of many spices and  marinades  to complete a dish, which usually consists of chicken, fish, and mutton. Unlike many other Asian nations, Omani cuisine is not spicy, and varies between regions. 
 Qatari cuisine 
 Saudi Arabian cuisine  - Food staples include lamb,  grilled chicken ,  falafel  (deep-fried  chickpea  balls),  shawarma  (spit-cooked sliced lamb),  mutabbaq  and  Ful medames . [54]  Arabic unleavened bread, or  khobz  (خبز), is eaten with almost all meals, and is often used as an edible utensil to scoop foods. [54] 
 Kabsa  is considered by many as Saudi Arabia's national dish. 
 Turkish cuisine  is largely the heritage of  Ottoman cuisine , which can be described as a fusion and refinement of  Central Asian ,  West Asian  and  Balkan  cuisines. [55] [56]  Turkish cuisine has in turn influenced those and other neighboring cuisines, including that of western Europe.
 Turkish wine 
 Yemeni cuisine  - The most common Yemeni dishes include:  Aseed ,  Bint Al-Sahn ,  Fahsa ,  Fatoot ,  Fattah ,  Ful medames ,  Hareesh ,  Jachnun ,  Kabsa ,  Karees ,  Komroh ,  Mandi ,  Mateet ,  Mutabbaq ,  Saltah ,  Samak Mofa ,  Shafut ,  Shakshouka ,  Thareed , and  Zoam .
 Mandi  is a traditional Yemeni dish usually made from meat (lamb or chicken), basmati rice, and a mixture of spices. 
 Levantine cuisine  – traditional  cuisine  of  Ottoman Syria , now usually called the  Levant , known in Arabic as the  Bilad ash-Sham . This region shared many culinary traditions under the  Ottoman Empire  which continue to be influential today. It covers the modern states of  Syria ,  Palestine ,  Lebanon ,  Jordan , Israel,  Northern Iraq , northwest  Iraq  ( the province of Mosul ), and parts of southern Turkey near  Adana ,  Gaziantep ,  Antakya  and  Mardin .
 Palestinian cuisine  consists of foods from or commonly eaten by  Palestinians , whether in Palestine, Israel, Jordan, refugee camps in nearby countries, or by the  Palestinian diaspora . 
 Israeli cuisine  comprises a mixture of  dishes —from those brought back to Israel by Jews from the  Diaspora , those from Jews who remained in the region, and those adopted from surrounding Arab inhabitants. Since before the establishment of the modern  State of Israel  in 1948, and particularly since the late 1970s, an Israeli  fusion cuisine  has developed. [57] 
 Israeli wine 
 Ptitim  – Israeli toasted pasta shaped like rice or little balls. 
 Jordanian cuisine 
 Lebanese cuisine  includes an abundance of starches,  fruits , vegetables, fresh fish and  seafood ; animal fats are consumed sparingly. Poultry is eaten more often than red meat, and when red meat is eaten it is usually lamb on the coast and goat meat in the mountain regions.
 Lebanese wine 
 Syrian cuisine  is a diffusion of the cultures of civilizations that settled in Syria, particularly during and after the Islamic era beginning with the Arab Umayyad conquest, then the eventual Persian-influenced Abbasids and ending with the strong influences of Turkish cuisine, resulting from the coming of the Ottoman Turks. 
 Syrian Jewish cuisine 
 South Caucasus cuisine  is the cuisine of the various countries and peoples of the  South Caucasus , also known as Transcaucasia.
 Armenian cuisine 
 Azerbaijani cuisine 
 Georgian cuisine 
 Ossetian cuisine 
 
 West Asian foods and dishes 
 
 
 
 Kabsa  is a traditional  Yemeni  dish.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hummus  with  pine nuts  at the Maxim restaurant in  Haifa, Israel .
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Syrians are renowned for producing dried apricot paste
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Chicken  Fesenjān  with Persian rice, an Iranian dish
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fatayer  is a  meat pie  or pastry that can alternatively be stuffed with spinach (sabaneq), or cheese (jibnah). It is eaten in Turkey, Syria, Lebanon, Jordan and other countries in West Asia.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fahsa  is a famous Yemeni dish, containing beef or lamb meat cooked in a stony pot called Madara.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Falafel  balls
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Doner kebab ,  Istanbul , Turkey
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Adjarian   Khachapuri  from Georgia
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Armenian  Ghapama  made with butternut squash, instead of pumpkin
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Light snacks of  Azerbaijani cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 See also [ edit ] 
 Eastern Arabian cuisine 
 Asian cuisine 
 Fusion cuisine 
 List of cuisines 
 List of dishes from the Caucasus 
 Mediterranean cuisine 
 Portals :   Asia   Food   Drink   Society   Wine   Lists 
 References [ edit ] 
 
 
 ^   "Cuisine."   Archived  2013-04-26 at the  Wayback Machine   Thefreedictionary.com   Archived  2013-05-26 at the  Wayback Machine . Accessed June 2011. 
 
 ^   "Kazakhstan" .  foodbycountry.com .  Archived  from the original on May 20, 2011 . Retrieved  April 18,  2011 . 
 
 ^   "The noodle-rich cuisine of Uzbekistan"   Archived  2007-12-11 at the  Wayback Machine ,  The Village Voice , Dining, 19 January 1999. 
 
 ^   "Fujian Cuisine.   Archived  2013-07-31 at the  Wayback Machine   Beautyfujian.com   Archived  2011-07-10 at the  Wayback Machine . Accessed June 2011. 
 
 ^   "Regions of Chinese food-styles/flavors of cooking."   Archived  2011-10-05 at the  Wayback Machine   University of Kansas   Archived  2011-10-05 at the  Wayback Machine , Kansas Asia Scholars. Accessed June 2011. 
 
 ^   J. Li & Y. Hsieh.  Traditional Chinese Food Technology and Cuisine . Asia Pacific Journal of Clinical Nutrition. 
 
 ^   Hsiung, Deh-Ta. Simonds, Nina. Lowe, Jason. [2005] (2005). The food of China: a journey for food lovers. Bay Books.  ISBN   978-0-681-02584-4 . p17. 
 
 ^   TVB. " TVB   Archived  2010-11-01 at the  Wayback Machine ."  廣東菜最具多元烹調方法.  Retrieved on 2008-11-19. 
 
 ^   徐, 文苑 (2005),  中国饮食文化概论 , 清华大学出版社, pp. 79–80 
 
 ^   Marshall Cavendish Corporation (2007).  World and Its Peoples: Eastern and Southern Asia . Marshall Cavendish. p. 126.  ISBN   9780761476313 .  Archived  from the original on January 13, 2023 . Retrieved  November 15,  2015 . 
 
 ^   "Beijing 2008 Olympics - Zhejiang Cuisine" . People's Daily Online. 2008.  Archived  from the original on June 5, 2011 . Retrieved  September 22,  2008 . 
 
 ^   Bourdain, Anthony  (2001).  A Cook's Tour: Global Adventures in Extreme Cuisines . New York, NY:  Ecco .  ISBN   0-06-001278-1 . 
 
 ^   "A Day in the Life: Seasonal Foods"   Archived  2013-01-16 at the  Wayback Machine , The Japan Forum Newsletter No. September 14, 1999. 
 
 ^   "Japanese Cuisine.   Archived  2011-06-25 at the  Wayback Machine   Thefoodieshandbook.co.uk   Archived  2016-02-18 at the  Wayback Machine . Accessed July 2011. 
 
 ^   (in Japanese)   "「ミシュランガイド東京・横浜・鎌倉2011」を発行　三つ星が14軒、二つ星が54軒、一つ星が198軒に"   Archived  2010-11-29 at the  Wayback Machine , Michelin Japan, November 24, 2010. 
 
 ^   Tokyo is Michelin's biggest star   Archived  2011-10-12 at the  Wayback Machine  From The Times November 20, 2007 
 
 ^   Ishige, Naomichi. " Food Forum Okinawa   Archived  2008-05-17 at the  Wayback Machine ."  Kikkoman . Retrieved on November 30, 2009. 
 
 ^   The Chosun Ilbo . "Hanjeongsik, a full-course Korean meal."  English.chosun.com   Archived  2003-07-07 at the  Wayback Machine . Accessed 6/11/2008. 
 
 ^   "Korean Cuisine (한국요리 韓國料理)"  (in Korean).  Naver  /  Doosan Encyclopedia . Retrieved  March 28,  2009 . 
 
 ^   향토음식   Archived  2011-07-14 at the  Wayback Machine   Nate  Korean-English Dictionary 
 
 ^  a   b   c   Le, C.N. (2008).  "Asian Cuisine & Foods" . Asian-Nation: The Landscape of Asian America.  Archived  from the original on January 14, 2009 . Retrieved  December 18,  2008 . 
 
 ^  a   b   "Indian Cuisine."   Archived  2018-02-19 at the  Wayback Machine   VisitSingapore.com   Archived  2018-05-07 at the  Wayback Machine . Accessed July 2011. 
 
 ^   "www.indiaat60.in/backgrounders/Incredible-India@60-indian-cuisine.pdf"   (PDF) . Archived from  the original   (PDF)  on October 11, 2017 . Retrieved  May 26,  2013 . 
 
 ^   Chandra, Sanjeev (February 7, 2008).  "The story of desi cuisine: Timeless desi dishes" .  The Star . Toronto. Archived from  the original  on October 26, 2008. 
 
 ^   "Indian Grocery Online, Food Shopping Store, Buy, Indian Cuisine" . Archived from  the original  on July 26, 2009 . Retrieved  May 26,  2013 . 
 
 ^   "Foreign Influences in Modern Indian Cooking" . Archived from  the original  on July 21, 2010 . Retrieved  May 26,  2013 . 
 
 ^   "History of Indian Food and Cooking" .  Archived  from the original on May 26, 2013. 
 
 ^   "Food - VegVoyages" .  Archived  from the original on June 28, 2009. 
 
 ^   "Food & Recipes - Asia Society" . Archived from  the original  on May 25, 2001. 
 
 ^   "Archived copy"   (PDF) . Archived from  the original   (PDF)  on October 3, 2008 . Retrieved  May 26,  2013 . {{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: archived copy as title ( link ) 
 
 ^   "Of Vajri Curries and Trotter Khudis - East Indians? | TheWingedFork" .  The Winged Fork . July 25, 2017.  Archived  from the original on October 21, 2018 . Retrieved  October 21,  2018 . 
 
 ^   "Goat Tripe - Vajri Khudi Curry : East Indian Series | TheWingedFork" .  The Winged Fork . May 4, 2018.  Archived  from the original on November 16, 2018 . Retrieved  October 21,  2018 . 
 
 ^   "Special East Indian Chicken Tope - East Indian Series | TheWingedFork" .  The Winged Fork . October 13, 2017.  Archived  from the original on October 21, 2018 . Retrieved  October 21,  2018 . 
 
 ^   Fieldhouse, Paul.  The World Religions Cookbook . Greenwood Press. p. 3. 
 
 ^   "Cuisine of Brunei" . ifood.tv. Archived from  the original  on May 27, 2012 . Retrieved  September 30,  2010 . 
 
 ^   "Philippine Cuisine."   Archived  2011-06-16 at the  Wayback Machine   Balitapinoy.net   Archived  2011-07-23 at the  Wayback Machine . Accessed July 2011. 
 
 ^   Alejandro, Reynaldo (1985).  The Philippine cookbook . New York, New York: Penguin. pp. 12–14.  ISBN   978-0-399-51144-8 .  Archived  from the original on January 13, 2023 . Retrieved  February 23,  2019 . 
 
 ^   Civitello, Linda (2011).  Cuisine and Culture: A History of Food and People . John Wiley and Sons. p. 263.  ISBN   978-1-118-09875-2 .  Archived  from the original on January 13, 2023 . Retrieved  February 23,  2019 . 
 
 ^   Philippines Country Study Guide . Int'l Business Publications. 2007. p. 111.  ISBN   978-1-4330-3970-6 . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   "Indonesian Cuisine."   Archived  2017-08-23 at the  Wayback Machine . Accessed July 2011. 
 
 ^   "Indonesian food."   Archived  September 10, 2011, at the  Wayback Machine   Belindo.com   Archived  2011-09-07 at the  Wayback Machine . Accessed July 2011. 
 
 ^   "Indonesian Cuisine" . Diner's Digest. Archived from  the original  on April 9, 2011 . Retrieved  July 11,  2010 . 
 
 ^   "Stung Treng" . Archived from  the original  on June 13, 2010. 
 
 ^   "Thai Food - Regional Thai Cuisine by Sawadee.com" . Archived from  the original  on September 17, 2011. 
 
 ^   "What is Malay Food?"   Archived  2013-05-25 at the  Wayback Machine   Malaysianfood.net   Archived  2013-06-06 at the  Wayback Machine . Accessed July 2011. 
 
 ^  a   b   c   "Singapore Food."   Archived  2011-07-05 at the  Wayback Machine   Singaporefoodhistory.com   Archived  2011-07-05 at the  Wayback Machine . Accessed July 2011. 
 
 ^  a   b   c   "Modern Thai"   Archived  2013-05-27 at the  Wayback Machine  (food).  Sabaiaz.com   Archived  2013-05-27 at the  Wayback Machine . Accessed July 2011. 
 
 ^  a   b   c   "The Middle East: Background."   Archived  2017-05-26 at the  Wayback Machine ,  Globalgourmet.com   Archived  1998-01-26 at the  Wayback Machine . Accessed January 2007. 
 
 ^   Tahini: The Taste of Healthy Middle Eastern Cuisine   Archived  2016-07-23 at the  Wayback Machine ,  The New York Times , October 19, 2009. Last visited January 29, 2010. 
 
 ^   Daisy Martinez (2010).  Daisy: Morning, Noon and Night: Bringing Your Family Together with Everyday Latin Dishes  (Hardvocer ed.). Atria. p.  336 .  ISBN   978-1-4391-5753-4 . 
 
 ^   Philip Mattar (2004).  Encyclopedia of the Modern Middle East & North Africa  (Hardcover ed.). Macmillan Library Reference. p. 840.  ISBN   0-02-865771-3 . 
 
 ^  a   b   Cuisine in Bahrain   Archived  2011-05-04 at the  Wayback Machine .  Allo' Expat Bahrain   Archived  2011-05-02 at the  Wayback Machine  (Website). Accessed April 2011. 
 
 ^  a   b   "Foods of Iraq: Enshrined With A Long History - ThingsAsian" .  www.thingsasian.com .  Archived  from the original on May 13, 2011. 
 
 ^  a   b   "Food in Saudi Arabia"   Archived  2012-09-05 at the  Wayback Machine . Food in Every Country (website). Accessed May 2010. 
 
 ^   Nur İlkin - A Taste of Turkish cuisine 
 
 ^   Aarssen, Jeroen; Backus, Ad (2000).  Colloquial Turkish .  Routledge . p. 71.  ISBN   978-0-415-15746-9 .  Archived  from the original on October 13, 2017 . Retrieved  February 23,  2019 . 
 
 ^   Gold, Rozanne  A Region's Tastes Commingle in Israel   Archived  2011-09-10 at Wikiwix (July 20, 1994) in  The New York Times  Retrieved 2010–02–14 
 
 
 External links [ edit ] 
  Media related to  Cuisine of Asia  at Wikimedia Commons 
 v t e Cuisines Continental 
 African 
 North 
 West 
 list 
 Americas 
 Caribbean 
 North 
 South 
 list 
 Asian 
 Caucasian 
 Central 
 Indian subcontinent 
 Levantine 
 list 
 European 
 Balkan 
 Central 
 Eastern 
 list 
 Oceanic 
 Intercontinental
 Global 
 Latin American 
 Mediterranean 
 Middle Eastern 
 National  and regional 
 Afghan 
 Albanian 
 Algerian 
 American 
 Californian 
 Floribbean 
 Hawaiian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Lowcountry (South Carolina) 
 New England 
 New Mexico 
 Pacific Northwest 
 Pennsylvania Dutch 
 Puerto Rican 
 Southern US 
 Southwest US 
 Texas 
 Angolan 
 Argentine 
 Armenian 
 Australian 
 Austrian 
 Azerbaijani 
 Bahraini 
 Bangladeshi 
 Barbadian 
 Belarusian 
 Belgian 
 Belizean 
 Beninese 
 Bhutanese 
 Bolivian 
 Bosnian-Herzegovinian 
 Botswana 
 Brazilian 
 British 
 Channel Islands 
 English 
 Gibraltarian 
 Northern Irish 
 Saint Helena 
 Scottish 
 Welsh 
 Bruneian 
 Bulgarian 
 Burkinabé 
 Burmese 
 Burundian 
 Cambodian 
 Cameroonian 
 Canadian 
 Acadian 
 Québécois 
 Central African Republic 
 Chadian 
 Chilean 
 Chinese 
 Cantonese 
 Hong Kong 
 Macanese 
 Tibetan 
 Xinjiang 
 Colombian 
 Congolese 
 Corsican 
 Croatian 
 Cuban 
 Cypriot 
 Czech 
 Danish 
 Faroese 
 Greenlandic 
 Djiboutian 
 Dominican 
 Dominican Republic 
 Dutch 
 East Timorese 
 Ecuadorian 
 Egyptian 
 Emirati 
 Equatorial Guinean 
 Eritrean 
 Estonian 
 Ethiopian 
 Fijian 
 Filipino 
 Finnish 
 French 
 Occitan 
 French Guianan 
 Gabonese 
 Gambian 
 Georgian 
 German 
 Ghanaian 
 Greek 
 Cretan 
 Epirotic 
 Greek Macedonian 
 Heptanesean 
 Guatemalan 
 Guinea-Bissauan 
 Guinean 
 Haitian 
 Honduran 
 Hungarian 
 Icelandic 
 Indian 
 Arunachalese 
 Assamese 
 Bengali 
 Bihari 
 Goan 
 Gujarati 
 Himachal Pradesh 
 Kashmiri 
 Jharkhandi 
 Karnataka 
 Kerala 
 Maharashtrian 
 Manipuri 
 Meghalayan 
 Mizo 
 Naga 
 Odia 
 Punjabi 
 Rajasthani 
 Sikkimese 
 Sindhi 
 Tamil 
 Telangana 
 Telugu 
 Indonesian 
 Acehnese 
 Balinese 
 Banjar 
 Batak 
 Betawi 
 Indo 
 Javanese 
 Madurese 
 Makassar 
 Minahasan 
 Minangkabau 
 Palembangese 
 Sundanese 
 Iranian 
 Iraqi 
 Irish 
 Israeli 
 Italian 
 Abruzzese 
 Ligurian 
 Lombard 
 Lucanian 
 Neapolitan 
 Roman 
 Sardinian 
 Sicilian 
 Venetian 
 Ivorian 
 Jamaican 
 Japanese 
 Okinawan 
 Jordanian 
 Kazakh 
 Kenyan 
 Korean 
 North Korean 
 South Korean 
 Kosovan 
 Kuwaiti 
 Kyrgyz 
 Lao 
 Latvian 
 Lebanese 
 Lesotho 
 Liberian 
 Libyan 
 Liechtensteiner 
 Lithuanian 
 Luxembourg 
 Macedonian 
 Malagasy 
 Malawian 
 Malaysian 
 Sabahan 
 Sarawakian 
 Maldivian 
 Malian 
 Maltese 
 Mauritanian 
 Mauritian 
 Mexican 
 Moldovan 
 Monégasque 
 Mongolian 
 Montenegrin 
 Moroccan 
 Mozambican 
 Namibian 
 Nauruan 
 Nepalese 
 New Zealand 
 Nicaraguan 
 Niger 
 Nigerian 
 Niuean 
 Norwegian 
 Omani 
 Pakistani 
 Palestinian 
 Panamanian 
 Peruvian 
 Polish 
 Portuguese 
 Qatari 
 Romanian  (incl.  Transylvanian Saxon ) 
 Russian 
 Bashkir 
 Chechen 
 Circassian 
 Komi 
 Mordovian 
 Sakha 
 Tatar 
 Udmurt 
 Yamal 
 Rwandan 
 Saint Lucian 
 Salvadoran 
 Sammarinese 
 São Tomé and Príncipe 
 Saudi Arabian 
 Senegalese 
 Serbian 
 Seychellois 
 Sierra Leonean 
 Singaporean 
 Slovak 
 Slovenian 
 Somali 
 South African 
 Spanish 
 Andalusian 
 Asturian 
 Balearic 
 Basque 
 Canarian 
 Cantabrian 
 Catalan 
 Extremaduran 
 Galician 
 Manchegan 
 Valencian 
 Sri Lankan 
 Sudanese 
 Swazi 
 Swedish 
 Swiss 
 Syrian 
 Taiwanese 
 Tajik 
 Tanzanian 
 Zanzibari 
 Thai 
 Togolese 
 Tunisian 
 Turkish 
 Turkmen 
 Trinidadian and Tobagonian 
 Ugandan 
 Ukrainian 
 Uruguayan 
 Uzbek 
 Venezuelan 
 Vietnamese 
 Western Saharan 
 Yemeni 
 Zambian 
 Zimbabwean 
 Ethnic 
 Ainu 
 Arab 
 Indonesian 
 Aromanian 
 Assyrian 
 Balochi 
 Berber 
 Cajun 
 Chinese 
 American 
 Canadian 
 Chifa 
 Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Crimean Tatar 
 Greek American 
 Hazaragi 
 Indian 
 Anglo-Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Indigenous American 
 Inuit 
 Italian American 
 Kurdish 
 Livonian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Malay 
 Ossetian 
 Parsi 
 Pashtun 
 Peranakan 
 Romani 
 Sámi 
 Soul food 
 Sylheti 
 Transylvanian Saxon 
 Yup'ik 
 Religious 
 Buddhist 
 Christian 
 Goan Catholic 
 Mangalorean Catholic 
 Mennonite 
 Hindu 
 Islamic 
 Chinese 
 Ital 
 Jain 
 Jewish 
 American 
 Ashkenazi 
 Bukharan 
 Ethiopian 
 Mizrahi 
 Sephardic 
 Syrian 
 Ritual slaughter 
 Sikh 
 Historical 
 Ancient Egyptian 
 Ancient Greek 
 Ancient Israelite 
 Ancient Roman 
 Antebellum America 
 Aztec 
 Byzantine 
 Early modern European 
 Historical Chinese 
 Historical Indian subcontinent 
 Historical North Indian and Pakistani 
 History of agriculture 
 History of alcoholic drinks 
 History of bread 
 History of seafood 
 History of vegetarianism 
 Historical Argentine 
 Historical Japanese 
 Inca 
 Mayan 
 Muisca 
 Mughal 
 Medieval 
 Ottoman 
 Peasant 
 Soviet 
 Thirteen Colonies 
 Styles 
 Classique 
 Fast food 
 Fusion 
 New American 
 Eurasian 
 Haute 
 Molecular gastronomy 
 Note by Note 
 Nouvelle 
 Lists 
 List of cuisines 
 List of historical cuisines 
 Lists of prepared foods 
 Related 
 Cookbook 
 Cooking 
 Culinary arts 
 Drink 
 Food 
 history 
 Diet 
 Meal preparation 
 
   Food portal 
   Drink portal 
   Category 
   Commons 
   Cookbook 
   WikiProject 
   Outline 
 
 v t e Asian cuisine Sovereign states 
 Afghanistan 
 Armenia 
 Azerbaijan 
 Bahrain 
 Bangladesh 
 Bhutan 
 Brunei 
 Burma (Myanmar) 
 Cambodia 
 China 
 Cyprus 
 East Timor (Timor-Leste) 
 Egypt 
 Georgia 
 India 
 Indonesia 
 Iran 
 Iraq 
 Israel 
 Japan 
 Jordan 
 Kazakhstan 
 North Korea 
 South Korea 
 Kuwait 
 Kyrgyzstan 
 Laos 
 Lebanon 
 Malaysia 
 Maldives 
 Mongolia 
 Nepal 
 Oman 
 Pakistan 
 Philippines 
 Qatar 
 Russia 
 Saudi Arabia 
 Singapore 
 Sri Lanka 
 Syria 
 Tajikistan 
 Thailand 
 Turkey 
 Turkmenistan 
 United Arab Emirates 
 Uzbekistan 
 Vietnam 
 Yemen 
 States with limited recognition 
 Abkhazia 
 Artsakh 
 Northern Cyprus 
 Palestine 
 South Ossetia 
 Taiwan 
 Dependencies and other territories 
 British Indian Ocean Territory 
 Christmas Island 
 Cocos (Keeling) Islands 
 Hong Kong 
 Macau 
 
  
NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw2375
Cached time: 20230311173946
Cache expiry: 1814400
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc, no‐toc‐conversion]
CPU time usage: 1.029 seconds
Real time usage: 1.258 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 20079/1000000
Post‐expand include size: 157391/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 6871/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 16/100
Expensive parser function count: 13/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 161368/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.468/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 19355982/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/400
 
 
Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  942.812      1 -total
 31.26%  294.762      1 Template:Reflist
 28.01%  264.098      2 Template:Navbox
 16.57%  156.237      1 Template:Asian_topic
 13.01%  122.641     17 Template:Cite_web
 12.20%  115.060      1 Template:Cuisine
 10.46%   98.624     52 Template:Iso2country
  9.80%   92.358      2 Template:Lang
  4.93%   46.507      1 Template:Short_description
  4.90%   46.206      9 Template:Cite_book
 
  Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:idhash:39488410-0!canonical and timestamp 20230311173944 and revision id 1142679282. Rendering was triggered because: page-view
  
 esi <esi:include src="/esitest-fa8a495983347898/content" />  
 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=List_of_Asian_cuisines&oldid=1142679282 " 
 Categories :  Asian cuisine Asia-related lists Cuisine by continent Food- and drink-related lists Hidden categories:  Webarchive template wayback links Articles with Japanese-language sources (ja) CS1 Korean-language sources (ko) CS1 maint: archived copy as title Webarchive template other archives Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use American English from November 2021 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from November 2021 Articles containing Bengali-language text Articles containing Arabic-language text Commons category link is on Wikidata Region topic template using suffix 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  This page was last edited on 3 March 2023, at 20:18  (UTC) . 
 Text is available under the  Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0 ;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the  Terms of Use  and  Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the  Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. 
 
 
 Privacy policy 
 About Wikipedia 
 Disclaimers 
 Contact Wikipedia 
 Mobile view 
 Developers 
 Statistics 
 Cookie statement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
