
 
 
 Jump to content 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle sidebar 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Create account Log in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Personal tools 
 
 
 
 
   Create account   Log in 
 
 
 
 
		Pages for logged out editors  learn more 
 
 
 Contributions Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Navigation 
 
 
 Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate 
 
 
 
 
 Contribute 
 
 
 Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file 
 
 
 
 
 Tools 
 
 
 What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item 
 
 
 
 
 Print/export 
 
 
 Download as PDF Printable version 
 
 
 
 
 In other projects 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons 
 
 
 
 
 Languages 
 
 On this Wikipedia the language links are at the top of the page across from the article title.  Go to top . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CentralNotice  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Contents 
 move to sidebar 
 hide 
 
 
 
 
 (Top) 
 
 
 
 
 
 1 History 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 Characteristics 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 Typical dishes 
 
 
				Toggle Typical dishes subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 3.1 Antipasti 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.2 Primi piatti 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.2.1 Primi piatti of rice 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.2.2 Stuffed pasta 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.2.3 Other types of pasta 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.2.4 Soups 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.3 Secondi 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.3.1 Meat-based 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.3.2 Fish-based 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.3.3 Vegetarian 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.4 Polenta 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.5 Sides, sauces, seasonings 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.6 Desserts 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4 Typical and traditional products 
 
 
				Toggle Typical and traditional products subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 4.1 Cheese 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.2 Cold cuts 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.3 Bread 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.4 Wine 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.5 Olive oil 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5 Alcoholic drinks 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6 See also 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 7 References 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8 Bibliography 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 9 Other projects 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
						Toggle the table of contents
					 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle the table of contents 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lombard cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 9 languages 
 
 
 
 Eesti Français Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Jawa ქართული Lombard Русский 
 Edit links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Article Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 English 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 More 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
 
 
 Regional cuisine of Lombardy, Italy 
   A crockpot of  Cassœula . It is a typical dish of the popular tradition, main dish of many Lombard  sagre . 
 Italian cuisine 
 History 
 Ancient Roman cuisine 
 Medieval cuisine 
 Early modern cuisine 
 Contemporary cuisine 
 
 Regional cuisines 
 Abruzzese cuisine 
 Apulian cuisine 
 Arbëreshë cuisine 
 Corsican cuisine 
 Ligurian cuisine 
 Lombard cuisine 
 Mantuan cuisine 
 Lucanian cuisine 
 Neapolitan cuisine 
 Roman cuisine 
 Sardinian cuisine 
 Sicilian cuisine 
 Venetian cuisine 
 
 Lists 
 Chefs 
 Dishes 
 Pasta 
 Cheeses 
 PDO 
 Desserts and pastries 
 Restaurants 
 Wine 
 IGT 
 DOCG 
 DOC 
 Beer 
 
 See also 
 Italian-American cuisine 
 Sammarinese cuisine 
 Osteria 
 Trattoria 
 Enoteca 
 Sagra 
 List of Italian chefs 
 Meal structure 
 
   Italy portal     Food portal v t e 
 Lombard cuisine  is a type of northern  Italian cuisine . The varied historical events of its provinces and of the diversity of its territories resulted in a very varied culinary tradition. First courses in Lombard cuisine range from  risottos  to  soups  and  stuffed pasta , in  broth  or not, and a varied choice of second courses meat dishes are added to fish dishes of the tradition of the many lakes and rivers of  Lombardy . [1] 
 The cuisine of the various Lombardy provinces can be united by the following traits: prevalence of  rice  and stuffed pasta over dry pasta,  butter  instead of  olive oil  for cooking, dishes cooked for a long time, as well as the widespread use of  pork ,  milk  and  dairy products , and  egg -based preparations; to which is added the consumption of  polenta , common to the whole  Northern Italy . [2] 
 
 
 History [ edit ] 
 Lombard cooking has ancient historical roots dating back to the settlement of  Celts  in the  Po Valley . [3]  The most ancient Lombardy dish is  cuz , whose preparation has Celtic origins: it is a second course based on  lamb  that is common in  Val Camonica . [3] 
 Later on, the elaboration and methods of Lombardy's cooking were influenced by the dominations that followed one another during the centuries: from the  ancient Romans  to the  Duchy of Milan  and the  Duchy of Mantua , that is the  Austrians , the Spanish and the French, as well as the dominion of the  Republic of Venice  in the areas of  Bergamo  and  Brescia . [4] 
 
 Characteristics [ edit ] 
   A dish of dry  agnolotti pavesi , with the condiment of  Pavese stew 
 Due to the great territorial and historical variety of Lombardy, it is very difficult to identify a unitary Lombard cuisine: it makes more sense to identify a continuum of provincial cuisines having similar elements throughout the region.
 Perhaps the most peculiar characteristic is the prevalence of filled pasta over dry pasta, but above all rice: from the latter it is possible to make both traditional poor man's rice soups and rice with meat or vegetables, up to the most elaborate and refined risottos. Related to the cooking of  risotto , but not only, is the use of butter, and sometimes  lard , in  sautéing  and frying instead of oil: the use of butter for cooking food is part of the high regional diffusion of  milk  and dairy products, Lombardy is the largest producer of milk in Italy with about 40% of the national production, and one of the regions with a greater variety of  cheeses . The common Lombard panorama is completed by the use of recipes based on eggs ( omelettes  and similar preparations), pork and polenta, shared with the rest of the Po Valley.
 From the point of view of preparation, preponderant, although not exclusive, are the recipes with prolonged cooking and low heat, such as  braised ,  stewed  and  boiled meat , historically derived from the abundance of firewood in the territory and the consequent cooking on the grill. [3] [5] [4] 
 A first approximate subdivision of Lombardy's cooking can be done from a territorial point of view: in the low Po Valley, in the areas where rice is cultivated, risottos will be more common together with vegetables widely cultivated in the plain, whereas as one gets closer to  alpine  areas will be more common dishes based on  game  or  pasture animals , as well as side dishes based on  potatoes  and  cabbage . Gastronomic islands are constituted by the  lakes , where there are risottos and stews based on freshwater fish and olive cultivation is practiced: there are two  olive oils  with protected designation of origin (PDO),  Garda  and  Laghi Lombardi .
 A second classification can be done by taking into account the history of the single provinces and their geographical borders: as it is logical to expect, the eastern Lombard cuisine will have some traits in common with the  Venetian one , the western one with the  Piedmontese one  based on braised meat and stews, the southern one with the Emilian one where preparations based on stuffed pastas predominate, whereas the cuisine of  Valtellina  will have some traits in common with the  Alpine cuisine  with a wide use of game,  salami  and  cheese  as base or condiment for main courses. [6] [7] 
 
 Typical dishes [ edit ] 
 Antipasti [ edit ] 
   Sciatt  from  Valtellina 
 The most common appetizers on Lombard tables are based on cured meats and cheeses, widely spread in the region, however they are often consumed as second courses or as the conclusion of a meal, accompanied or not by polenta or fried polenta.
 Appetizers include  sciatt valtellinesi , crispy  buckwheat  pancakes filled with cheese which is melted during cooking in butter,  nervetti   in insalata milanesi , prepared with calf feet,  beans  and  onions , and  margottini alla bergamasca ,  semolina  cakes bound with egg, branzi and meat broth.
 Among the  pâtés  are Milanese-style veal liver pâté, goose pâté from  Lomellina  and  chub  pâté from the  Brescia area . A popular appetizer was once  trifoliated  snails , widely available in the wooded and agricultural territory.
 
 Primi piatti [ edit ] 
 Primi piatti of rice [ edit ] 
   Risotto alla milanese 
 Rice is a common element to all the local cuisines of  Lombardy , and represents the base of first courses from  Valtellina  to  Mantovano : Lombardy is responsible for 42% of the whole Italian rice production. The "basic" rice preparation common to the whole region is rice  in cagnone , rice boiled in salted water and seasoned with butter in which garlic and  sage  have been sautéed, and finally sprinkled with  Grana cheese . It can also be served with  asparagus  or  pumpkin . [8]  Besides this there are also soups prepared with rice, combined with typical vegetables of the whole region, such as  cabbage ,  turnip ,  peas  and  coratella . The main dish of the region are  risotti , rice toasted and then cooked with hot broth: common in the whole Lombardy territory are  risotto  with mushrooms, and with sausage. [9] 
 Traditionally local, although known well outside the region are the  Risotto   alla Milanese , which owes its characteristic yellow color to  saffron , and its "simplified" version  alla Monzese  without saffron and with  luganega  instead of beef marrow, and finally the  risotto alla pilota , typical of the  Mantua area . In addition to meat and vegetable risottos, in the vicinity of the lakes we can mention fish risottos: risotto with perch from  Lake Como  and  risotto  with  tench  from  Lake Garda .
 
 Stuffed pasta [ edit ] 
   Pumpkin  tortelli 
   Casoncelli 
 A common  stuffed pasta  dish of the whole region are the so-called  ravioli   di magro ,  ravioli  with a generic stuffing made of  egg yolk ,  ricotta cheese  and herbs which vary from area to area. Among the most common variants there are  spinach  and  hop  tops, whereas in the past, in times of economic hardship,  ravioli  were also filled with wild herbs, such as  dandelion ,  nettles  and  borage . [10] 
 Typical of the eastern provinces are  casoncelli  ( casonsei ), stuffed pasta of various shapes (half-moon shaped in  Bergamo , square or "candy-like" in  Brescia ) stuffed with meat,  Grana cheese  and aromatic herbs and eaten with a sprinkling of butter and cheese,  marubini  in broth from the province of  Cremona , square shaped and stuffed with braised meat, mixture of salami,  Grana Padano cheese  and  nutmeg . In the province of Mantua are  tortelli   di zucca  (pumpkin tortelli), to which is added apple  mostarda  and  amaretto , and finally the very particular  tortelli   cremaschi , prepared with a filling of amaretti,  raisins ,  mint , candied citron,  mostaccini  and  lemon peel , as well as classic ingredients such as  breadcrumbs  and  nutmeg . [11] 
Belonging to the province of  Pavia , in particular to  Oltrepò Pavese  are  agnolotti .
 
 Other types of pasta [ edit ] 
   Pizzoccheri 
 Among the most famous examples of dry pasta are  pizzoccheri   della Valtellina , thick  tagliatelle  made of buckwheat flour and seasoned with  potatoes ,  savoy cabbage  and melted cheese,  bigoli con sardelle ,  bigoli  boiled and then browned in the cooking juices of  sardines  typical of the  Mantua area , or  bardele coi marai , or  borage   tagliatelle  generally seasoned with butter typical of the Garda area of  Brescia . Among the dishes similar to  gnocchi  can be mentioned, besides pumpkin  gnocchi  and  pizzoccheri  from  Valchiavenna , small potato  gnocchi  with butter and melted cheese,  strangolapreti  from  Bergamo , made of a dough made of stale bread, eggs, milk and herbs.
 
 Soups [ edit ] 
 A renowned soup based on Lombardy's agricultural products is  minestrone alla milanese , obtained by boiling the main vegetables growing in the region and flavored with  lard  and  pork rinds . [12]  Other dishes of the poor tradition are the  zuppa   alla pavese , a soup made with  broth ,  stale bread ,  eggs  and grated cheese, and the  pancotto , stale bread soaked in water, cooked in a pot together with butter and with the addition of meat, cooked in the whole region: a sort of "summation" of the two dishes is constituted by the  minestra mariconda bresciana , obtained by adding to the previous ingredients also some cow's milk. In  Brianza  can also be found  urgiada , a soup of barley with bacon,  leeks  and beans.
 
 Secondi [ edit ] 
 Dishes of the Lombardy region are mainly based on meat, even though there are many examples of fish dishes spread near lakes and big rivers such as  Po  or  Ticino .
 
 Meat-based [ edit ] 
   A plate of  polenta  and  bruscitti 
 Widespread throughout the territory is sausage, especially  pork sausage , in all its variants such as mutton sausage from  Valcamonica  and  strinù . Another popular dish is  bollito   misto  (mixed boiled meats), according to the province, prepared with different cuts of meat, accompanied by  Cremonese  or  Mantuan   mostarda :  cotechino  is also widely consumed throughout the territory and is sometimes served together with  bollito misto . The most famous variant of the territory is the  gran bollito cremonese , in which are added to the classic boiled meat cuts, calf's head, calf's tongue and pot salami, accompanied by the classic boiled sauces.
 From  Milan  but common in the whole western part of  Lombardy  are  cassoeula , a sort of stew with ribs, luganega and cabbage, to which can be added other parts of the pig such as rind and pig's foot according to the area, and  rosticciata  ( rustisciada ), a dish made of sausage and pork shoulder with onions. Always common in the whole Insubria area are  bruscitti , originating from  Altomilanese , which consist in a braised meat dish cut very thin and cooked in wine and  fennel seeds , historically obtained by stripping leftover meat. Typical of Milanese cooking is instead  ossobuco  (marrowbone).
 
   Ossobuco  with  risotto   alla milanese 
 In the area of Bergamo and Brescia is known the dish of  polenta e osei , where birds such as  thrushes  or  larks  are browned in butter or on the spit and served together with polenta, [13]  to which is added the pork  alla bresciana . [14]  In the province of Mantua, beef stew and donkey stew are common: in general, stews are quite common in the lowlands, as in the case of Pavia-style stew. [15] 
 In the Alpine cuisine of Valtellina can be mentioned  pork ribs   al lavècc , where marinated pork ribs are cooked for hours with wine in  lavècc , particular pots made of  soapstone , and pork  alla pioda , where different cuts of pork are cooked on the  pioda , a stone slab on which are also cooked vegetables such as potatoes and eggplants. Widespread in the whole alpine territory, between  Lecco ,  Bergamo ,  Sondrio  and  Brescia , are stews and ragouts of Alpine fauna such as  roe deer ,  deer  and  hares , often accompanied by  polenta .
 Veal  meat is particularly used in the Milan area and is at the base of two of the most popular city dishes:  cotoletta   alla milanese  and  ossobuco , traditionally prepared with sautéed  parsley ,  garlic  and  lemon zest  and served as a single dish together with  risotto .  Goose  meat is widely consumed in the Pavia and  Lomellina  areas for the preparation of first and second courses and sausages.
 
 Fish-based [ edit ] 
   Pike  with sauce 
 The most famous fish dish of  Lake Como  are the  missoltini , salted and dried  agoni  on special "wheels", the  misolta , which are then cooked on the grill and eaten possibly with toasted  polenta  and red wine: [16]  fishing and its preparation were a real ritual, and in the villages of the Como Riviera occupying someone else's fishing place was considered a serious offense. Other larian preparations are the  lavarello  or the  alborelle , which can be fried or  in  carpione .
 On  Lake Garda  famous dishes are  trout  baked with mushrooms and eel Gardesana, cooked on the grill and seasoned with oil and lemon, both typical products of the Benaco. [17]   Eel  was once also cooked near rivers, whereas today it has practically disappeared: on the Mantuan banks of the  Po , fried fish and pike in sauce are typical. Dishes based on fresh water fish can also be found in the Pavese area and in western Lombardy: in these same areas is historically prepared the  frog , once widely spread in  rice fields : frog is also present in other areas such as  Val Camonica , where the typical frog cake is prepared.
 
 Vegetarian [ edit ] 
 Typical vegetables of the Lombard plain are:  celery , beans,  green beans ,  carrots , leek,  zucchini , eggplant,  pumpkin ,  tomato , spinach and asparagus; whereas because of their rusticity, potatoes and savoy cabbage can be cultivated even in the coldest mountain areas. Among the second courses based on vegetables there are various versions of stuffed vegetables, above all zucchini, savoy cabbage meatballs and asparagus Milanese style, boiled and then laid on a  fried egg  ( Oeuf in cereghin ) and  chard   parmigiana . With herbs such as mint,  chives ,  parsley  and  chervil  it was customary to prepare the omelette with fine herbs. [18] 
 
 Polenta [ edit ] 
   Polenta uncia 
 In previous centuries  polenta  was the staple food of Lombard people:  polenta  could be eaten alone or as a side dish in meat dishes, such as the famous  polenta e osei , vegetables, such as polenta with mushrooms, with  lard  for  pulenta e gras pestà , or with one of the many cheeses. However, there are many seasonings and variants of the classic polenta:
 
 Polenta taragna, typical of Valtellina and of the alpine areas of Bergamo and Brescia, buckwheat flour is added to the corn flour, giving the polenta a darker color than the characteristic yellow one. [5] 
 Polenta uncia, from the Como area, prepared by adding cheese and butter over which garlic and sage have been browned while the polenta is still hot in the pot. 
 Polenta cròpa, typical of the upper Valtellina, cooked in cream. 
 Pult, typical of  Lecco , made with wheat flour added to corn flour. 
 Tóch, Como area and similar to polenta uncia, in which the cheese and butter were added later to the part of the polenta that had been taken out and not melted inside. 
 The  toch  was the base of the ritual of  toch e regell , where once the  polenta  was consumed, the copper pot was put back on the fire: once the pot was heated, red wine with cloves, cinnamon and lemon rind was poured inside. The wine, which softened the hardened  polenta  on the walls of the pot, was then drunk. [19] 
 Polenta , as well as corn flour, could be reused in its leftovers to create sweets, as in the case of the Mantuan  fiapòn . [20] [21] [22] 
 
 Sides, sauces, seasonings [ edit ] 
   Mixed boiled beef, capon and pork, with green sauce, mustard and yellow sauce 
 Typical condiment which is not to be missed when boiled meat is served, is  mustard , which is however an excellent match with the most flavoursome cheeses: the most common versions are Cremona mustard, with  cherries ,  tangerines ,  peaches  and  pears  infused in a syrup with mustard oil, [23]  Voghera mustard, similar to the Cremonese one but less spicy, [24]  and mostarda mantovana, prepared with pears,  apples ,  quince , pumpkin and  melon . [5]  Widespread is also  mostarda di cipolle  (onion mustard), more similar to a jam because of its consistency, but always prepared with the addition of mustard essence.
 To accompany the mixed boiled meat there are also the  peverata , made with  capers ,  anchovies , garlic and  hot pepper , typical of Pavia and Brianza (where there is no hot pepper), the  horseradish  sauce, made with horseradish and  vinegar , and the  grattacù  sauce, made with  rosehip berries , wine and sugar, and the Milanese yellow sauce, made with egg yolk and lemon juice, heated just long enough to set. [25]  Other sauces, partly shared with relative variants in the whole Northern Italy, are  green sauce  (or " bagnetto verde "), made of  parsley , oil and anchovies (compared to the original Piedmontese version, in Lombardy stale bread and egg yolk are also added), red sauce, obtained by cooking tomatoes, peppers and carrots.
 
 Desserts [ edit ] 
   Panettone  cut over a Christmas plate 
 The most famous Lombard sweets are  panettone  and  colomba , belonging to the Milanese confectionery tradition: by now spread all over Italy, the first one is a typical  Christmas cake  with a cylindrical shape whose dough is enriched with raisins and candied fruit while the second one is generally consumed during Easter time, with a dough similar to panettone, but shaped like a  dove  and covered with icing and sugar. Another typical Milanese sweet of Christmas festivities, in particular of New Year's Eve, is  carsenza , which is made of raisins and apples. [26] 
 A elaborated version, with a dough halfway between  panettone  and  brioche  and covered with icing and sugar grains is  veneziana : consumed in the big version, of the size of a traditional panettone, at Christmas, during the year it is instead consumed in " monodose " portions of the size of a doughnut. Other Christmas sweets outside the Milanese territory are the  bisciola   valtellinese , a loaf of bread with a dough similar to  panettone  with raisins, and the  bossolà bresciano , obtained by three successive leavening.
 
   A  colomba  for Easter 
 Widespread all over Lombardy are  frittelle , which have different names according to the ingredients and the method of preparation as well as the area of origin: very common are  chestnut   frittelle , because of the flour used, and apple  frittelle , because of the filling ingredient.
 Other famous sweets of the region are Cremona nougat ( turòon ), [27]  according to the legend created by local confectioners for the wedding of  Francesco Sforza  and  Bianca Maria Visconti , and  amaretti di Saronno , crispy cookies made of  almonds ,  albumen  and armelline. Probably influenced by Piedmontese confectionery are  baci di Cremona , similar to  baci   di dama  but with a crispy cookie made of hazelnut flour, and  baci del Signore di Pavia , more flattened, filled with orange marmalade and half covered with melted chocolate. [28]  Among other cookies we have  offelle di Parona , sometimes prepared with rice flour,  mostaccini , a Cremonese cookie prepared with the addition of, among other spices,  clove ,  mace ,  coriander  and  star anise ,  biscottini di Prosto , a cookie with a high content of butter cooked twice in the oven typical of  Valchiavenna .
 
   Torrone  from  Cremona 
 In the area of the low plain there are a famous series of cakes: the Mantuan  torta delle rose , so called because it is made up of various forms of rolled dough, the  Anello di Monaco , a sort of high doughnut made of leavened dough covered with icing, and the  sbrisolona  cake, a cake made of yellow flour and almonds which is particularly crumbly, and its similar  Lodi  cake  tortionata , prepared with white flour instead of yellow.
 From Cremona are  spongarda , a cake filled with dried fruit, and  torta   bertolina , made with strawberry grapes, and finally  torta del Paradiso  from Pavia. Sweet version of the famous dish from Bergamo is  polenta e osei , made with sweet  polenta  covered with yellow  almond paste  decorated with chocolate birds or  marzipan .
 Typical of western Lombardy are  brutti e buoni  from  Gavirate , sweets made of almonds and hazelnuts,  chiaro di Luna  from  Paullo , the  torta paesana  from  Brianza , made of  cocoa , milk and stale bread, created to reuse bread left over from meals. Prepared with  maize flour  are  Amor polenta , from  Varese , and  pan meino  ( Pan de mej ), a sort of small sweet  focaccia  flavored with  elder flowers .
 
 Typical and traditional products [ edit ] 
 See also:  Category:Italian products with a designation of origin 
 Lombardy, thanks to its territorial variety has one of the highest numbers of PDO and PGI products, to be precise 34 (updated January 2019): 14 cheeses, 10 sausages and salami, 4 types of fruits and vegetables, 2 species of fish, 2 designations of olive oil and 1 honey. [29]  The region also has 250 Products with a  designation of origin  recognized by the Ministry of Agriculture Food and Forestry according to the 2017 revision. [30] 
 
 Cheese [ edit ] 
 Lombardy is one of the Italian regions with the greatest tradition of dairy products: Lombardy counts among its cheeses 14  D.O.P . products and 63  P.A.T ., the highest number among the Italian regions. [31] 
 One of the most famous and widespread cheese in the region is  Grana Padano , produced in most of the region except for  Valtellina  and  Como , it is one of the most famous and ancient hard paste Italian cheeses, used together with  Parmigiano Reggiano , produced in the  province of Mantua , as a condiment for first courses and fillings: [32]  both derive from Granone Lodigiano, the ancestor of all Italian  Grana cheeses , whose origin is attributed to the monks of the  Chiaravalle Abbey  in the 12th century.
 
   Quartirolo Lombardo 
 Another famous cheese from Lombardy, originally from Milan but nowadays produced in almost all the region, is  Gorgonzola , a raw cheese in two versions: a "sweet" one, softer and creamier, and a "spicy" one, more compact and with a stronger taste. [33]  Other " panlombardi " cheeses are  Taleggio , a soft cheese with raw paste coming from the  homonymous valley , and  Quartirolo Lombardo , whereas the last DOP denomination in order of time is  Silter  from  Brescia .
 Exclusively from the mountain areas, especially from Valtellina, are Casera and Bitto, cheeses with a semi-soft and soft texture that can be eaten alone, or used melted as a condiment over  pizzoccheri  from Valtellina, or as a real dish as in  sciatt . Among other DOP cheeses from Lombardy we can mention  Provolone Valpadana , Salva Cremasco, Strachitunt, Nostrano Valtrompia, Formai de Mut from Alta Valle Brembana and finally Formaggella del Luinese, the only DOP goat cheese from Lombardy.
 Stracchino  and  Robiola  considered as cheese categories: belonging to the first group there are Stracchino Bronzone, Stracchino della Valsassina, Stracchino Orobico and Stracchino Tipico; [34]  belonging to the second group there are Robiola Bresciana and Robiola della Valsassina. [35] 
 Other famous Lombard cheeses worthy of note are Agrì di Valtorta, Bagòss,  Branzi , caprini Bergamaschi, Casatta di Corteno Golgi, Casolet,  Rosa Camuna , Tombea, Semuda, Zincarlin and  Mascarpone , eaten alone or used as a base element for the cream used to accompany  panettone . [5] 
 
 Cold cuts [ edit ] 
   Bresaola  della Valtellina served with bread, olives and onions 
 The historical spreading of breeding in Lombardy has given the region a wide tradition of cold cuts and sausages. Among DOP and IGP products, there are three types of pork salami: Brianza salami, produced in the hills between Lecco and Milan, Varzi salami, produced in the Oltrepò pavese with pork meat, pepper and wine, and Cremona salami. More particular is the goose salami from Mortara, in the land of  Lomellina  where the use of goose in cooking is very common. [36] 
 
   Liver  Mortadella  with  vin brulé 
 Every province has at least one typical salami, among which the most famous are Milano salami, Casalin mantovano, and bastardei from  Valchiavenna . Also from Valtellina territory are  bresaola , obtained from the seasoning of beef meat and that can be smoked or not, and  slinzega . [5] 
 As far as hams are concerned, we can mention prosciutto mantovano, with its sweet taste,  prosciutto crudo  delle Orobie ,  prosciutto al pepe della Valtellina , and  prosciutto d'oca stagionato della Lomellina . [37]  Besides  mortadella  produced in the whole region, there is also the Vin Brulé liver mortadella, originally from the mountains between  Lecco  and  Valtellina .
 
 Bread [ edit ] 
   Michette  on the shelves of a bakery 
 Typical and common bread in Milan, but also in the rest of western Lombardy, is the  rosetta , locally called  michetta , blown bread (almost empty inside) and with a "turtle shell" shape derived from the mold used to make the dough, traditionally consumed with cold cuts, especially with  mortadella , it was the symbol snack of  magut  (bricklayers) and workers for its rusticity and low cost. [38] 
 Typical of Pavia area are instead the hard bread, whose dough must be prepared in three different moments at a distance of some hours, and the rice bread, common in Lomellina, a land where the cultivation of rice is strongly spread. [39]  Similarly, given the wide diffusion of  maize  in the Lombardy plain, in the lower Lombardy area it is possible to find yellow bread, prepared with maize flour. [40] 
 Typical of Valtellina is  rye bread , a doughnut shaped bread created with the addition of  rye flour , whereas originating from  Livigno  is  pan carcent , a doughnut shaped bread with  turnips  added in the dough, and  pan da cool , loaves of bread with  colostrum  added in the dough. [41] [42] 
 Recently elected as typical bread of Bergamo is the  Garibalda , a loaf of bread made of a mixture of semolina flour, whole wheat flour, buckwheat flour and corn flour. Typical of the city of  Virgilio  is  pane mantovano  or  mantovanina , a hard dough bread created by rolling up the dough, which will create the typical curls at the ends of the bread once it is baked.
 
 Wine [ edit ] 
 See also:  Category:Wines from Lombardia 
   Moscato di Scanzo DOCG 
 The cultivation of vine dates back to Neolithic times, as witnessed by the finding of  grape seeds  in archaeological sites of the same period, however the first reliable sources about the production of wine date back to the first century BC, in which are described the wines of Oltrepò Pavese and the " Rhaetian  wines" produced in the area of lake Como.
 Lombard provinces boast 5 DOCG, 22 DOC and 15 IGT: 60% of the regional wine production falls under DOC and DOCG appellation, that is about the double of the national average. [43] 
 
   Bottle and glass of  Franciacorta  DOCG 
 The most renowned wine production areas are  Oltrepò  Pavese, in the province of Pavia,  Franciacorta , a hilly area south from  lake Iseo , [5]  the  morainic  area around  Lake Garda , and Valtellina, where wines are cultivated on the typical terraces which allow the cultivation on very steep mountainous terrains and a higher insolation to vineyards. [44] 
 The 5 Lombardy DOCG denominations are: [45] 
 
 Franciacorta , sparkling wine made from  chardonnay  and  pinot grapes , in white and rose versions. 
 Valtellina superiore, obtained by  Nebbiolo grapes  cultivated in the northern side of Valtellina in the typical terraces, which together with the characteristics of the soil allow a higher insolation in order to compensate the harshness of climate. It is a full bodied wine with a strong taste to be consumed with meat dishes. 
 Sforzato di Valtellina, also obtained by Nebbiolo grapes left to dry beyond the normal harvesting period in order to naturally increase the sugar content of the fruit. The result is a rare example of very structured dry " passito ", to be consumed with important meat dishes such as stews and braised meat. 
 Oltrepò Pavese metodo classico , sparkling wine made with Pinot produced in the province of Pavia in white and rose versions. 
 Moscato di Scanzo,  raisin wine  obtained with a method similar to the Sforzato di Valtellina in the hilly lands with high slope, to be consumed with chocolate and cheese. It is produced exclusively in the commune of  Scanzorosciate  in the province of Bergamo. 
 Famous DOC wines of the region are Buttafuoco,  Bonarda  and Sangue di Giuda, sweet red wine not passito, from Oltrepò Pavese,  Curtefranca  and  Cellatica , from Franciacorta, Valtenesi, Garda Bresciano and Lugana from the Garda area, Rosso di Valtellina, and Lambrusco Mantovano.
 Lastly, it is worth mentioning the wines of the province of Bergamo, such as Terre del Colleoni and Valcalepio; IGT wines of Terre Lariane, produced in some areas of the provinces of Lecco and Como, and the only DOC wine produced in the province of Milan,  San Colombano .
 In the hills of  Brianza , especially in the Lecco area, there are still many big knobs producing wines which are very appreciated in the area, such as Pincianel and Nustranel.
 Until the second half of the nineteenth century,  Alto Milanese  was also a wine area. [46] [47]  The history of viticulture in the Alto Milanese area has its roots in  Roman times . In this area were once produced some renowned wines, among which Colli di Sant'Erasmo, Santana and Clintù. [48] 
 
 Olive oil [ edit ] 
 See also:  Category:Olive oil from Lombardy 
   Extra virgin olive oil of  Manerba del Garda , on the Garda bresciano 
 Although Lombardy is outside the tradition of cultivation, the cultivation of olive trees and the production of  olive oil  is attested since the Middle Ages on the lakes of Lombardy, where the effect of large water basins mitigates the climate and protects plants from the high temperature changes typical of the rest of the region: overall in the region there are more than 1600 hectares of land planted with olive trees, most of them dedicated to the production of olives for mills.
 The territory of Lombardy has two protected designations of origin:
 
 Laghi Lombardi DOP Extra Virgin Olive Oil, in its two subzones Lario, produced on Lake Como, and Sebino, produced on  Lake Iseo 
 Garda DOP Extra Virgin Olive Oil, in its subzone Bresciano. 
 Both productions present in general a low productivity with oils of low acidity, delicate flavor and particularly valuable. [49] 
 
 Alcoholic drinks [ edit ] 
   A  pirlo , aperitif of Brescian origin 
 Widespread in all wine territories is the production of  grappa , especially in the  province of Brescia  and in the  province of Sondrio : in particular  Valchiavenna  was, before the opening of the Sempione tunnel, one of the most famous places of grappa production in Italy.
 The local grappa producers ( grapat de la Val di Giust ) were forced to emigrate because of the crisis in Valchiavenna, deprived of its historical traffic of people and goods due to competition from the  Simplon Pass : some of the main families of grappa producers in all of northern Italy originate from Valchiavenna, including the Ghelfi, the Vener, the Levi and the Francoli families. Distilled differently from grappa are imperial drops, a distillate of herbs produced by the monks of the  Certosa of Pavia .
 As for typical liqueurs, the most renowned ones are  Braulio , a liqueur from Valtellina obtained by the infusion of mountain herbs,  amaretto liqueur , made of almonds and herbs whose origins date back to the sixteenth century, and  Fernet Branca , a liqueur with a characteristic bitter taste produced in the centre of Milan in the original factory, at the time of its foundation at the outskirts of the city. Other liqueurs are  Vespetrò  from  Canzo , made of  coriander , anise and orange peel,  Ramazzotti bitters  created in a store in the center of Milan by the pharmacist of the same name, Acqua di tutto cedro, produced in  Salò , and  nocino .
 Remaining distillates and liquors of big industrial groups are: the  Campari group , creator of  Aperol , Illva of Saronno, for the production of Zucca rhubarb as well as the famous  amaretto , and Distillerie Fratelli Branca.
 
A famous Lombard aperitif is  pirlo , which is made of still white wine and  Campari . It has origins in Brescia and it is similar in concept to the more known  spritz , which has origins in Veneto. The fashion of  happy hour  has also introduced for pirlo the use of Aperol (much less alcoholic and complex) instead of Campari. Pirlo is served in a glass with a high stem and a typical balloon shape. [50] 
 See also [ edit ] 
 Italian cuisine 
 Lombardia 
 Cuisine of Mantua 
 References [ edit ] 
 
 
 ^   ( Guaiti & p. 10 )  harv error: no target: CITEREFGuaitip._10 ( help ) . 
 
 ^   ( Regione Lombardia & p. 1 )  harv error: no target: CITEREFRegione_Lombardiap._1 ( help ) . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   "Storia tradizioni cucina lombarda" .  www.taccuinistorici.it . 
 
 ^  a   b   "Le 9 ricette più tradizionali della Lombardia" .  www.lacucinaitaliana.it . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   e   f   "Piatti tipici della cucina regionale - La Lombardia" .  www.dossier.net . 
 
 ^   ( Guaiti & p. 11 )  harv error: no target: CITEREFGuaitip._11 ( help ) . 
 
 ^   "Cucina Tipica Italiana - Lombardia" .  www.cucchiaio.it . 
 
 ^   ( Regione Lombardia & p. 15 )  harv error: no target: CITEREFRegione_Lombardiap._15 ( help ) . 
 
 ^   ( Regione Lombardia & p. 14 )  harv error: no target: CITEREFRegione_Lombardiap._14 ( help ) . 
 
 ^   ( Regione Lombardia & p. 24 )  harv error: no target: CITEREFRegione_Lombardiap._24 ( help ) . 
 
 ^   ( Regione Lombardia & p. 124 )  harv error: no target: CITEREFRegione_Lombardiap._124 ( help ) . 
 
 ^   ( Regione Lombardia & p. 90 )  harv error: no target: CITEREFRegione_Lombardiap._90 ( help ) . 
 
 ^   "Polenta e osei" .  www.buonalombardia.regione.lombardia.it . 
 
 ^   Il cuoco perfetto . Vol. 2. I secondi con la carne. La Spezia-Milano: Fratelli Melita Editori – Editoriale del Drago. 1988. p. 348. {{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: others ( link ) 
 
 ^   ( Regione Lombardia & p. 137 )  harv error: no target: CITEREFRegione_Lombardiap._137 ( help ) . 
 
 ^   ( Regione Lombardia & p. 67 )  harv error: no target: CITEREFRegione_Lombardiap._67 ( help ) . 
 
 ^   ( Regione Lombardia & p. 155 )  harv error: no target: CITEREFRegione_Lombardiap._155 ( help ) . 
 
 ^   ( Regione Lombardia & p. 28 )  harv error: no target: CITEREFRegione_Lombardiap._28 ( help ) . 
 
 ^   ( Regione Lombardia & p. 64 )  harv error: no target: CITEREFRegione_Lombardiap._64 ( help ) . 
 
 ^   Gino Brunetti, ed. (1981).  Cucina mantovana di principi e di popolo. Testi antichi e ricette tradizionali  [ Mantuan cuisine of princes and people. Ancient texts and traditional recipes ]. Mantua. pp. 231–232. 
 
 ^   "Fiapòn" .  ars-alimentaria.it . 
 
 ^   "Tradizioni da rispettare Chisöl, ecco il segreto" .  Gazzetta di Mantova . 
 
 ^   "Mostarda di Cremona, frutta candita per accompagnare bolliti" .  www.salepepe.it . 
 
 ^   "Mostarda di Voghera (Pavia)" .  www.infodeco.it . 
 
 ^   ( Guatteri & p. 52 )  harv error: no target: CITEREFGuatterip._52 ( help ) . 
 
 ^   "La carsenza, il dolce della tradizione contadina milanese" . 
 
 ^   ( Atlante dei prodotti tipici & p. 155 )  harv error: no target: CITEREFAtlante_dei_prodotti_tipicip._155 ( help ) . 
 
 ^   ( Atlante dei prodotti tipici & p. 131 )  harv error: no target: CITEREFAtlante_dei_prodotti_tipicip._131 ( help ) . 
 
 ^   Regione Lombardia.  "Elenco DOP/IGP Regione Lombardia"   (PDF) . 
 
 ^   Regione Lombardia.  "Elenco prodotti dodicesima revisione"   (PDF) . 
 
 ^   ( Atlante dei prodotti tipici & p. 13 )  harv error: no target: CITEREFAtlante_dei_prodotti_tipicip._13 ( help ) . 
 
 ^   ( Atlante dei prodotti tipici & p. 18 )  harv error: no target: CITEREFAtlante_dei_prodotti_tipicip._18 ( help ) . 
 
 ^   ( Atlante dei prodotti tipici & p. 17 )  harv error: no target: CITEREFAtlante_dei_prodotti_tipicip._17 ( help ) . 
 
 ^   Atlante dei prodotti tipici —  p. 105 . 
 
 ^   ( Atlante dei prodotti tipici & p. 101 )  harv error: no target: CITEREFAtlante_dei_prodotti_tipicip._101 ( help ) . 
 
 ^   ( Atlante dei prodotti tipici & pp. 23-25 )  harv error: no target: CITEREFAtlante_dei_prodotti_tipicipp._23-25 ( help ) . 
 
 ^   ( Atlante dei prodotti tipici & pp. 54-56 )  harv error: no target: CITEREFAtlante_dei_prodotti_tipicipp._54-56 ( help ) . 
 
 ^   ( Atlante dei prodotti tipici & p. 145 )  harv error: no target: CITEREFAtlante_dei_prodotti_tipicip._145 ( help ) . 
 
 ^   ( Atlante dei prodotti tipici & p. 146 )  harv error: no target: CITEREFAtlante_dei_prodotti_tipicip._146 ( help ) . 
 
 ^   ( Atlante dei prodotti tipici & p. 147 )  harv error: no target: CITEREFAtlante_dei_prodotti_tipicip._147 ( help ) . 
 
 ^   ( Atlante dei prodotti tipici & p. 137 )  harv error: no target: CITEREFAtlante_dei_prodotti_tipicip._137 ( help ) . 
 
 ^   ( Atlante dei prodotti tipici & p. 144 )  harv error: no target: CITEREFAtlante_dei_prodotti_tipicip._144 ( help ) . 
 
 ^   Regione Lombardia.  "Vini di Lombardia" . 
 
 ^   "I vini della Lombardia" .  www.enotecaletteraria.it . 
 
 ^   "Vino e qualità in Lombardia"   (PDF) .  www.consumatorilombardia.it . 
 
 ^   ( Agnoletto & p. 70 )  harv error: no target: CITEREFAgnolettop._70 ( help ) . 
 
 ^   "L'uva dei fratelli Gnecchi Ruscone all'esposizione di Merate del 1876" .  bartesaghiverderiostoria.blogspot.it . 
 
 ^   "Stemma di Marcallo con Casone" . marcallo.it. 
 
 ^   ( Atlante dei prodotti tipici & p. 26 )  harv error: no target: CITEREFAtlante_dei_prodotti_tipicip._26 ( help ) . 
 
 ^   "Il pirlo" . 
 
 
 Bibliography [ edit ] 
 Agnoletto, Attilio (1992).  San Giorgio su Legnano - storia, società, ambiente . 
 Daniela Guaiti (2010).  Lombardia .  La grande cucina regionale italiana . Verona: Gribaudo. 
 "Per un codice della cucina lombarda"   (PDF) . Regione Lombardia. 
 "Atlante dei prodotti tipici e tradizionali"   (PDF) . Regione Lombardia. 
 Gastronomia , vol. 5, 1982,  OCLC   163181971 
 Other projects [ edit ] 
 
 
 Lombard cuisine   at Wikipedia's  sister projects 
 
 Definitions  from Wiktionary Media  from Commons News  from Wikinews Quotations  from Wikiquote Texts  from Wikisource Textbooks  from Wikibooks Resources  from Wikiversity 
 
   Wikibooks  contiene ricette della  cucina lombarda 
   Wikimedia Commons  contiene immagini o altri file sulla  cucina lombarda 
 v t e   Cuisine of Italy History 
 Ancient Roman cuisine 
 Medieval cuisine 
 Early modern cuisine 
 Contemporary cuisine 
 Regional cuisines 
 Abruzzese 
 Apulian 
 Arbëreshë 
 Ligurian 
 Lombard 
 Lucanian 
 Neapolitan 
 Roman 
 Sardinian 
 Sicilian 
 Venetian 
 Pasta and sauces 
 Pasta  ( List ) 
 Carbonara 
 Pesto 
 Ragù 
 Neapolitan ragù 
 Arrabbiata sauce 
 Amatriciana sauce 
 Marinara sauce 
 Genovese sauce 
 Bolognese sauce 
 Checca sauce 
 Fettuccine Alfredo 
 Pasta alla Norma 
 Pasta con i peperoni cruschi 
 Pasta con le sarde 
 Pasta e fagioli 
 Pasta al pomodoro 
 Pasta all'Ortolana 
 Rigatoni con la Pajata 
 Cacio e pepe 
 Spaghetti aglio e olio 
 Spaghetti alla puttanesca 
 Spaghetti alle vongole 
 Tumact me tulez 
 Soups 
 Soup alla canavese 
 Soup alla modenese 
 Acquacotta 
 Bagnun 
 Minestrone 
 Ribollita 
 Other dishes ( List ) 
 Bagna càuda 
 Braciola 
 Bruschetta 
 Cotoletta 
 Cotoletta alla milanese 
 Crostino 
 Bollito misto 
 Baccalà alla lucana 
 Baccalà alla vicentina 
 Cacciatore 
 Cacciucco 
 Caponata 
 Cappon magro 
 Caprese salad 
 Carciofi alla romana 
 Carpaccio 
 Carne pizzaiola 
 Cassoeula 
 Ciambotta 
 Ciccioli 
 Coda alla vaccinara 
 Fiorentina 
 Fondue 
 Frico 
 Frittata 
 Frìttuli 
 Istrian stew 
 Lampredotto 
 Polenta 
 Porchetta 
 Panzanella 
 Parmigiana 
 Ossobuco 
 Orzotto 
 Rafanata 
 Risotto 
 Rollatini 
 Saltimbocca 
 Scaloppine 
 Timballo 
 Vitello tonnato 
 Pizza and street food 
 Pizza 
 al taglio 
 Neapolitan pizza 
 Sicilian pizza 
 Focaccia 
 Piscialandrea 
 Calzone 
 Panzerotti 
 Crocchè 
 Arancini 
 Supplì 
 Frittula 
 Panelle 
 Pani câ meusa 
 Panino 
 Piadina 
 Arrosticini 
 Farinata 
 Tramezzino 
 Zippuli 
 Sardenara 
 Scaccia 
 U' pastizz 'rtunnar 
 Cheeses and charcuterie 
 Cheeses 
 PDO 
 Salumi 
 Pastry and desserts ( List ) 
 Bocconotto 
 Bombolone 
 Bruttiboni 
 Buccellato 
 Budino 
 Cannoli 
 Cantuccini 
 Cassata 
 Cassatella di sant'Agata 
 Castagnaccio 
 Cavallucci 
 Colomba di Pasqua 
 Crostata 
 Crocetta of Caltanissetta 
 Gelato 
 Granita 
 Grattachecca 
 Marzipan 
 Mustacciuoli 
 Neapolitan ice cream 
 Neccio 
 Pandoro 
 Panettone 
 Panforte 
 Panna cotta 
 Panpepato 
 Parrozzo 
 Pastiera 
 Pignolata 
 Pizzelle 
 Ricciarelli 
 Seada 
 Semifreddo 
 Sfogliatelle 
 Sorbetto 
 Sponge cake 
 Spumoni 
 Struffoli 
 Tartufo 
 Tiramisu 
 Torrone 
 Torta caprese 
 Zabaione 
 Zeppole 
 Zuccotto 
 Zuppa Inglese 
 Breads 
 Borlengo 
 Breadstick 
 Ciabatta 
 Coppia Ferrarese 
 Filone 
 Michetta 
 Pane carasau 
 Pane di Altamura 
 Pane sciocco 
 Sgabeo 
 Taralli 
 Vastedda 
 Wines 
 Varieties 
 IGT 
 DOCG 
 DOC 
 Abruzzo 
 Calabrian 
 Friulan 
 Lombardy 
 Piedmont 
 Tuscan 
 Veneto 
 Alcoholic beverages 
 Beer 
 Grappa 
 Sambuca 
 Mirto 
 Vermouth 
 Spritz 
 Limoncello 
 Fernet 
 Campari 
 Aperol 
 Cynar 
 Amaro 
 Amaretto 
 Nocino 
 Centerbe 
 Bargnolino 
 Maraschino 
 Sassolino 
 Strega 
 Rosolio 
 Galliano 
 Frangelico 
 Alchermes 
 Aurum 
 Coffee 
 Caffè 
 Espresso 
 Lungo 
 Ristretto 
 Doppio 
 Espressino 
 Cappuccino 
 Caffelatte 
 Latte macchiato 
 Caffè macchiato 
 Caffè corretto 
 Affogato 
 Mocaccino 
 Marocchino 
 Bicerin 
 Barbajada 
 Bombardino 
 See also 
 Sammarinese cuisine 
 Italian-American cuisine 
 Italian food products 
 Osteria 
 Trattoria 
 Enoteca 
 Sagra 
 List of Italian chefs 
 List of Italian dishes 
 Meal structure 
 Italian Sounding 
 
   Italy portal 
   Food portal 
 
  
NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw2388
Cached time: 20230311170616
Cache expiry: 1814400
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc, no‐toc‐conversion]
CPU time usage: 0.691 seconds
Real time usage: 0.872 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2702/1000000
Post‐expand include size: 96949/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 784/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 2/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 95542/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.405/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 24773059/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/400
 
 
Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  644.764      1 -total
 36.54%  235.597      1 Template:Reflist
 18.94%  122.138     20 Template:Cite_web
 15.10%   97.363      1 Template:Lang
 14.16%   91.310      1 Template:Italian_cuisine
 13.80%   88.946      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  9.60%   61.885      1 Template:Sister_project_links
  9.57%   61.723     29 Template:Harvard_citation
  8.64%   55.724      1 Template:Short_description
  7.55%   48.703      1 Template:Cuisine_of_Italy
 
  Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:idhash:32465016-0!canonical and timestamp 20230311170615 and revision id 1134187285. Rendering was triggered because: page-view
  
 esi <esi:include src="/esitest-fa8a495983347898/content" />  
 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Lombard_cuisine&oldid=1134187285 " 
 Category :  Cuisine of Lombardy Hidden categories:  Harv and Sfn no-target errors CS1 maint: others Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Italian-language text Pages using Sister project links with default search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  This page was last edited on 17 January 2023, at 11:57  (UTC) . 
 Text is available under the  Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0 ;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the  Terms of Use  and  Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the  Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. 
 
 
 Privacy policy 
 About Wikipedia 
 Disclaimers 
 Contact Wikipedia 
 Mobile view 
 Developers 
 Statistics 
 Cookie statement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
