
 
 
 Jump to content 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle sidebar 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Create account Log in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Personal tools 
 
 
 
 
   Create account   Log in 
 
 
 
 
		Pages for logged out editors  learn more 
 
 
 Contributions Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Navigation 
 
 
 Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate 
 
 
 
 
 Contribute 
 
 
 Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file 
 
 
 
 
 Tools 
 
 
 What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item 
 
 
 
 
 Print/export 
 
 
 Download as PDF Printable version 
 
 
 
 
 In other projects 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons 
 
 
 
 
 Languages 
 
 On this Wikipedia the language links are at the top of the page across from the article title.  Go to top . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CentralNotice  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Contents 
 move to sidebar 
 hide 
 
 
 
 
 (Top) 
 
 
 
 
 
 1 History 
 
 
				Toggle History subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 1.1 Origins 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.2 Cultural and regional influences 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.3 As national cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 Staples 
 
 
				Toggle Staples subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 2.1 Rice 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.2 Noodles 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.3 Bread 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.4 Other staples 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 Protein 
 
 
				Toggle Protein subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 3.1 Meat 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4 Fruit and vegetables 
 
 
				Toggle Fruit and vegetables subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 4.1 Vegetables 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.2 Vegetarianism in Malaysia 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.3 Fruit 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5 Ingredients 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6 Structure of meals 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 7 Food establishments 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8 Cuisines of Malaysia 
 
 
				Toggle Cuisines of Malaysia subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 8.1 Malay cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 
 8.1.1 Javanese-influenced cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8.2 Malaysian Chinese cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8.3 Malaysian Indian cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8.4 Sabahan food 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8.5 Sarawakian food 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8.6 Peranakan food 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8.7 Eurasian food 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8.8 Other Malaysian cuisines 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 9 Kuih (delicacy) and snack 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 10 Desserts and sweets 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 11 See also 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 12 References 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 13 External links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
						Toggle the table of contents
					 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle the table of contents 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Malaysian cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 21 languages 
 
 
 
 العربية বাংলা Čeština Español فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Jawa ქართული Bahasa Melayu 日本語 Português Suomi தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 
 Edit links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Article Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 English 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 More 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
 
 
 Culinary traditions of Malaysia 
 See also:  List of Malaysian dishes 
 This article  needs additional citations for  verification .  Please help  improve this article  by  adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources:   "Malaysian cuisine"  –  news   ·   newspapers   ·   books   ·   scholar   ·   JSTOR   ( May 2017 )  ( Learn how and when to remove this template message ) 
 
 
 Nasi lemak on banana leaf.jpg This article is part of the series on Malaysian cuisine Masakan Malaysia 
 Regional and cultural cuisines 
 Chinese 
 Eurasian 
 Indian 
 Javanese 
 Malay 
 Peranakan 
 Sabah 
 Sarawak 
 
 Ingredients 
 Belacan 
 Budu 
 Gula Melaka 
 Kerisik 
 Kicap Manis 
 Pandan 
 Sambal 
 Santan 
 Tapai 
 Tempoyak 
 
 Types of food 
 Foods 
 Dishes 
 Soups 
 Kuih 
 Keropok 
 Kerepek 
 Drinks 
 Alcohol 
 
 Holidays and festivals 
 Chinese New Year 
 Hari Raya Puasa 
 Hari Raya Qurban 
 Deepavali 
 Christmas 
 Tadau Kaamatan 
 Gawai 
 
 Related cuisines 
 Bruneian 
 Chinese 
 Filipino 
 Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Singaporean 
 Thai 
 
 See also 
 History 
 Cookbook: Cuisine of Malaysia 
 
   Malaysia portal   Food portal v t e 
 Malaysian cuisine  consists of cooking traditions and practices found in  Malaysia , and reflects the multi-ethnic makeup of its population. [1]  The vast majority of  Malaysia 's population can roughly be divided among three major ethnic groups:  Malays ,  Chinese  and  Indians . The remainder consists of the  indigenous  peoples of  Sabah  and  Sarawak  in  East Malaysia , the  Orang Asli  of  Peninsular Malaysia , the  Peranakan  and  Eurasian  creole communities, as well as a significant number of foreign workers and expatriates.
 As a result of historical migrations, colonisation by foreign powers, and its geographical position within its wider home region, Malaysia's culinary style in the present day is primarily a melange of traditions from its Malay, Chinese, Indian,  Indonesian ,  Filipino  and indigenous Bornean and Orang Asli, with light to heavy influences from  Arab ,  Thai ,  Portuguese ,  Dutch  and  British cuisines , to name a few. This resulted in a symphony of flavours, making Malaysian cuisine highly complex and diverse. The condiments, herbs and spices used in cooking vary.
 Because Peninsular Malaysia shares a common history with  Singapore , it is common to find versions of the same dish across both sides of the border regardless of the place of origin, such as  laksa  and  chicken rice . The same thing can be said with Malaysian Borneo and  Brunei , such as  Ambuyat . Also because of their proximity, historic migration and close ethnic and cultural kinship, Malaysia shares culinary ties with  Indonesia ,  Thailand  and the  Philippines , [2]  as these nations often share certain dishes, such as  satay  and  rendang .
 Because the vast majority of Chinese Malaysians are descendants of immigrants from  southern China , Malaysian Chinese cuisine is predominantly based on an eclectic repertoire of dishes with roots from Fujian, Teochew, Cantonese, Hakka and Hainanese cuisines. [3]  However, despite the vast majority of Indian Malaysians are descendants of immigrants from southern India, Malaysian Indian cuisine has a mixture of north-south Indian and Sri Lankan diversity that can be differentiated by drier or wetter curry dish preparation. [ citation needed ] 
 
 
 History [ edit ] 
 Origins [ edit ] 
 Malaysian cuisine has developed over the  region's history . Although the modern state of Malaysia did not exist until 1963, the cuisine can claim traceable roots as far back as the 1400s during the time of the  Malacca Sultanate . Malaysian cuisine is a mixture of various food cultures from around the Malay archipelago, India, China, the Middle East, and several European countries. [4]  This diverse culinary culture stems from Malaysia's diverse culture and colonial past. [5]  The cuisine was developed as a melange between local and foreign. In the 15th century, the region now known as Malaysia became an important passageway for maritime trade. Passing through Malaysia were Arab traders who  brought spices  from the Middle East, as well as Portuguese, Dutch, and English colonists and traders who introduced food staples such as peanuts, pineapples, avocado, tomato, squash and pumpkin. [4]  During the 19th century during the period of British colonial rule, many Indian and Chinese laborers were brought to Malaysia, contributing to the diversity of tastes in Malaysian cuisine. [6] [4] 
 
 Cultural and regional influences [ edit ] 
 This section  needs additional citations for  verification .  Please help  improve this article  by  adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.   ( July 2022 )  ( Learn how and when to remove this template message ) 
 Being a multicultural country, Malaysians have over the years adopted each other's dishes to suit the taste buds of their own culture. For instance, Malaysians of Chinese descent have adapted the Indian  curry , and made it more dilute and less spicy to suit their taste. Chinese  noodles  have been crossed with Indian and Malay tastes and thus Malay fried noodles and Indian fried noodles were born. Malaysians have also adapted famous dishes from neighbouring countries, or those with strong cultural and religious ties, and in the absence of an established community from said countries have made it completely their own, a notable example being  tom yam , one of Thailand's most well-known dishes.
 After migrating south of the border, Thai tom yam takes on the visual characteristics of a Malaysian Assam gravy with a flavour profile of sweet, sour and spicy. It is thickened with pounded chile paste which also turns it a vivid orange-red.  Tamarind  is often used instead of lime juice as its souring agent, and dried instead of fresh chillies are used to provide a fiery kick.  Malay-style  tom yam soup tends to be heavily seafood-based, whereas in Chinese-style eateries the broth's spiciness is toned down and usually serves as a base for noodle soup.
 Across the sea from Peninsular Malaysia, on Borneo island, lie the states of Sabah and Sarawak. Traditional lifestyles and limited roads still predominate outside of the major cities, especially in Sarawak, where rivers are the only major highways for much of the inland population. The jungles of Borneo are teeming with wild plants, fungi, and fruits, and its sweeping coastlines and many large rivers provide an abundance of seafood and freshwater fish fit for the dinner table. A rich variety of traditional food has been developed by Borneo's many tribes and indigenous groups over the centuries; much of it is healthy food, consisting of foraged (now increasingly cultivated due to modernisation) and fermented foods. Because much of the region was once under the Brunei Sultanate's  thalassocracy , the  Bruneian Malay people  have left a lasting culinary influence, particularly on the cookery of the coastal Muslim communities of East Malaysia. According to the source paper written in 2006, the Malaysian food industrial sector accounted for about 14% of the total manufacturing energy consumption. [7] 
 Historically speaking, fresh produce is often scarce for hunter-gatherer nomadic tribes around the world, thus it is usually preserved out of necessity for important events and festivals. The tribal peoples of Sabah and Sarawak are no different; most of them have developed techniques for curing, fermenting or preserving their supplies of fresh meat, fruit and vegetables. For example, during festive occasions the  Murut people  of Sabah would serve  tamba  ( jeruk  in the Malay language) made from fresh raw  wild boar  or river fish, which is stuffed in bamboo tubes along with rice and salt and left to ferment for a few weeks, a technique which is also practised by the  Lun Bawang  people across the border in Sarawak. Fermented products are also frequently used as a cooking ingredient besides eaten on their own. Dayak households in Sarawak may saute their version of  fermented meat  with garlic and tapioca leaves (either fresh or pickled), and fermented   tempoyak  is a popular cooking seasoning. [ citation needed ] 
 The production and consumption of traditional liquor play an important cultural role for the non-Muslim peoples of East Malaysia. Alcoholic drinks made from rice is the most common form, as well as the widely available. In Sabah, the Penampang Kadazan  lihing  is perhaps the most well known. Yet due to the historical lack of a standardised Kadazandusun language used and understood statewide, ethnic groups from other districts in Sabah have very different names for similar fermented rice-based drinks: hiing (certain Dusun languages), kinomol, segantang, kinarung, kinopi, linahas, and even  tapai [8] [9]  To add to the confusion, tapai proper as understood by most Peninsular Malaysians is a fermented sweet and sour rice paste served as a snack or dessert, although further fermentation of the tapai to produce alcoholic drinks is possible. The preferred party drink of the Murut, made from the tuber of the cassava or tapioca plant, is also called tapai. [9]  The Iban of Sarawak call their rice wine tuak, which must not be confused with Sabahan talak, which is a hard liquor made from rice. To the native peoples of Sarawak, tuak may also refer to any alcoholic drink made from fermenting any carbohydrate-rich substance besides rice. [10] 
 
 As national cuisine [ edit ] 
 National cuisines are coveted constructs by tourism industries that need to serve tourists a variety of "local" or "authentic" dishes. In reality the ethnic makeup of countries often gives rise to dispute over ownership or inclusion of dishes in a respective national cuisine. The dishes that are most attractive to foreign tourists are heavily promoted as "typical" or "local". Malaysian cuisine has been promoted through Malaysian media and advertisements as inclusive of the cuisines of many Asian ethnic groups and cultures, and Malaysia as a singular location to experience the a diversity of authentic Asian  foodways . When the Ministry of Culture launched a program to promote cultural tourism it was decided that Malaysia would be "promoted as a meeting point of many different dishes from various ethnic groups" living in the country.
 Another goal of national cuisine is ethnic harmony in modern nation states. Malaysia saw culture as a path to cohesive national identity after the  Malaysia Race Riots  in 1969. In 1979 Islam was formally recognized as "an important element in the national culture."
 
 Staples [ edit ] 
 Rice [ edit ] 
   A Malaysian  nasi lemak  traditionally wrapped in  banana leaves 
 Rice ( Malay :  nasi ) is the most important staple food in Malaysia. According to Indonesian-born food and cookery writer  Sri Owen , there is some evidence for rice cultivation found in the state of  Sarawak  in Malaysian  Borneo  dated 2300 BC, and about 900 years of history for the state of  Kelantan  in West Malaysia. Today  Malaysia  produces about seventy percent of the amount of rice it needs to support itself and the rest is imported. [11]  This is a matter of policy as the government believes that national resources can be used more profitably instead of attempting to achieve self-sufficiency with rice production; the prevalent attitude is that revenue generated from its industries enables the country to import up to half the rice it needs. [12]  Nevertheless, the government is fully committed and involved in planning, allocating resources and managing subsidies for the rice farming industry. The state of Kedah is considered the "rice bowl" [13] [14]  ( Malay :  jelapang padi ) of the country, accounting for about half of Malaysia's total production of  rice .
 Plain steamed white rice , to be served with side dishes of meat or vegetables, is typically prepared with an electric  rice cooker  at home. Some households and food establishments prefer to cook rice on a stove top with the absorption method or the rapid-boil method. Compressed rice, called  nasi himpit , is another method of preparing and cooking rice: the rice is wrapped with fronds or leaves and compressed into the form of a cylinder, which is then cooked by boiling. The rice would compress and merge during the cooking process. Compressed rice is usually eaten cold with some sort of gravy, although it may be served warm in a broth or soup. A notable variant of compressed rice prepared by the  Bugis  community is  burasak : rice is precooked with coconut milk before it is wrapped in banana leaves and steamed until fully cooked.
 Besides the ubiquitous white rice, there are different types of locally grown and imported rice available in the market, and each type has a specific cooking method to bring out optimal results. [15]  Glutinous rice ( Malay :  pulut ) is one example: because of its low  amylose  and high  amylopectin  content which results in a sticky texture after cooking, glutinous rice is prepared with different measurements and techniques and is not suitably interchangeable with regular rice. It is typically used for making snacks and desserts, but glutinous rice is also prepared as a savoury staple by indigenous peoples like the  Orang Asli  as well as the  Dayak people  of Borneo.  Lemang  is glutinous rice roasted in a hollowed bamboo tube, and is prepared for festive occasions like  Ari Gawai ,  Hari Raya Aidilfitri , and  Hari Raya Aidiladha . [16] 
 A popular dish based on rice in Malaysia is  nasi lemak , rice steamed with coconut milk and pandan leaves to give it a rich fragrance. Of Malay origin,  nasi lemak  is very popular and frequently referred to as the  national dish . [17]  It is customarily served with  ikan bilis  or fried anchovies, peanuts, sliced  cucumber , hard-boiled eggs and  sambal . Although it is often considered a breakfast dish, it is served in a variety of ways and commonly eaten at any time of day due to its versatility. For a more substantial meal,  nasi lemak  may be served with fried chicken, curries, or a spicy meat stew called  rendang .
 Congee  is a type of rice  porridge  or gruel popular among Malaysia's ethnic communities. It is eaten primarily as a breakfast food or late supper. It is also considered particularly suitable for the sick as a mild, easily digestible food. [18]  Congee is called  bubur  in  Malay ; 粥 written in  Chinese , pronounced as  zhou  in  Mandarin Chinese  and  juk  in  Cantonese ; and  kanji  (கஞ்சி) in  Tamil . It may be served plain with little embellishment, or cooked with ingredients like fish slices, seafood, chicken, beef, pork, vegetables, and spices. The importance and popularity of congee in the Malaysian diet is such that  bubur ayam  or chicken congee is a permanent fixture on the menu of Malaysian  McDonald's  restaurants. [19] 
 
 Noodles [ edit ] 
 This section  does not  cite  any  sources .  Please help  improve this section  by  adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and  removed .   ( December 2015 )  ( Learn how and when to remove this template message ) 
 Noodles  are another popular staple, particularly in Malaysian Chinese cuisine, but used by other groups as well. Noodles such as bi hoon (米粉,  Hokkien : bí-hún,  Malay :  bihun ;  rice vermicelli ),  kuay teow  (粿條, Hokkien: kóe-tiâu) or ho fun (河粉,  Cantonese : ho4 fan2;  flat rice noodles ), mee (麵 or 面, Hokkien: mī, Malay:  mi ; yellow noodles), mee suah (麵線 or 面线, Hokkien: mī-sòaⁿ;  wheat vermicelli ), yee meen (伊麵 or 伊面, Cantonese: ji1 min6;  golden wheat noodles ), dongfen (冬粉, Hokkien: tang-hún, Cantonese: dung1 fan2;  cellophane noodles ), Lao Shu Fen (老鼠粉, Cantonese: lou5 syu2 fan2;  silver needle noodles ), and others provide an alternative source of carbohydrate to a serving of rice that accompanies every meal. Stir-fried noodle dishes ( Malay :  mee goreng ) are ubiquitous throughout Malaysia's cities, towns and villages, with numerous localised variants prepared by various ethnic communities according to their culinary traditions and preferences. MCFC OK
 
 Bread [ edit ] 
 This section  does not  cite  any  sources .  Please help  improve this section  by  adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and  removed .   ( December 2015 )  ( Learn how and when to remove this template message ) 
   Roti canai 
   Roti Telur and Teh Tarik 
 Malaysia does not produce wheat, and all supplies are imported from wheat-producing countries. Nevertheless, Western-style  white bread  and  Indian breads  made with wheat flour like  roti canai  are fairly common foods or is sandwiched along with a layer of  kaya  between slices of untoasted white bread.
 Traditional wheat-based pleated steamed  bao  or pao (Chinese : 包子) is a Chinese staple which has become tightly woven into Malaysia's gastronomic fabric. Pao are found in restaurants doing brunch  dim sum  trade, as well as specialist Chinese  kopitiam  (coffee shops). Sweet fillings may include  tausa ,  lotus seed paste ,  kaya , pandan, ground peanuts, and custard; savoury fillings may consist of stewed  char siu  (Chinese : 叉燒), chicken or pork. Malay versions ( pau ) may be found in night markets ( pasar malam ) and they are always  halal , with fillings of curried potato, chicken or beef. Some variants have a  quail egg  in the middle in addition to the curry.
 Oven-baked buns are also available in specialist bakeries,  kopitiam , and restaurants. One local speciality in particular - a bun with a buttery core and topped with a crispy and fragrant coffee pastry crust - has achieved iconic status in Malaysia, and franchises like  Rotiboy  and Pappa Roti which specialise in these coffee buns have successfully expanded abroad to multiple nations and spawned hundreds of outlets. However, the popular buns that remain a favourite among Malaysians are the buns that are filled with a sweet shredded coconut filling,  kaya  (coconut jam),  pandan kaya  (screwpine with coconut jam), sweet corn, chocolate, red bean paste and butter buns.
 
 Other staples [ edit ] 
 Like Peninsular Malaysia, rice is the undisputed staple food for the majority of the people of Sabah and Sarawak. Rice is central to  Kadazandusun  culture, and its paramount importance is reflected in the annual  Kaamatan  festival, as well as traditional beliefs and customs since antiquity which revolve around the veneration of rice spirits. But for other ethnic communities throughout Sabah and Sarawak, cassava or tapioca tubers as well as sago starch are also popular staples. The tapioca tuber is just as important as rice to the  Bajau people  of Sabah, while the  Dayak peoples  of Sarawak make extensive use of both the tuber and leaves of the tapioca plant in their cooking. Sago starch is derived from the pith extracted from the sago palm, and is the staple food for the  Melanau  and the  Penan  peoples of Sarawak. [20] 
 Sago starch is prepared as a gooey and sticky paste by the  Bisaya  and  Kedayan  communities called  ambuyat , and is called  linut  by the Melanau. It is eaten by rolling the paste around the prongs of a bamboo fork, and dipping it into soup,  sambal , or other varieties of gravies and dipping sauces. Aside from being the source for sago pith, the sago palm is a source of another delicacy for the indigenous peoples of Borneo: the  sago grub . Called  butod  in Sabah and  ulat mulong  in Sarawak, sago grubs are typically eaten raw but also served deep fried, roasted or sauteed. [21] 
 
 Protein [ edit ] 
 Meat [ edit ] 
   Tanks of fresh  seafood  at a seafood restaurant in  Kota Kinabalu , Malaysia 
 Malaysian  poultry  is handled according to halal standards to conform with the country's dominant and official religion, Islam. [22]  Imported poultry is available at major hypermarkets, supermarkets and speciality stores especially in affluent areas where a significant expatriate community can be found.
 Fish , both freshwater and saltwater, features prominently in the Malaysian diet. Most local fish is purchased soon after it is caught, while frozen fish is generally imported. Such fish, namely  salmon  and  cod , are well received on the Malaysian table but are not found in Malaysian waters. [23] 
Many types of seafood are consumed in Malaysia, including  shrimp  or  prawn ,  crab ,  squid ,  cuttlefish ,  clams ,  cockles ,  snails ,  sea cucumber  and  octopus . In general, members of all ethnic communities enjoy seafood, which is considered  halal  by Malaysian Muslims (according to  Shafi’i fiqh ), though some species of crabs are not considered halal as they can live on both land and sea. Sea cucumbers are considered halal. [24] 
 Beef  is common in the Malaysian diet, though it is notable that the consumption of beef is proscribed by some followers of  Hinduism  and certain  Chinese folk religious sects . Beef can be commonly found cooked in curries, stews, roasted, or eaten with noodles. Malays generally eat beef that is halal. Australian beef prepared under the Government Supervised Muslim Slaughter System (AGSMS) is imported into Malaysia and is halal. [25] 
 Malaysian Malays , who form about half of Malaysia's population, are  Muslim  and therefore do not consume pork since  Islam forbids it . This does not prohibit others from producing and consuming pork products, and thus pork can be found in  wet markets ,  supermarkets  and  hypermarkets , usually displayed with a non-halal disclaimer. Pork is consumed by the Chinese communities, Indians,  the Iban ,  the Kadazan ,  Murut ,  Lun Bawang/Lundayeh , the  Orang Asli , and non-Muslim  expatriates . [26] 
 In Malaysia, the term " mutton " refers to goat meat; lamb, or the meat of a young sheep, is always imported from countries like Australia and New Zealand. In the past mutton was primarily associated with  Malaysian Indian  cuisine, and was not as widely eaten due to health concerns as well as its perceived gamey flavour. Today, dishes like whole spit roast of mutton, mutton  biryani  and mutton soup are now a common sight at banquets and events. Today, the demand for mutton during the fasting month and  Hari Raya  period has now far exceeded that for  Deepavali  and  Christmas  combined. [27] 
 
 Fruit and vegetables [ edit ] 
 Vegetables [ edit ] 
 This section  does not  cite  any  sources .  Please help  improve this section  by  adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and  removed .   ( December 2015 )  ( Learn how and when to remove this template message ) 
   Kangkung belacan 
 Locally-grown  produce  is available year-round as Malaysia is a tropical country and does not have four seasons. During rainy seasons, vegetable yields may decrease (which may result in an increase in market price), but rarely if ever stop altogether. Imported produce has made inroads into the market in recent years, either to supplement local demand for essential ingredients like  garlic  and  potatoes , or to supply produce which does not grow well in Malaysia's climate and soil conditions. A few regions in Malaysia, like  Cameron Highlands  and the foothills adjacent to  Mount Kinabalu  provide the appropriate mean temperatures and soil conditions for the cultivation of temperate produce like  tea .
 Malaysian-grown greens, tubers and vegetables commonly found nationwide include but are not limited to  amaranth  ( bayam ),  bean sprouts  ( taugeh ),  brinjals  ( terung ),  bitter gourd  ( peria ),  bok choi  ( sawi ),  cabbage  ( kobis ),  choy sum ,  cucumber ( timun ) ,  Chinese celery  ( daun sup ) ,  coriander  ( daun ketumbar ), ginger ( halia ),  green beans ,  water spinach  ( kangkung) ,  ladies' fingers  ( bendi ),  leeks ,  lettuce ,  lotus root ,  maize  ( jagung ),  napa cabbage  ( kobis cina ),  sweet potatoes  ( ubi keledek ),  spring onions  ( daun bawang ),  katuk  ( cekur manis  or  sayur manis ),  pumpkin  ( labu ),  shiitake mushrooms  ( cendawan ),  stink beans  ( petai ),  tapioca  ( ubi kayu ),  taro or yam  ( ubi keladi ),  tomatoes ,  yambean or turnip ,  turmeric  ( kunyit ), and  yardlong beans  ( kacang panjang ), carrot ( lobak merah ), and scallions ( daun bawang ).
 In some areas in Malaysia local produce is grown on a small scale, and many rural communities like the Peninsular  Orang Asli  and certain tribal peoples of Sarawak forage wild edible  ferns  or vegetables to supplement their diet.  Vegetable fern , better known as  pucuk paku pakis , is perhaps the most widely available fern and is found in eateries and restaurants throughout the nation.  Stenochlaena palustris  is another type of wild fern popularly used for food. Endemic to East Malaysia, it is called  midin  in Sarawak and is prized for its  fiddleheads  by locals and visitors. It is known by the native peoples of  Sabah  as  lemiding ,  lembiding  or  lombiding , where both the leaves and the fiddleheads of the plant are eaten. The young shoots of plants like  bamboo  and coconut are popularly harvested as food by communities outside urban areas.
 A popular way to cook leafy vegetables like  kangkung  and sweet potato leaves is stir frying with a pungent sauce made from  belacan  (shrimp paste) and hot chilli peppers. Other vegetables popularly cooked this way include bean pods and fiddlehead ferns like  paku pakis  and  midin . Vegetables like carrots, cucumbers, onions and yardlong beans are used to make a localised variety of  pickle  called  acar . Vegetables and herbs are also popularly served undressed and often raw in some rural indigenous communities as  ulam . An  ulam  spread may include items such as  banana blossoms , cucumber,  winged beans ,  pegaga  leaves,  petai , and yardlong beans, typically eaten with a pungent dipping sauce like  sambal belacan .
 
 Vegetarianism in Malaysia [ edit ] 
 This section  does not  cite  any  sources .  Please help  improve this section  by  adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and  removed .   ( October 2015 )  ( Learn how and when to remove this template message ) 
   A typical serve of banana leaf rice. 
 As of 2012, about one million people within Malaysia's total population were practising  vegetarians , and vegetarian food is much easier to obtain when dining out today. However, because of the heavy emphasis on meat and seafood by traditional Malay cuisine as well as the common inclusion of shrimp paste and other seafood products in many local dishes, diners may find it difficult to negotiate their way around menus in search of vegetarian or vegan food in Malay cuisine restaurants.
 Restaurants that display signs with the words  sayur sayuran ,  vegetarian  or the Chinese characters  素  or  斎  will offer a decent variety of food for diners who abstain from meat. There are many of them across the country, particularly in urban areas. These restaurants serve only vegetarian/vegan food and absolutely no meat or animal products is used in their cooking. Even restaurants that specialise in meat and seafood will make vegetarian dishes upon request. Some meat-serving restaurants have a vegetarian section in their menu.
 Over 80% of Malaysian Chinese identify themselves as Buddhists, and some follow a vegetarian diet at least some of the time. Some vegetarian Chinese cuisine restaurants offer an  exclusively vegetarian menu  (Chinese: 素食, 斎) featuring Chinese dishes which resemble meat dishes in look and even taste like "roast pork", fried "fish" with "skin" and "bones", and "chicken drumsticks" complete with a "bone". These restaurants are run by proprietors who abstain from consumption of animal products and strong-tasting vegetables and spices as way of life for religious reasons, and are essentially vegan. The meat analogues used are often locally produced as opposed to imported, and are made solely from ingredients like soy, gluten, mushrooms and tuber vegetables.
 Organic vegetarianism has also slowly become a trendy modern vegetarian diet nowadays. Most of the organic vegetarian menu will include superfood ingredients, for example: organic quinoa, millet, chia seeds, flax seeds, avocado, egg, tofu, pine nuts, blueberry,  almond milk , etc. A lot of organic fruit and vegetables are locally produced in recent years. There is even an organic version of vegetarian sambal balacan, Nasi lemak chili paste, etc.
 Buddhist vegetarian restaurants are likely to be found in areas with a high concentration of Chinese and tend to be especially busy on certain festive days where many Buddhists adopt a strict vegetarian diet for at least a day. In Buddhism, some people who are full-time vegetarians are observing the Buddhist  Five Precepts . They are vegetarian because they are observing the precept to abstain from killing or harming living beings intentionally. Another precept is to abstain from taking drugs or intoxicants for enjoyment, hence, alcohol is not used in most pure vegetarian shops. (This is different, however, when ordering vegetarian food off the menu of restaurants that serve meat dishes.)
 Vegetarianism has a long and revered tradition in Indian culture. Some Malaysian Indians are born-and-bred vegetarians who often hail from a family line with generations of vegetarians. Some others practice vegetarianism on auspicious festivals such as Thai Ponggal, Hindu New Year, Deepavali, Full Moon Prayers, and on certain days of the week as a symbol of respect when they visit holy temples. Abstaining from meat before fulfilling a vow is a common practice to bring the body to a neutral and focused state, physically and mentally, during Thaipusam and other holy prayer events. Dishes, of South and North Indian types, are based on the ancient concept of Ayurveda and are known to include arusuvai or six types of tastes. Some Indian vegetarian dishes may incorporate dairy products and honey ( lacto vegetarian ). Some others are heavily based on lavish coconut milk and nuts. There are many Indian eateries and restaurants in Malaysia that offer a pure vegetarian menu. South Indian restaurants, in particular, offer no shortage of meatless options such as Thali meal, also known as banana leaf rice, which is often vegetarian by default, and a wide array of sweets, snacks and light meals such as kesari, tose, idli, uppuma, vade, aviyal, idiyappam and paniyaram.
 
 Fruit [ edit ] 
 This section  relies largely or entirely on a  single source .  Relevant discussion may be found on the  talk page . Please help  improve this article  by  introducing  citations to additional sources . Find sources:   "Malaysian cuisine"  –  news   ·   newspapers   ·   books   ·   scholar   ·   JSTOR   ( December 2015 ) 
 Malaysia's tropical climate allows for fruit to be grown all year round. A huge variety of common and obscure fruits, either locally grown or imported are available throughout the country. While the vast majority of fruits grown in Malaysia naturally thrive in the tropics, a few areas in the country like  Cameron Highlands  or  Kundasang  in Sabah have a different climate zone which enables the cultivation of temperate fruits like  strawberries .  Fruit is commonly served after a meal as dessert, and fruit juices are highly sought after as drinks of choice in a climate that is hot and humid all year round. Pickled fruits or  jeruk  are popular and widely available, whether sold from street stalls or specialist shops. Many localities are named after native fruits, most notably  Alor Setar  ( buah setar ) and  Malacca  ( buah melaka ).
 
   Penang   rojak 
 Fruits are used to make a popular salad dish called  rojak  (Chinese: 水果囉喏).  It consists of pieces of fruit and vegetable bound with a viscous dark sauce made from shrimp paste, sugar, chilli, and lime juice. The  Penang  version is particularly popular and well regarded. The dish is usually topped with a generous sprinkling of toasted ground peanuts.
 Notable fruits which are cultivated in Malaysia include:
 
   Durians  in rack sold in Kuala Lumpur 
 The  banana , or  pisang  in Malay. Many different cultivars are available on the market, and  plantain  is used for  pisang goreng .  Other parts of the banana plant may be used for culinary purposes. 
 The  calamansi lime , or  limau kasturi  in Malay. Widely used as a souring agent in Malaysian cooking, the juice of the calamansi lime is also savoured on its own with ice and secondary flavourings like green apple juice, pandan leaves and dried preserved plums. 
 The  cempedak , a fruit with a large and rough pod-like body. The edible flesh coating each pod is sweet, and has a soft custard-like texture. 
 The  durian , a fruit with a spiky outer shell and a characteristic odour is a local tropical fruit that is notable because it provokes strong emotions either of loving it or hating it. It is also known as the "King of the Fruits".  Several species  of durian exist throughout Malaysia - common cultivars come with pale cream or yellow coloured  arils , whereas some varieties found in Borneo are naturally bright red, orange or even purple in colour. 
 The  guava , called  jambu  or  jambu batu  in Malay. It is a crunchy fruit often eaten plain or garnished with a tart seasoning mix. 
 The  honeydew , or  tembikai susu  in Malay. This aromatic green melon is often cut up and served with cooked sago pearls in chilled coconut milk as a dessert. 
 The  jackfruit , or  nangka  in Malay. It is an enormous fruit similar in appearance to cempedak, but quite different in taste and texture. The fleshy covering of each pod is firm and sweet. Unripe jackfruit is occasionally used for cooking savoury meals. 
 The  langsat , a fruit which are borne in clusters similar to grapes and resemble tiny potatoes, with a taste likened to a sweet and tart combination of grape and grapefruit. A second, larger variety known as  duku  generally bear fruit which are large, generally round, and have somewhat thick skin that does not release sap when cooked. The seeds are small with thick flesh, a sweet scent, and a sweet or sour alin. 
 The  longan , which means "dragon eye" in Chinese. A related species called  mata kucing  (literally "cat's eye" in Malay) has a virtually identical taste to commercially cultivated longan. However, the  mata kucing  fruit ( Euphoria malaiense ) is smaller, the fleshy aril is thinner, and the yellow rind is bumpy and leathery like a  lychee  fruit. 
 The  mango , or  mangga  in Malay. The state of  Perlis  is famous for its Harumanis variety (from the  mangifera indica  cultivar), which is registered as a product of  geographical indication  (GI) with the Malaysian Intellectual Property Organisation (MyIPO). [28]  Another notable species of mango found only in Borneo and used extensively in local cookery is the  mangifera pajang , known in Sabah as  bambangan  and Sarawak as  buah mawang . 
 The  mangosteen , or  manggis  in Malay. In contrast to the durian, mangosteen is often called the "queen of the fruits". 
 The  papaya , or  betik  in Malay. Another common fruit available year-round in Malaysia, and widely eaten to conclude a meal. 
 The  pineapple , or  nanas  in Malay. It is widely eaten as a fruit and used extensively in local cooking, such as a curried pineapple dish called  pajeri nanas . 
 The  pitaya , better known locally as dragon fruit. Dragon fruit is available in red and white fleshed varieties. 
 The  pomelo , or  limau bali  in Malay. Pomelos grown in the Sungai Gedung area in the state of  Perak  has been granted GI status. It is also called  limau tambun , after the town of  Tambun  which is also famed for its pomelo produce. As pomelos are associated with traditional Chinese festivities, most farms harvest twice a year in conjunction with  Chinese New Year  and  Mid Autumn Festival . 
 The  rambutan , as the name suggests, have fleshy pliable spines or 'hairs' on its outer shell which is usually red or yellow in colour. Once the hairy exterior is peeled away, the tender, fleshy, sweet and sour tasting fruit is revealed. [29] 
 The  rose apple , called  jambu air  or  jambu merah  in Malay, which is not to be confused with  jambu batu  or guava. The term refers to various  Syzygium  species which are grown for their fruit. The fruit may be eaten on its own, or tossed through a  rojak  salad. 
 The  sapodilla , better known locally as  buah ciku . Its flesh has a grainy texture akin to ripened pear with a sweet malty flavour. 
 The  soursop , known as  durian belanda  in Malay and  lampun  to the  Dusun people  of Borneo. The fruit is commonly made into juice and smoothies, and the leaves of the soursop plant are boiled and taken as a herbal infusion. 
 The  starfruit , or  belimbing  in Malay. Malaysia is a global leader in starfruit production by volume and ships the fruit widely to Asia and Europe. [30] 
 The  tarap , also called  marang , is a fruit that is native to Borneo and is related to cempedak and jackfruit. While the fruits are about the same size and shape as a durian and also emit a noxious odour, the spines of the tarap are soft and rubbery compared to the durian's hard, thorny spines. The fruit itself is smooth, soft and creamy, and the flavour is reminiscent of sweet  custard apple  with a hint of tartness. 
 The  watermelon , or  tembikai  in Malay. This popular fruit comes in red and yellow varieties. 
 The  sugar apple , or  epal kustard  in Malay. This fruit comes in red or green varieties. 
 Ingredients [ edit ] 
 This section  does not  cite  any  sources .  Please help  improve this section  by  adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and  removed .   ( October 2015 )  ( Learn how and when to remove this template message ) 
   Sambal belacan, made with mixed toasted  belachan , ground chilli, kaffir leaves, sugar and water 
 Chilli peppers  are indispensable in Malaysian kitchens, and both fresh and dried forms are used. Chillies come in several sizes, shapes and colours. As a general rule, two type of chilli cultivars are the most commonly available: the  bird's eye chilli  ( cili padi ), which although small in size are extremely pungent and very hot; and longer varieties, which tend to be much milder. Green chillies are more peppery in taste, while red chillies, green chillies which have been left to ripen, have a slightly sweeter heat. If a milder flavour is preferred, the seeds and membranes are removed from the chilli pods before they are cut, or the chillies are left whole and removed prior to serving. Some common uses include grinding the chillies into a paste or  sambal ; chopping fresh chillies as a condiment or garnish; and pickling whole or cut chillies.
 Belacan  is essential to Malaysian cooking. It is a type of  shrimp paste  which is pressed into a block and sun-dried. In its raw form it has a pungent smell. Once cooked, the aroma and flavour mellow and contribute a depth of flavour to the dish. [31]  To prepare  belacan  for use, one typically wraps a small amount in foil, which is then roasted over a flame or placed into a preheated oven.  Belacan  is most commonly pounded or blended with local chilli peppers, shallots and lime juice to make the most popular and ubiquitous relish in Malaysia,  sambal belacan .  Belacan  is also crumbled into a ground spice paste called  rempah , which usually includes garlic, ginger, onions or shallots, and fresh or dried chilli peppers. A  rempah  paste is similar in form and function to an Indian wet  masala  paste or  Thai curry paste , and is often browned and caramelised ( Malay :  tumis ) to mellow the raw flavours of its component ingredients and produce a harmonised finish.
 The  coconut  ( Malay :  kelapa ) is another quintessential feature of Malaysian cuisine, and virtually all parts of the plant are used for culinary purposes. The white fleshy part of the coconut endosperm may be grated, shredded and used as is; dried to make desiccated coconut; or toasted until dark brown and ground to make  kerisik . Grated coconut flesh is also squeezed to make  coconut milk , which is used extensively in savoury dishes and desserts throughout the country.  Coconut oil  is used for cooking and cosmetic purposes, and may be either obtained by processing  copra  (dried coconut flesh) or extracted from fresh coconuts as virgin coconut oil.  Coconut water , the clear liquid found inside the cavity of each coconut, is a popular cooler in Malaysia's hot and humid climate.  Gula melaka  is unrefined  palm sugar  produced from the sap of the coconut flower. It is the most traditional sweetener in Malaysian cooking and imbues a rich caramel-like flavour with a hint of coconut. Coconut fronds are traditionally used to wrap food, hollowed out coconut husks and shells may be used as a source of  charcoal  fuel for barbecued meats and traditional pastry making, and even the apical bud or growing tip of the coconut palm is a popular delicacy served in rural communities and specialty restaurants.
 Soy sauce  of different varieties is another important ingredient. Light soy sauce contributes its pleasantly salty flavour to a variety of stir-fries, marinades and steamed dishes. In some hawker establishments, freshly sliced or pickled chillies arrive immersed in light soy sauce to be used for dipping. Dark soy sauce is thicker, more intense in flavour and less salty. It is often used when a heartier flavour is desired, particularly with  masak kicap  (a style of braising with a blend of soy sauce varieties) dishes, and also to darken the color of a dish.  Kicap manis , sweetened soy sauce sometimes flavoured with star anise or garlic, is also a popular seasoning for cooking. The sweet and savoury taste of  kicap manis  also functions as a substitute to approximate the combination of dark soy sauce and thick caramel sauce, which is primarily used to colour and season stewed dishes.
 Common herbs include  lemongrass  ( Malay :  serai ), a type of grass with a lemony aroma and flavour. Young, fresh stems are more desirable as older stems tend to acquire a woody texture. The tender white part closest to the base of the stem is thinly sliced and eaten raw in salads, or pounded with other aromatics to make a  rempah . It is also used whole in boiled and simmered dishes. The  pandan (screwpine)  leaf is the Asian equivalent of vanilla in Western cuisine. Its subtle aroma is released when the leaves are bruised by tying one or two long leaves into a knot, and used for cooking curries, rice and desserts. The leaves can also be used to wrap items like rice, chicken or fish for cooking. Pandan leaf is also available in liquid essence or powdered form to flavour and colour cakes. Turmeric ( Malay :  kunyit ) is a  rhizome  popular for its flavour as well as colouring properties. The leaves and flowers of the turmeric plant are also used in cooking or eaten raw.
 Tofu products, specifically fried tofu, are widely used as cooking ingredients and as side accompaniments. While fried tofu can be bland in flavour on its own, its main contribution is texture and especially with tofu puffs, the ability to soak up the flavour of whatever they are cooked in. Fried tofu products are found as a versatile component ingredient for dishes like stir fried noodles,  rojak  (fruit and vegetable salad), noodle soups, and stews. A popular way of serving fried tofu on its own is  a salad  with bean sprouts, shredded cucumber and spring onions, covered in a thick sweet and spicy dressing and dusted with roasted ground peanuts. Fried tofu may also be stuffed with a mixture of ground meat or shredded vegetables.
 Dried seafood products contribute a savoury depth of flavour to some Malaysian dishes. Small dried anchovies, known as  ikan bilis , are very popular. It acquires a crispy texture when deep-fried, and is served as an accompaniment or prepared as a  sambal  relish in this capacity.  Ikan bilis  is also boiled to make fish stock; in fact, instant  ikan bilis  stock granules are a popular seasoning in modern kitchens. Dried shrimp and salted dried fish are also used in various ways.
 Other essential seasoning and garnishes include tamarind ( Malay :  asam jawa ), specifically the paste-like pulp extracted from the fruit pod which contributes a tart flavour to many dishes.  Candlenuts  ( Malay :  buah keras ) are similar in appearance to  macadamia nuts , being round, cream-coloured and having a high oil content. Candlenuts are normally ground to thicken sauces.  Lup cheong  is a type of dried  Chinese sausage  made from pork and spices. Mainly used by the  Malaysian Chinese  community, these sweet sausages are usually sliced very thinly and added for additional flavour and texture. Recent studies have shown that there are 62 commonly consumed Malaysian foods that include biogenic amines.
 
 Structure of meals [ edit ] 
 This section  does not  cite  any  sources .  Please help  improve this section  by  adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and  removed .   ( December 2015 )  ( Learn how and when to remove this template message ) 
 There is no standard  breakfast  ( Malay :  sarapan ) menu due to Malaysia's multi-ethnic social fabric as well as the advent of modern influences. Western-style breakfast like  breakfast cereal , cooked eggs and toast have become commonplace in homes and when dining out, but heartier traditional fare based predominantly on noodles and rice dishes are still very popular. One may choose to start the day with the ubiquitous nasi lemak or kuih; venture for Chinese-style congee,  dim sum  and noodle soups; or settle for Indian-influenced fare such as  roti canai ,  idli  ( Tamil :  இட்லி   iṭli   /ɪɖlɪ/ ),  thosai  ( Tamil :  தோசை   tōcai   /t̪oːsaj/ ), and  upma . In the state of  Kelantan , the term  nasi berlauk  refers to a breakfast meal which consists of a small serve of rice and complementary dishes or  lauk .
 For lunch and dinner, food is not customarily served in courses but rather concurrently. A meal may consist of a single dish for solitary diners, or rice with many complementary dishes shared by all. At restaurants where food is cooked to order, there is often no distinction between appetizers/starters and main courses, and food will arrive at the table whenever it is ready. At some traditionally-run eateries where pre-cooked food is served, diners are meant to help themselves by starting with a plate of plain rice and choose from a buffet spread of assorted dishes. Like the Indonesian  Nasi Padang , this is not an all-you-can-eat for a fixed price dining experience. The cost of the meal would depend on what the diner selects and how many different items were placed on the plate for consumption. In Malay-run  warung  (a small family-owned casual eatery or café) or restaurants ( kedai makan ), this style of dining is known as  nasi campur  which means "mixed rice". A similar concept exist at some eateries serving home-style Malaysian Chinese food, where it may be known as  economy rice  (Chinese: 杂饭).
 A practice known as "open house" ( Malay :  rumah terbuka ) is popular during festive seasons, and even as an elaborate occasion to celebrate birthdays and weddings. Open house events are traditionally held at the home of the host: well-wishers are received and that everyone, regardless of background, is invited to attend. Home-cooked or catered food is provided by the host(s) at their own expense, and while it is acceptable for guests to bring along gifts for the host, they are expected to help themselves to the food as much as they like. Open house events may also be held at restaurants and larger public venues, especially when hosted by government agencies or corporations.
 
 Food establishments [ edit ] 
 This section  does not  cite  any  sources .  Please help  improve this section  by  adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and  removed .   ( December 2015 )  ( Learn how and when to remove this template message ) 
 A  kopitiam  or kopi tiam is a traditional coffee shop patronised for meals and beverages, predominantly operated by Chinese proprietors and especially members of the  Hainanese community . The word  kopi  is a Malay/Hokkien term for coffee and  tiam  is the Hokkien and Hakka term for shop (Chinese : 店). A common sight in Malaysia and neighbouring Singapore, menus often feature offerings like nasi lemak, boiled eggs, roti bakar, noodle dishes, bread and kuih. The owners of some kopitiam establishments may lease premise space to independent stallholders, who sometimes offer more specialised dishes beyond standard Chinese kopitiam fare. Typical beverages include  Milo , a malted chocolate drink considered iconic to Malaysians of all ages, as well as coffee ( kopi ) and tea ( teh ). Diners would use  slang terms specific to kopitiam culture  to order and customise drinks to their taste.
 The omnipresent  Mamak stall  is a Malaysian institution. Available throughout the country and
particularly popular in urban areas, Mamak stalls and restaurants offer a wide range of food and some are open 24 hours a day. The proprietors of these establishments are members of Malaysia's  Tamil Muslim  community, who have developed a distinct culinary style and wield an enormous influence on Malaysian food culture disproportionate to their numbers. A type of meal served buffet-style at some Mamak eateries is called  nasi kandar , which is analogous to the Malay  nasi campur  where you pay for what you have actually eaten. The diner is to choose from a variety of curried dishes made with chicken, beef, mutton, or seafood. A mixture of curry sauces is then poured on the provided rice: this is called  banjir  (literally means "flooding").
 
 Cuisines of Malaysia [ edit ] 
 This section  does not  cite  any  sources .  Please help  improve this section  by  adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and  removed .   ( December 2015 )  ( Learn how and when to remove this template message ) 
 Malay cuisine [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Malay cuisine 
 For a traditional Malay meal, rice is considered the centerpiece of a meal, with everything else considered as an accompaniment, relish or side for the rice. Malay cuisine bears many similarities to  Indonesian cuisine , in particular some of the regional traditions from  Sumatra . It has also been influenced by Chinese, Indian, Thai and many other cultures throughout history, producing a distinct cuisine of their own. Some regional Malay dishes, such as  arisa  and  kacang pool , are examples of influence from  Arab cuisine  due to longstanding historical and religious ties. Many Malay dishes revolve around a  rempah , which is usually sauteed in oil ( tumis ) to draw out flavours to form the base of a dish. A dipping relish called sambal is an essential accompaniment for most Malay dishes.
 
   Air bandung. 
 Air bandung  - a cold milk drink flavoured with rose cordial syrup, giving it a pink colour. Despite the name, there is no connection to the city of  Bandung  in Indonesia.  Bandung  within this context refers to anything that comes in pairs or is mixed from many ingredients. [ citation needed ] 
 Air janda pulang , a traditional drink from  Negeri Sembilan . It is suitable to drink with lunch and on hot days. [32] 
 Akok , a traditional sweet dessert in  Kelantan , Malaysia. Made mainly from eggs, coconut milk, flour and brown sugar,  akok  has a distinctive caramel taste. It is often served during afternoon snack together with coffee.  Akok  is prepared in a cooking utensil called  dapur tembaga  made of solid brass, which is surrounded with charcoal. 
 Apam johol , a sweetened rice cake, wrapped in  rambai  leaves to preserve the aroma and make it look good. It is sometimes eaten with  rendang ,  sambal   tumis  and bean porridge. [33] 
 Asam pedas  - a sour and spicy stew of meat, with the core ingredients being  tamarind  and chilli. Depending on region, tomatoes, lady's fingers, shredded  torch ginger  bud and  Vietnamese coriander  (Malay:  daun kesum ) may also be added. Usually cooked with fish like  mackerel  or  stingray , although some recipes use chicken and even  oxtail . 
 Ayam goreng  -  a generic term for deep fried chicken, typically marinated in a base of turmeric and other seasonings prior to cooking. 
 Ayam masak merah  - this dish literally means red-cooked chicken in English. Pieces of chicken are first fried to a golden brown then slowly braised in a spicy tomato sauce. Peas are sometimes added to the dish, and it is garnished with shredded kaffir lime leaves as well as coriander. It is often paired with nasi tomato - rice cooked with  tomato sauce  or  paste , milk, dried spices, and a sauteed rempah base of garlic, onions, ginger. 
 Ayam percik  - also known as ayam golek in some states, ayam percik is grilled marinated chicken basted with a spiced coconut milk gravy. 
 Bubur lambuk  - a savoury rice porridge consumed during the fasting month of Ramadhan, made with a mixture of lemongrass, spices, vegetables, and chicken or beef. It is usually cooked communally at a local mosque, which is then distributed to the congregation as a meal to break the fast every evening. In the state of Terengganu, bubur lambuk is prepared with wild herbs,  budu , sweet potatoes, and seafood. 
 Gulai  - the Malay term for a curried stew. The main ingredients for gulai may be poultry, beef, mutton, various kinds of offals, fish and seafood, and also vegetables such as cassava leaves and green/unripe jackfruit. The gravy is usually yellowish-brown in color due to the sauteed and browned  rempah  which forms its base, and the addition of ground turmeric. The gravy's consistency may vary in thickness depending on the cook. 
   Ikan bakar in  Muar ,  Johor . 
 Ikan bakar  - barbecued or char grilled fish, usually smeared with a sambal-based sauce. It may also be accompanied with air asam, a dip made from shrimp paste, onion, chillis and tamarind juice. 
 Ikan goreng  - a generic term for shallow or deep fried fish, which is almost always marinated prior to cooking. There are countless recipes and variants for what is arguably the most popular and typical method of cooking fish in Malaysia. 
 Kebebe - the food which made of 13 ingredients that has a bitter, salty, sweet, sour and spicy mixed taste. Its allegedly able to get rid of nausea after taking too much food. 
 Kerabu  - a type of salad-like dish which can be made with any combination of cooked or uncooked fruits and vegetables, as well as the occasional meat or seafood ingredient. There are many kerabu recipes, which often have little common in preparation:  kerabu taugeh  is made with blanched bean sprouts and quintessentially Malay ingredients like kerisik, while preparations like  kerabu mangga  (shredded green mango salad) resemble a  Thai-style yam salad  in taste profile. 
 Keropok lekor  - a speciality of the state of Terengganu and other states on the east coast of Peninsula Malaysia, keropok lekor is a savoury fritter made from a combination of batter and shredded fish. Sliced and fried just before serving, it is eaten with hot sauce. 
 Kerutuk Daging  - a type of coconut milk-based curry. Traditionally it is best eaten with white rice, sambal belacan and ulam-ulaman or Malay salad. 
 Ketupat  - a variant of compressed rice, wrapped in a woven palm frond pouch. As the rice boils, the grains expand to fill the pouch and the rice becomes compressed. This method of cooking gives the  ketupat  its characteristic form and texture. Usually eaten with rendang (a type of dry beef curry) or served as an accompaniment to satay,  ketupat  is also traditionally served on festive occasions such as  Eid  (Hari Raya Aidilfitri) as part of an open house spread. 
 Kuzi ayam , a thick curry. Traditionally it is eaten with white rice, sambal belacan and ulam 
 Laksam  or  Laksang  - a different variant on laksa found in the northern and northeastern states of the Peninsular. Laksam consists of thick flat rice noodle rolls in a full-bodied, rich and slightly sweet white gravy of minced fish, coconut milk and shredded aromatic herbs. 
 Masak lemak  is a style of cooking which employs liberal amounts of turmeric-seasoned coconut milk. Sources of protein like chicken, seafood smoked meats and shelled molluscs, perhaps paired with fruits and vegetables such as bamboo shoots, pineapples and tapioca leaves are often cooked this way. Certain states are associated with a specific variant of this dish: for example,  masak lemak cili api/padi  is an iconic speciality of  Negeri Sembilan . 
   Authentic  mee bandung  from  Muar 
 Mee Bandung Muar  - Traditional noodle dish from  Muar  that cooked with yellow noodles coupled with egg in addition to a thick broth-gravy made of a combination of dried shrimps, onion, spices,  shrimp paste  and chillies. Prawn, meat, fish cakes and vegetables are also added. [34] 
   Nasi dagang 
 Mee Siput Muar , a deep-fried circular dried noodle snack from  Muar ,  Johor  made from flour and eaten with  sambal . 
 Nasi Beringin , a fragrant rice dish that used to be served to  Johor royalties  in the late 1890s; the sultans would have this fragrant dish especially when guests were invited to dine in the palace. 
 Nasi dagang  - rice cooked with coconut milk and fenugreek seeds, served with a fish  gulai  (usually tuna or  ikan tongkol ), fried shaved coconut, hard-boiled eggs and vegetable pickles.  Nasi dagang  ("trader's rice" in Malay) is a staple breakfast dish in the northeastern states of Kelantan and Terrenganu. It should not be confused with nasi lemak, as nasi lemak is often found sold side by side with nasi dagang for breakfast in the east coast of Peninsular Malaysia. 
   Nasi kerabu 
 Nasi goreng  -  a generic term for fried rice, of which there are many, many different permutations and variations. Variants includes  Nasi goreng kampung ,  Nasi goreng pattaya , and  Nasi paprik . 
 Nasi Kandar  -  a meal of steamed rice that is served with a variety of curries and side dishes. [35]  It is a popular northern Malaysian dish from Penang. 
 Nasi Lemuni , It's like nasi lemak but cooked with herb that's called daun lemuni(English:  Vitex trifolia  leaves). 
 Nasi tumpang  - rice packed in a cone-shaped banana leaf. A pack of nasi tumpang consists of an omelette, meat floss, chicken or shrimp curry and sweet gravy. It is traditionally served as a meal of convenience for travellers on the road. 
 Nasi ulam  - rice salad tossed with a variety of thinly shredded herbs and greens ( daun kaduk ,  daun cekur ,  daun kesum  and so on) as well as pounded dried shrimp,  kerisik  and chopped shallots. A variant popular in the eastern coast states of Peninsular Malaysia is called  nasi kerabu , which is blue-coloured rice served with various herbs, dried fish or fried chicken, crackers, pickles and vegetables. 
 Pek nga  - also known as Lempeng Kelapa, It is usually served during breakfast. 
 Puding Diraja  - also known as Royal Pudding, this dessert was developed and served to the royal family of Pahang state. 
 Rendang  - a spicy meat and coconut milk stew originating from the  Minangkabau people  of  Indonesia , many of whom have settled in the state of Negeri Sembilan. Buffalo meat is the most traditional choice for this dish, but beef and chicken are by far more commonly used for rendang in restaurants and home cooking. The common addition of kerisik is another distinctively Malaysian touch. Rendang is traditionally prepared by the  Malay  community during festive occasions, served with  ketupat  or  nasi minyak . 
   Raw (l) and cooked (r) sambal tempoyak. 
 Roti jala  - The name is derived from the Malay words  roti  (bread) and  jala  (net). A special ladle with a five-hole perforation used to form its lacy pattern. Roti jala is usually eaten as an accompaniment to a curried dish, or served as dessert with a sweet dipping sauce. 
 Roti john  - a spiced meat omelette sandwich, popularly eaten for breakfast or as a snack. 
   Sate 
 Sambal  - the term sambal not only refers to a relish-like sauce made from chilli peppers pounded together with secondary ingredients like  belacan  and thinned with calamansi lime juice, it also refer to a cooking style where meat, seafood, and vegetables like  brinjal  ( Malay :  sambal terung ) and  stink bean  ( Malay :  sambal petai ) are braised in a spicy sambal-based sauce. 
 Satay - one of Malaysia's most popular foods, Satay (written as  sate  in Malay) is made from marinated beef and chicken pieces skewered with wooden sticks and cooked on a charcoal grill. It is typically served with compressed rice cut onions, cucumber, and a spiced peanut gravy for dipping. The town of  Kajang  in Selangor is famous for its satay;  Sate Kajang  is a term for a style of sate where the meat chunks are bigger than that of a typical satay, and the sweet peanut sauce is served along with a portion of fried chilli paste. 
 Serunding  - spiced meat floss.  Serunding  may also refer to any dish where the primary meat or vegetable ingredient is shredded and pulled into thin strands. In Indonesia, this term strictly refers to a dry-toasted grated coconut mix instead. 
 Sup kambing  - a hearty mutton soup slow simmered with aromatic herbs and spices, and garnished with fried shallots, fresh cilantro and a wedge of calamansi lime. Variants include soups cooked with beef ( Malay :  daging ), beef ribs ( Malay :  tulang ), or oxtail ( Malay :  buntut/ekor ), all seasoned with the same herbs and spices. 
 Tempoyak  - fermented durian, traditionally stored in an urn. Tempoyak may be eaten as relish, or it can be added to braised dishes and stews as a primary flavouring ( masak tempoyak ). 
 Javanese-influenced cuisine [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Javanese cuisine 
   Soto ayam , (chicken soto). Note the transparent yellow broth, the  emping  and fried shallot 
 There are certain Malaysian dishes with overt Javanese influences or are direct adaptations from  Javanese cuisine , brought to Malaysia by  Javanese immigrants  who have been assimilated or integrated into the wider Malay community to various degrees. Javanese cuisine is highly distinct from mainstream Malay cooking, being noted for its simplicity and sweeter flavours, as opposed to mainstream Malay cuisine which is predominantly based on the complex and spicy regional cuisines of  Sumatra . A popular way of serving Javanese-influenced food in the southern part of Peninsular Malaysia is termed  nasi ambang , which consists of shared platters of white rice served with accompaniments like chicken cooked in soy sauce or curried gravy, stir fried noodles,  sambal goreng , fried shredded coconut pieces, egg, vegetables and so on. 
 
 Ayam penyet  - deep fried chicken which is smashed prior to serving. The other key component to this dish is a spicy sambal. Other accompaniments include cucumbers, fried tofu and tempeh. 
 Begedil  - spherical fritters made from mashed potato and occasionally ground meat. It is called perkedel in Indonesia. 
 Botok botok  - steamed banana leaf parcels of sliced fish seasoned with ground spices and shredded herbs. 
 Lontong  - vegetables stewed in a lightly spiced coconut milk soup, usually served with compressed rice and additional condiments added either during cooking or in individual servings. It is eaten during festive occasions, and also as a breakfast meal.  In Indonesia this dish would be called  sayur lodeh , and the compressed rice  lontong . 
 Nasi kuning  - rice cooked with coconut milk and turmeric. A common breakfast dish in certain regions like the east coast of Sabah, where it is typically served with sambal, eggs, coconut-based  serundeng , and spiced fish. Not to be confused with the Peranakan  nasi kunyit , which uses glutinous rice. 
 Mee rebus  - a dish which consists of egg noodles drenched in a spicy aromatic sauce thickened with cooked and mashed tuber vegetables. Versions of  mee rebus  found in other parts of Malaysia are sometimes called  mee jawa , perhaps as a nod to its likely  Javanese  origin. [36] 
 Pecal  -   pecal  is a vegetable salad with cucumber slices, long beans, beansprout, fried tofu, blanched kangkung and  tempeh  dressed in a peanut sauce. 
 Rempeyek  - deep-fried savoury cracker made from flour (usually rice flour) with other ingredients (such as peanuts) bound or coated by crispy flour batter. 
 Soto  - Meat broth, typically served with plain rice,  lontong , or  noodles  depending on regional variation as well as personal preference. 
 Telur pindang  - marbled eggs boiled with herbs and spices. Commonly seen in Javanese Malaysian wedding feasts and festive occasions, particularly in Johor. 
 Tempeh  -  a staple source of protein in Javanese cuisine, made by a natural culturing and controlled fermentation process that binds soybeans into a cake form, similar to a very firm vegetarian burger patty, which can then be cooked and served in a variety of ways. 
 Malaysian Chinese cuisine [ edit ] 
 Part of a series on Chinese cuisine 
 Regional cuisines 
 Four Great Traditions 
 Chuan (Sichuan) 
 Lu (Shandong) 
 Yue (Guangdong) 
 Huaiyang (Jiangsu) 
 Eight Great Traditions (+all above) 
 Anhui 
 Fujian 
 Hunan 
 Zhejiang 
 Ten Great Traditions (+all above) 
 Beijing 
 Shanghai 
 Twelve Great Traditions (+all above) 
 Henan 
 Shaanxi 
 Fourteen Great Traditions (+all above) 
 Hubei 
 Liaoning 
 Sixteen Great Traditions (+all above) 
 Tianjin 
 Yunnan 
 New Eight Great Traditions 
 Gansu 
 Hangzhou 
 Jilin 
 Liaoning 
 Ningbo 
 Shaanxi 
 Shanghai 
 Shanxi 
 Beijing and the vicinity 
 Beijing 
 Imperial 
 Aristocrat 
 Tianjin 
 Other regional styles 
 Teochew 
 Guangxi 
 Guizhou 
 Hainan 
 Haipai 
 Hakka 
 Hong Kong 
 Jiangxi 
 Macanese 
 Manchu 
 Northeastern 
 Putian (Henghwa) 
 Qinghai 
 Taiwan 
 Tibetan 
 Xinjiang 
 
 Overseas cuisine 
 Australia 
 Britain 
 Burma 
 Canada 
 Caribbean 
 Philippines 
 India 
 Indonesia 
 Japan 
 Latin America 
 Perú 
 Puerto Rico 
 Korea 
 Malaysia 
 Pakistan 
 Singapore 
 United States 
 
 Religious cuisines 
 Buddhist 
 Islamic 
 Taoist 
 
 Ingredients and types of food 
 Main dishes 
 Desserts 
 Noodles 
 
 Preparation and cooking 
 Stir frying 
 Double steaming 
 Red cooking 
 
 See also 
 Customs and etiquette 
 List of Chinese desserts 
 List of Chinese dishes 
 List of Chinese restaurants 
 List of restaurants in China 
 
   Asia portal 
   China portal 
   Hong Kong portal 
   Taiwan portal v t e 
 Main article:  Malaysian Chinese cuisine 
 Malaysian Chinese cuisine is derived from the culinary traditions of Chinese Malaysian immigrants and their descendants, who have adapted or modified their culinary traditions under the influence of Malaysian culture as well as immigration patterns of Chinese to Malaysia. Because the vast majority of Chinese Malaysians are descendants of immigrants from southern China, Malaysian Chinese cuisine is predominantly based on an eclectic repertoire of dishes with roots from  Cantonese cuisine ,  Hakka cuisine ,  Fujian cuisine  and  Teochew cuisine . [ citation needed ] 
 As these early immigrants settled in different regions throughout what was then  British Malaya  and  Borneo , they carried with them traditions of foods and recipes that were particularly identified with their origins in China, which gradually became infused with the characteristics of their new home locale in Malaysia while remaining distinctively Chinese. For example, Hainanese chicken rice is usually flavoured with tropical pandan leaves and served with chilli sauce for dipping, and tastes unlike the typical chicken dishes found in  Hainan Island  itself. Some of these foods and recipes became closely associated with a specific city, town or village, eventually developing iconic status and culminating in a proliferation of nationwide popularity in the present day.
 Chinese food is especially prominent in areas with concentrated Chinese communities, at roadside stalls, hawker centres and kopitiam, as well as smart cafes and upmarket restaurants throughout the nation. Many Chinese dishes have pork as a component ingredient, but chicken is available as a substitution for Muslim customers from the wider community, and some Chinese restaurants are even  halal -certified. [ citation needed ] 
 A sample of representative Malaysian Chinese dishes found nationwide include:
 
   Bak Kut Teh 
   Char kway teow  in  Penang 
 Bak Kut Teh  (pork ribs soup). The root meaning for the dish, "Bak Kut" (Hokkien dialect) is the term for meaty ribs, at its simplest cooked with garlic, dark soy sauce and a specific combination of herbs and spices which have been boiled for many hours. Popularly regarded as a health tonic, this soup is historically eaten by hard working Chinese coolies working on the wharfs at Port Swettenham (now  Port Klang ) and clearing estates, accompaniment with strong  tea  ("Teh") on the side. There are some differences in seasoning amongst other Chinese communities; the Teochew prefer a clear broth which is heavier on garlic and pepper, while the Cantonese may include additional varieties of medicinal herbs and spices. Variations include the so-called  chik kut teh  (made with chicken and a version that is gaining popularity with Muslim diners), seafood bak kut teh, and a "dry" (reduced gravy) version which originated from the town of  Klang . 
 Bakkwa   - literally "dried meat", bakkwa is better understood as barbecued meat jerky. While this delicacy is especially popular during the  Chinese New Year  celebration period, it is available everywhere and eaten year round as a popular snack. 
 Bean sprouts chicken   -  Ipoh 's most well known dish, bean sprouts chicken consists of poached or steamed chicken accompanied with a plate of blanched locally grown bean sprouts in a simple dressing of soy sauce and sesame oil. The crunchy and stout texture of Ipoh-grown bean sprouts is attributed to the mineral-rich properties of local water supplies. The dish is usually served with hor fun noodles in a chicken broth, or plain rice. 
 Cantonese fried noodles  refers to a preparation of noodles which are shallow or deep fried to a crisp texture, then served as the base for a thick egg and cornstarch white sauce cooked with sliced lean pork, seafood, and green vegetables like choy sum. A variation called yuen yong  involves mixing both crisp-fried rice vermicelli as well as hor fun to form a base for the sauce. A related dish called wa tan hor uses hor fun noodles, but the noodles are not deep fried, merely charred. 
 Chai tow kway   - a common dish in Malaysia made of rice flour. It also known as fried  radish  cake, although no radish is included within the rice cakes, save perhaps the occasional addition of preserved radish  during the cooking process. Seasonings and additives vary from region, and may include bean sprouts and eggs. 
   Penang   chee cheong fun 
 Char kway teow   Stir fried  rice noodles  with bean sprouts, prawns, eggs (duck or chicken), chives and thin slices of preserved Chinese sausages. Cockles and  lardons  were once standard offerings, but mostly relegated to optional additions these days due to changing taste preferences and growing health concerns.  Penang -style char kway teow is the most highly regarded variant both in Malaysia as well as abroad. 
 Chee cheong fun   is square rice sheets made from a viscous mixture of rice flour and water. This liquid is poured onto a specially made flat pan in which it is steamed to produce the square rice sheets. The steamed rice sheets is rolled or folded for ease in serving. It is usually served with tofu stuffed with fish paste. The dish is eaten with accompaniment of semi sweet fermented bean paste sauce, chilli paste or light vegetable curry gravy.  Ipoh  and  Penang  have different variants of the dish as well; certain stalls in  Ipoh  serve the dish with a red sweet sauce, thinly sliced pickled green chillies and fried shallots, whilst in  Penang , a type of sweet, black  shrimp sauce  called  hae ko  is the main condiment. 
 Cheong Cheng style steamed fish   - Cheong cheng literally mean gravy or sauce steamed. The main ingredients for the gravy or sauce are fermented bean paste and chillies. 
   Hainanese chicken rice balls in  Muar ,  Johor ,  Malaysia 
 Chicken rice  e is one of the most popular Chinese-inspired dishes in Malaysia. Hainanese chicken rice is the best known version: it is prepared with the  same traditional method  used for cooking  Wenchang chicken , which involve steeping the entire chicken at sub-boiling temperatures within a master stock until cooked, to ensure the chicken meat becomes moist and tender. The chicken is then chopped up, and served with a bowl or plate of rice cooked in  chicken fat  and chicken stock, along with another bowl of clear chicken broth and a set of dips and condiments. Sometimes the chicken is dipped in ice to produce a jelly-like skin finishing upon the completion of the poaching process. In  Malacca , the chicken rice is served shaped into balls. 
 Curry Mee  ( A bowl of thin yellow noodles mixed with bihun in a spicy curry soup enriched with coconut milk, and topped with tofu puffs, prawns, cuttlefish, chicken, long beans, cockles and mint leaves, with sambal served on the side. It is often referred to as  curry laksa .
 White Curry Mee   mee, however the soup base is in white colour instead of yellow or red. The white color comes from the Coconut gravy ) 
 Fish ball  are fish paste shaped into a spherical shape. Usually fish ball is served as a condiment together with  rice vermicelli  or yellow noodles in a  clear soup  base. Bean sprouts and  spring onions  are also commonly added, complemented by a small plate of  chilli padi  soaked in  soy sauce .  Fishcake  is also a common addition 
 Fish head bihun  . A noodle soup in which the main ingredients are rice vermicelli and a deep fried fish head cut into chunks. The soup itself is somewhat creamy, which is usually achieved using a mixture of rich fish stock and milk. Tomatoes and pickled vegetables are sometimes added to cut the richness and provide a tangy foil for the noodle soup. 
 Hakka mee  - Hakka Mee is a simple dish of noodles topped with a ground meat gravy. A popular hawker dish with Hakka cultural roots, it is based on an older recipe called Dabumian ; the name indicates its place of origin as  Dabu County , the center of Hakka culture in mainland China. 
 Heong Peng   - these fragrant pastries, which resemble slightly flattened balls, are a famed speciality of Ipoh which are now widely available in Malaysia and are even exported overseas. It contains a sweet sticky filling made from malt and shallots, covered by a flaky baked crust and garnished with sesame seeds on the surface. 
   A bowl of  Penang   Hokkien mee 
 Hokkien Mee   actually has two variants, with each being ubiquitous to a particular region of  Peninsular Malaysia .
 Penang   Hokkien mee , colloquially referred to in  Penang  as  Hokkien mee , is also known as  hae mee   elsewhere in  Malaysia . One of  Penang 's most famous specialties, it is a noodle soup with yellow and rice noodles immersed in an aromatic stock made from prawns and pork (chicken for halal versions), and garnished with a boiled egg, poached prawns, chopped  kangkung  and a dollop of spicy  sambal . 
 Hokkien char mee, a dish of thick yellow noodles braised, fried with thick black soy sauce and added with crispy lardons, is more commonly served in the  Klang Valley . It was originally developed in  Kuala Lumpur . Thus, within the central region of  Peninsular Malaysia , the term  Hokkien mee  refers to this particular version. 
   Iced Ipoh white coffee in  Menglembu ,  Ipoh , Malaysia Ipoh white coffee  . A popular coffee drink which originated in Ipoh. Unlike the robust dark roast used for typical Malaysian-style black coffee ("Kopi-O"), "white" coffee is produced with only palm oil margarine and without any sugar and wheat, resulting in a significantly lighter roast. It is typically enriched with condensed milk prior to serving. This drink inspired the  OldTown White Coffee  restaurant chain, and instant beverage versions are widely available throughout Malaysia and even in international markets. 
 Kam Heong   - literally "golden fragrance" in English, Kam Heong is a method of cooking developed in Malaysia, and is a good example of the country's culinary style of mixing cultures. The tempering of aromatics with bird's eye chillies, curry leaves, crushed dried shrimp, curry powder, oyster sauce and various other seasonings yields a versatile stir-fry sauce that goes well with chicken, clams, crabs, prawns, and squid. 
 Kway chap  . Teochew dish of rice noodle sheets in a dark soy sauce gravy, served with pork pieces, pig offal, tofu products and boiled eggs. 
   Claypot chicken rice 
 Lor mee . A bowl of thick yellow noodles served in a thickened gravy made from eggs, starch and pork stock. 
 Marmite  chicken  - a unique dish of marinated fried chicken pieces glazed in a syrupy sauce made from  marmite , soy sauce, maltose and honey. This dish may also be prepared with other ingredients like pork ribs and prawns. 
 Ngah Po Fan  or  Sha Po Fan   - seasoned rice  cooked in a claypot  with secondary ingredients, and finished with soy sauce. A typical example is rice cooked with chicken, Chinese sausage, and vegetables. Claypots are also used for braising noodles, meat dishes and reducing soups. One of the most famous and common one is:
 Claypot chicken rice   - chicken rice served in a claypot, traditionally cooked with charcoal. Typical additions include salted fish and  lap cheong .  Bercham , a suburb in Ipoh is famous for claypot chicken rice. 
 Ngo hiang  or  lor bak  - a fried meat roll made from spiced minced pork and chopped water chestnuts rolled up in soy bean curd sheets, and deep fried. It is usually served with small bowl of  Lor  (a thick broth thickened with corn starch and beaten eggs) and chilli sauce. The term also extends to other items sold alongside the meat rolls, like  tao kwa  (hard tofu), pork sausages,  tofu skin  sheets etc. 
   Pan Mee 
 Oyster omelette  or  O-chian   - a medley of small oysters is sauteed on a hot plate before being folded into an egg batter, which then has moistened starch mixed in for thickening, and finally fried to a crisp finish. Unlike other versions of oyster omelettes found throughout the Hokkien and Teochew diaspora, a thick savoury gravy is never poured onto Malaysian-style oyster omelettes; a chilli sauce is provided on the side for dipping instead. 
 Pan mee  - noodle soup with hand-kneaded and torn pieces of noodles or regular strips of machine-pressed noodles, with a toothsome texture not unlike Italian pasta. A variant popular in the  Klang Valley  is known as "Chilli Pan Mee", and which of cooked noodles served with minced pork, a poached egg, fried anchovies and fried chilli flakes which are added to taste. Chilli Pan Mee is accompanied with a bowl of clear soup with leafy vegetables. 
   Tau sar pneah , also known as  Tambun pneah , from  Penang 
 Popiah  - Hokkien/Teochew-style crepe stuffed and rolled up with cooked shredded tofu and vegetables like turnip and carrots. The Peranakan version contains julienned bangkuang ( jicama ) and bamboo shoots, and the filling is seasoned with  tauchu  (fermented soybean paste) and meat stock. Another variation consists of popiah doused in a spicy sauce. Popiah can also be deep fried and served in a manner similar to the mainstream Chinese  spring roll . 
 Tau sar pneah  ( - A famous  Penang  delicacy, this round-shaped Chinese pastry contains primarily green bean paste, and its ingredients include wheat flour, sugar and salt. It is  also known as   Tambun biscuits  as it was widely believed that the pastry originated from Bukit Tambun,  Penang . Its popularity as a delicacy has made this pastry one of the must-buy souvenirs from  Penang . [37] 
   Wonton Mee 
 Wonton Mee  - thin egg noodles with  wonton  dumplings,  choy sum  and char siu. The dumplings are usually made of pork or prawns, and typically boiled or deep fried. The noodles may be served in a bowl of broth with dumplings as in the traditional Cantonese manner, but in Malaysia it is more commonly dressed with a dark soy sauce dressing, with boiled or deep-fried wonton dumplings as a topping or served on the side in a bowl of broth. Variations of this dish are usually in the meat accompaniments with the noodles. These may include roast pork, braised chicken feet, and roast duck 
 Yau Zha Gwai  or Eu Char Kway or You Tiao - a version of the traditional Chinese crueller, which is a breakfast favourite. It can be eaten plain with a beverage like coffee and soy milk, spread with butter or kaya, or dipped into congee. It is shaped like a pair of chopsticks, stuck together. 
 Yong tau foo  - tofu products and vegetables like  brinjals ,  lady's fingers , bitter gourd and chillies stuffed with fish paste or  surimi . Originally developed in  Ampang, Selangor , Malaysian yong tau foo is a localised adaptation of a Hakka dish called  ngiong tew foo  (stuffed tofu with ground pork paste) and is usually served in a clear broth, with or without noodles. 
   Yusheng 
 Yusheng   - a festive raw fish salad, also pronounced  yee sang  in the Cantonese manner. While raw fish preparations are thought to have existed in China during antiquity and can be found in the  Chaoshan  region of Guangdong province in modern times, yusheng was created and developed in  Singapore  in 1964 when the republic was still a member state of the Federation of Malaysia. [ citation needed ]  It consists of strips of raw fish tossed at the dining table with shredded vegetables, crispy tidbits and a combination of sauces and condiments. Yusheng literally means "raw fish" but since "fish " is commonly conflated with its homophone "abundance, Yúshēng is interpreted as a homophone for Yúshēng meaning an increase in abundance. Therefore, yusheng is considered a symbol of abundance, prosperity and vigor. As a result, the mixing and tossing of yusheng with chopsticks and the subsequent consumption of the salad has become ritualised as part of the commemoration of  Chinese New Year  festivities in Malaysia and Singapore. 
 Zongzi   - a traditional Chinese food made of glutinous rice stuffed with savoury or sweet fillings and wrapped in bamboo, reed, or other large flat leaves. They are cooked by steaming or boiling, and are a feature of the  Duanwu  festival, which is still celebrated by the Chinese communities in Malaysia. 
 Lei Cha   - This aromatic drink is a Hakka staple. The recipe differs from household to household, but generally green tea leaves are added to a mixture of salt, ground mint leaves, toasted sesame seeds and nuts. The mixture is ground or pounded into a fine powder, then brewed into a drink. Taste salty, minty, and full of nutrition. 
 Gong Pian or Kom Piang  -  This is a type of clay oven-baked biscuit/bagel associated with the  Fuzhounese  settlers brought in by the British. Unlike the more common clan communities brought in, the Fuzhounese settlers were brought in smaller numbers predominantly settling in Sitiawan, Perak and Sibu, Sarawak. The Gong Pians out of Sitiawan are generally sweet, but the Gong Pians in Sitiawan are salty. It is usually filled with pork, lard or onions and is best eaten while still hot and crispy. Fuzhou cuisine is unique in its own, different from the other more common Chinese clan communities. It is uncommon and can only be found mainly in Sitiawan and Sibu. 
 
 Malaysian Indian cuisine [ edit ] 
 This article is part of the series on Indian cuisine 
 Regional cuisines 
 North India 
 Awadhi 
 Bhojpuri 
 Haryana 
 Kashmiri 
 Kumauni 
 Mughlai 
 Punjabi 
 Rajasthani 
 Uttar Pradeshi 
 South India 
 Chettinad 
 Hyderabadi 
 Karnataka 
 Kerala 
 KonguNadu 
 Mangalorean 
 Mangalorean Catholic 
 Saraswat 
 Tamil 
 Telangana 
 Telugu 
 Udupi 
 East India 
 Bengali 
 Bihari 
 Jharkhand 
 Odia 
 Maithil 
 West India 
 Goan 
 Gujarati 
 Malvani & Konkani 
 Marathi 
 Parsi 
 Sindhi 
 Northeast India 
 Arunachalese 
 Assamese 
 Meghalayan 
 Manipuri 
 Mizoram 
 Naga 
 Sikkimese 
 Tripuri 
 Other 
 Anglo-Indian 
 Fast food 
 Indian Chinese 
 Indian Indonesian 
 Indian Singaporean 
 Jain (Satvika) 
 Malaysian Indian 
 Nepali 
 
 Ingredients, types of food 
 Main dishes 
 Soups and stews 
 Desserts 
 Bread 
 Drinks 
 Snack foods 
 Spices 
 Condiments 
 
 Preparation, cooking 
 Handi 
 Karahi 
 Tava 
 Tandoor 
 Uruli 
 Other 
 
 See also 
 History 
 Etiquette 
 Indian chefs 
 Cookbook: Cuisine of India 
 
 Related cuisines 
 Nepalese cuisine 
 Sri Lankan cuisine 
 Bangladeshi cuisine 
 Pakistani cuisine 
 Bhutanese cuisine 
 Tibetan cuisine 
 Afghani cuisine 
 
   India portal 
   Food portal v t e 
 Main article:  Malaysian Indian cuisine 
 Malaysian Indian  cuisine, or the cooking of the ethnic Indian communities in Malaysia consists of adaptations of authentic dishes from India, as well as original creations inspired by the diverse food culture of Malaysia. As the vast majority of Malaysia's Indian community are mostly  ethnic Tamils  who are descendants of the modern Indian state of  Tamil Nadu  and  Sri Lanka 's  Northern Province , much of Malaysian Indian cuisine is predominantly  South Indian inspired  in character and taste. A typical Malaysian Indian dish is likely to be redolent with curry leaves, whole and powdered spice, and contains fresh coconut in various forms. Ghee is still widely used for cooking, although vegetable oils and refined palm oils are now commonplace in home kitchens. Before a meal it is customary to wash hands as cutlery is often not used while eating, with the exception of a serving spoon for each respective dish.
 Food served in the traditional South Indian manner is termed  banana leaf rice . Plain white or parboiled rice would be served with an assortment of vegetable preparations, lentil gravy, pickles, condiments, and  papadum  crackers on a banana leaf, which acts as a disposable plate. Banana leaf meals are eaten to celebrate special occasions such as festivals, birthdays, marriages, or to commemorate funeral wakes. It is customary to consume banana leaf meals  by hand  and to show appreciation for the food by folding the banana leaf inwards, though less ritual and etiquette is observed when the meal isn't part of a formal occasion, such as the  Malayalee  community's elaborate  Sadya  feasts. Boiled eggs, meat or seafood dishes are available at banana leaf restaurants which are not exclusively vegetarian or vegan.
 Some notable Malaysian Indian dishes include:
 
 Chapati  - a  North Indian style  flatbread. It is made from a dough of  atta flour  (whole grain durum wheat), water and salt by rolling the dough out into discs of approximately twelve centimetres in diameter and browning the discs on both sides on a very hot, dry tava or frying pan without any oil. Chapatis are usually eaten with curried vegetables. and pieces of the chapati are used to wrap around and pick up each bite of the cooked dish. 
 Fish head curry  - a dish where the head of a fish (usually  ikan merah , or literally "red fish"), is braised in a thick and spicy curried gravy with assorted vegetables such as lady's fingers and brinjals. 
   Idli served with typical accompaniments. 
 Fish molee  - originally from the Indian state of  Kerala , this preparation of fish in a spiced coconut milk gravy is perhaps the Malaysian  Malayalee  community's best known dish. 
 Idli  - made from a mashed mixture of skinned black lentils and rice formed into patties using a mould and steamed, idlis are eaten at breakfast or as a snack. [38]  Idlis are usually served in pairs with  vadai , small donut-shaped fritters made from mashed lentils and spices,  chutney , and a thick stew of lentils and  vegetables  called  sambar . 
 Lassi  - a yogurt-based drink which comes in savoury and sweet varieties. A common drink of Tamil origin which is similar to lassi but is thinner in consistency is called  moru . It is seasoned with salt with flavoured with spices like asafoetida, curry leaves and mustard seeds. [39] 
   Maggi goreng in  George Town ,  Penang 
 Maggi goreng  - a unique Mamak-style variant of mee goreng or stir-fried noodles, using reconstituted  Maggi instant noodles  instead of yellow egg noodles. The noodles may be wok-tossed with bean sprouts, chilli, greens, eggs, tofu, and meat of choice, although no recipe at any Mamak eatery are ever the same. It is usually accompanied with a calamansi lime. [40] 
   Murtabak  being made at a stall, a type of pancake filled with eggs, small chunks of meat and onions. 
 Murtabak   - a savoury dish of stuffed roti canai or flatbread eaten with curry gravy. A typical recipe consists of a minced meat mixture seasoned with garlic, onions and spices folded with an omelette and roti canai. Murtabak is popularly eaten with a side of sweet pickled onions during the fasting month of  Ramadan . 
 Murukku  - a savoury snack of spiced crunchy twists made from rice and urad dal flour, traditionally eaten for  Deepavali . 
 Nasi Beriani  or  Biryani  - a rice dish made from a mixture of spices, basmati rice, yoghurt, meat or vegetables. The ingredients are ideally cooked together in the final phase and is time-consuming to prepare. Pre-mixed biryani spices from different commercial names are easily available in markets these days, which is meant to reduce preparation time. 
   Pasembur. 
 Pachadi  - a traditional South Indian side accompaniment or relish made with vegetables, fruits or lentils. The  Malaysian Telugu  community celebrate the Telugu New Year or  Ugadi  by preparing a special dish called  Ugadi Pachadi , which blends six taste notes as a symbolic reminder of the various facets of life. It is made with green chilli (heat), unripe mangoes (tangy), neem flowers (bitter), jaggery (sweet), tamarind juice (sour) and salt. [41] 
 Pasembur  - a salad of shredded cucumber, boiled potatoes, fried bean curd, turnip, bean sprouts, prawn fritters, spicy fried crab, and fried octopus. This  Penang  Mamak speciality is served with a sweet and spicy nut sauce, and variants of this dish are found in other states as  Mamak rojak . 
 Pongal  - a boiled rice dish which comes in sweet and spicy varieties. [42]  It shares the same name as the  harvest  festival which is celebrated every January; the name of the festival itself is derived from this dish. [43]  The sweet variety of pongal, prepared with milk and jaggery, is cooked in the morning. Once the pongal pot has boiled over (symbolism for an abundant harvest), it is then offered as a  prasad  to the gods as thanksgiving. 
 Poori  - an unleavened deep-fried bread made with whole-wheat flour, commonly consumed for breakfast or as a light meal. A larger  North Indian  variant made with leavened all-purpose flour or  maida  is called  bhatura . 
 Puttu  -  a speciality of the  Ceylonese Tamil  community, puttu is a steamed cylinder of ground rice layered with coconut. It is eaten with bananas, brown sugar, and side dishes like vendhaya kolumbu (tamarind stew flavoured with fenugreek seeds and lentils) or kuttu sambal (relish made from pounded coconut, onions, chilli and spices). [41] 
 Putu Mayam   - the Indian equivalent of rice noodles, also known as  idiyappam . Homemade versions tend to be eaten as an accompaniment to curried dishes or dal. The street food version is typically served with grated coconut and orange-coloured  jaggery . In some areas,  gula melaka  is the favoured sweetener. 
   Roti tisu served as a savoury meal, pictured here with a glass of teh tarik. 
 Roti canai  - a thin unleavened bread with a flaky crust, fried on a skillet with oil and served with condiments. It is sometimes referred to as roti kosong. A host of variations on this classic dish may be found at all Mamak eateries, either at the creative whim of the cook or by customers' special request. A few examples include: roti telur (fried with eggs), roti bawang (fried with thinly sliced onions), roti bom (a smaller but denser roti, usually round in shape), roti pisang (banana), and so on. 
 Roti tissue  - a variant of roti canai made as thin as a piece of 40–50 cm round-shaped tissue in density. It is then carefully folded by the cook into a tall, conical shape and left to stand upright. Roti tissue may be served with curry gravy, dal and chutneys, or finished off with sweet substances such as caramelised sugar and eaten as a dessert. 
 Teh tarik  - literally meaning "pulled tea", teh tarik is a well-loved Malaysian drink. Tea is sweetened using condensed milk, and is prepared using outstretched hands to pour piping hot tea from a mug into a waiting glass, repetitively. The higher the "tarik" or pull, the thicker the froth. The pulling also has the effect of cooling down the tea. Teh tarik is an art form in itself and watching the tea streaming back and forth into the containers can be quite captivating. Similar drinks and variants include kopi tarik, or "pulled coffee" instead of tea;  teh halia , tea brewed with ginger, and with or without the  tarik  treatment; and teh madras, which is prepared with three separate layers: milk at the bottom, black tea in the middle and foam at the top. [44] 
 Thosai ,  dosa  or  dosai  - a soft crepe made from a batter of mashed urad dal and rice, and left to ferment overnight. The batter is spread into a thin, circular disc on a flat, preheated griddle. It may be cooked as it is for (which results in a foldable and soft crepe), or a dash of oil or ghee is then added to the thosai and toasted for crispier results. 
 Vadai ,  vada  or  vades  - is a common term for many different types of savoury fritter-type snacks originated from South India with a set of common ingredients. The most common ingredients are lentils, chillis, onions and curry leaves. 
 Sabahan food [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Sabahan cuisine 
   Sea grapes, known as latok by the Bajau people. 
 The food of Sabah reflects the ethnic diversity of its population and is very eclectic. Traditional  Kadazandusun  cuisine involves mostly boiling or grilling and employs little use of oil. From simple appetizers of seasoned unripe mango to a variety of pickled foods collectively known as  noonsom , tangy and pungent flavours derived from souring agents or fermentation techniques is a key characteristic of traditional Kadazandusun cooking. [45]  Rice wine accompanies all Kadazandusun celebrations and rites, and at a  Murut  event there will be rows upon rows of jars with fermented tapioca tapai. [9]  Presently few eateries in Sabah serve traditional indigenous dishes, although it will always be found during festive occasions like weddings and funerals, as well as the Kaamatan and Kalimaran cultural festivals. Chinese-influenced dishes like  northern Chinese   potstickers  and Hakka stuffed tofu, along with many original creations developed in Sabah's interior settlements by immigrants from both  northern and southern China  throughout the 20th century, feature prominently on the menus of many kopitiam establishments and upscale restaurants. [ citation needed ] 
 Sabah is notable for its excellent seafood, temperate produce and tea (Sabah tea has GI status) grown in the highlands of Mt. Kinabalu, and a small coffee plantation industry with  Tenom  coffee considered the best produce in the region. Local ingredients like freshwater fish, wild boar ( bakas  in native dialects), bamboo shoots, wild ferns, and various jungle produce still figure prominently in the daily diet of the local population. As a significant portion of rural communities still subsist on agriculture as their primary source of income, small scale festivals are even held each year at certain towns to celebrate produce vital to the livelihoods of the local people: the Pesta Jagung of  Kota Marudu , the Pesta Rumbia (sago) of  Kuala Penyu , and Pesta Kelapa from the town of  Kudat . [46]  Sabah vegetable, also known as  cekuk manis  or  sayur manis  (Chinese : 树仔菜), can be found on the menus of many eateries and restaurants throughout the state of Sabah. It is one of the local terms used for a variety of  Sauropus albicans  developed in  Lahad Datu , which yields crunchy edible shoots in addition to its leaves. [ citation needed ]  The flavour is reminiscent of spinach but more complex, "as though it had been fortified with broccoli and infused with asparagus", [47]  and is typically stir-fried with eggs or seasonings like sambal belacan.
 Whether grilled,  cured , deep-fried, steamed, stir-fried, braised, served raw, or made into soups, Sabah's seafood is famed for its freshness, quality, and good value for money. A vast variety of fish, cephalopods, marine crustaceans, shellfish, sea cucumbers and jellyfish have become mainstays on lunch and dinner menus at kopitiam, restaurants, and humble food shacks all over  Kota Kinabalu  and other coastal towns like  Sandakan ,  Tawau ,  Lahad Datu  and  Semporna . Seafood paired with noodles also figure prominently for breakfast, for each day locals flock to speciality eateries where they may be served an assortment of fish-based products to start the day. Examples include:  poached  patties handmade with fresh  fish paste ; deep-fried  fish cakes  wrapped in tofu skin sheets; and noodle soups with toppings like sliced  fish fillet ,  fish or prawn balls , and fish innards. A few eateries even serve "noodles" rolled out with fresh fish paste. [ citation needed ] 
 Edible seaweed  is a traditional food for certain seaside communities throughout Sabah and also possess GI status. [48]   Latok  is similar in appearance to clusters of green-hued fish eggs or grapes, and is typically prepared as a salad by the  Bajau  people.  Coral seaweed  is another popular seaplant product; in recent times it is marketed as a gourmet health food to both locals and tourists, and is given the moniker of "sea  bird's nest " (Chinese : 海底燕窝) as coral seaweed acquires a similar gelatinous texture when dissolved in water. [ citation needed ] 
 
   Amplang. 
   Swordfish  hinava served with  sandwich bread 
 Among the foods and beverages particular to Sabah are:
 
 Amplang  is a type of cracker made from Spanish mackerel, tapioca starch and other seasonings, and then deep fried. [49] 
 Bahar  or  baa  is the Kadazandusun variant of  palm wine  made with sap collected from the cut flower bud of a young coconut tree and a special type of tree bark called  rosok , endemic to the  Tuaran  district. Pieces of the  rosok  is dipped into the coconut nectar during the fermentation process, which contributes a reddish hue to the final product. [50] 
 Beaufort Mee  (Chinese: 保佛炒面) is a speciality of  Beaufort  town. Handmade noodles are smoked, then wok-tossed with meat (usually slices of char siu and marinated pork) or seafood and plenty of  choy sum , and finished off with a thick viscous gravy. [51] 
 Bosou , also called  noonsom  or  tonsom , is the Kadazandusun term for a traditional recipe of tangy fermented meat. Smoked and pulverised buah keluak (nuts from the Kepayang tree ( Pangium edule ) which grows in Malaysia's mangrove swamplands), or  pangi  is a key ingredient and acts as a preservative. Combined with rice, salt and fresh meat or fish, the mixture is then placed into a sealed jar or container for fermentation. Contemporary variants for  bosou  add bananas and pineapples to the mixture. [52]   Pinongian  is a variant where rice is omitted to produce a final product which is much less tangy in taste; however, unlike bosou, "pinongian" must be cooked before serving. 
 Hinava  is a traditional Kadazandusun dish of raw fish cured in lime juice. Typically, firm fleshed white fish like mackerel ( hinava sada tongii ) is marinated with lime juice, sliced shallots, chopped chilli, julienned ginger and grated dried seed of the  bambangan  fruit. Optional additions may include sliced bitter gourd. Hinava may also be made with prawns ( hinava gipan ). 
 Lihing  is a rice wine made exclusively from glutinous rice and natural yeast called  sasad . Bittersweet in taste profile, lihing is a speciality of the Kadazan  Penampang  community, where it is still commonly  brewed at home . Lihing can be used to make chicken soup ( Sup Manuk Lihing ), used in marinades, or even as an ingredient for meat pastries and stir-fried dishes. Commercially produced lihing, much pricier than the homebrewed version but consistent in quality, is also available in select souvenir shops. Lihing and similar rice wine variants from other Kadazandusun communities may also be distilled to produce a hard liquor called  montoku  or  talak . 
 Linongot  is a type of leaf parcel (usually  irik  or tarap leaves)  filled with a combination of cooked rice and root vegetables like sweet potatoes and yam. [53]  Alternate names known by Kadazandusun communities in other districts include  linopod  and  sinamazan . [54] 
 Nasi kombos  is a rice dish from the  Lotud  community. [54]  Glutinous rice is first cooked with young coconut water, and then mixed with the grated tender flesh of a young coconut. The rice is traditionally served in a hollowed out coconut shell. [55] 
 Nonsoom bambangan  is a pickle made from half ripe bambangan fruit mixed with grated dried bambangan seed and salt, sealed in a tightly covered jar and left to ferment for weeks. [56] 
 Ngiu chap  (牛什) is a Chinese-influenced dish of beef or buffalo broth served with noodles, usually immersed in the soup with slices of poached beef or buffalo meat, meatballs, stewed brisket, tendon, liver and various offal parts. An iconic Sabahan dish, ngiu chap has many different variations, from the lighter Hainanese style to heartier Hakka-influenced flavours, and even village-style ngiu chap adapted for indigenous tastes. [57] 
 Piaren Ah Manuk  is a chicken curry made from a sauteed  rempah  base and grated coconut, then braised in coconut milk. This dish is very popular in the  Iranun  community. [58]  Variants include fish (Piaren Ah Sada) and unripe jackfruit (Piaren Ah Badak). 
  Nuba laya/Nuba tinga  is an ordinary rice wrapped with  banana leaf  or nyrik leaf. This dishes is to ease the farmer and the traveller for them to carry for a long journey. Usually this dishes is very famous among the  Lun Bawang/Lundayeh  people and this dishes a bit similarity to the linongot. However, this Nuba Tinga/Nuba laya is different because the rice is very soft and can bitten easily by senior citizen. 
 Pinasakan  or  Pinarasakan  is a home-style Kadazandusun dish of fish simmered with  takob-akob  (dried skin of a mangosteen-like fruit which functions as a souring agent) or slices of unripe  bambangan , as well as fresh turmeric leaves and rhizome. [59] 
 Pinjaram  (or known as: Penyaram) is a Bajau and  Bruneian Malay  heritage. It is famous and popular almost everywhere in Sabah and can be found in night markets and Tamu (Sabah weekly market). 
 Sagol  or  sinagol  is a Bajau speciality of fish which is first blanched and minced, then sauteed with turmeric, garlic, ginger, onions and crushed lemongrass. Traditionally the oil used is rendered fish liver oil, usually from the same fish used to prepare this dish. This dish may be prepared with  shark ,  stingray  and even  puffer fish . [48] 
 Sang nyuk mian  (Chinese : 生肉面) is a dish of noodles served with pork broth, originating from  Tawau . Very popular with the non-Muslim communities of Sabah, it is named after the poached-to-order slices of tender marinated pork served in pork broth which is flavoured with fried lard bits. The noodles (usually thick yellow noodles) are either dressed in dark soy and lard, or dunked into the soup along with the aforementioned pork slices, vegetables, meatballs and offal. [60] 
 Sinalau  refers to Kadazandusun style smoked meat, which is usually wild boar or  bakas . Barbecued on a char grill and eaten with rice and dipping sauces, sinalau bakas can be found and purchased in rural areas and towns. Halal versions substitute wild boar for other game meats like deer. [8] 
 Sinamu Baka  is a  Lun Bawang/Lundayeh  traditional food. This is a tangy fermented food same like a  Bosou  but the differences is sinamu baka only suitable for wild bear. 
 Tinonggilan  is a slightly sparkling alcoholic drink made from  maize . Tinonggilan is a  Rungus  speciality and is usually served during festive occasions, or as refreshments for guests during the performance of a ritual dance called Mongigol Sumundai. [61] 
 Tompek  is a Bajau food made from grated  tapioca , eaten as an alternative starchy staple to rice. The grated tapioca is squeezed to dry out mixture and crumbled, then fried or toasted until golden brown. [62]  Grated tapioca may also be packed into cylindrical shapes and steamed until it forms into a chewy tubular cake called  putu , another traditional Bajau staple. [48] 
 Tuaran mee  (Chinese: 斗亚兰面) is a speciality of  Tuaran  town. This dish of wok fried fresh handmade noodles is well known in the nearby city of Kota Kinabalu as well as in neighbouring  Tamparuli  town, where the localised adaptation is called Tamparuli mee (Chinese: 担波罗利炒生面). The noodles must first be toasted with oil in the wok to prevent it from clumping together, then blanched to reduce the stiff crunchy texture from toasting. The final step involves stir frying the noodles to a dry finish with eggs, vegetables, and meat or seafood. [51] 
 Tuhau  ( Etlingera coccinea ) is a type of wild ginger, specifically the stems of the same plant popularly served as a relish by the Kadazandusun community. The stems are typically chopped up and served fresh with lime juice, or mixed with local chives and chilli peppers then cured with salt and vinegar. A more recent recipe called  serunding tuhau  involves slicing tuhau stems into thin floss-like shreds, which is then sauteed until it becomes golden and crisp. It has a distinctive scent which is said to have a polarising effect even among indigenous Sabahans. [59] 
 Sarawakian food [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Sarawakian cuisine 
 Sarawakian is quite distinct from the regional cuisines of the Peninsular. It is considered less spicy, lightly prepared and with more emphasis on subtle flavours. The most important spice in Sarawakian cuisine is pepper. Pepper is commercially produced on an industrial scale as a cash crop, and the preferred choice by local cooks when heat is wanted in a dish. Granted GI status by MyIPO, Sarawak black pepper is highly regarded by international culinary figures such as  Alain Ducasse . [63] 
 While the Iban constitute the largest Dayak subgroup as well as the most populous ethnic group in Sarawak, much of the ethnic Iban population is still concentrated away from Sarawak's main urban areas, congregating instead within  longhouse  communities scattered all over the interior regions of the state. The traditional cookery of the Iban is called  pansoh  or  pansuh , which is the preparation and cooking of food in bamboo tubes. Ingredients like poultry, fish, pork, vegetables or rice are mixed with fragrant herbs like lemongrass, tapioca leaves and  bungkang  leaves (a species of myrtle from the  Eugenia  genus), then sealed within the bamboo tubes and placed directly over an open fire. Cooking food this way will infuse it with aroma and flavour from the bamboo tubes while keeping it moist. [ citation needed ] 
 During Dayak festivals or  Gawai , the Iban would slaughter locally reared pigs. The pig would be cleaned thoroughly after the slaughter, have its head and stomach removed, and the rest of the pig would be cut into smaller pieces in preparation for barbecuing. The head and stomach of a pig are usually put aside and prepared separately as they are considered the choicest parts of the animal; hence pig's heads are a common edible gift brought by visitors to an Iban longhouse, and dishes such as pork stomach cooked with pineapples are a must for Gawai. [ citation needed ] 
 Sarawak is notable for its rice; currently three varieties grown in Sarawak has been granted GI status by MyIPO. [64] [65] 
Among the foods and beverages particular to Sarawak are:
 
   Kolo mee 
   Laksa Sarawak 
   Teh C Peng Special 
 Belacan bihun  is rice vermicelli dressed in a gravy made from ground chillies, belacan, tamarind, and dried shrimp. It is garnished with cured cuttlefish, julienned cucumber, bean sprouts and century egg wedges. [66] 
 Bubur pedas  is a type of rice congee cooked with a specially prepared spice paste, or  rempah  made from turmeric, lemon grass,  galangal , chillies, ginger, coconut and shallots. A fairly complex and spicy dish compared to most typical congee preparations, Bubur Pedas is often prepared during the month of Ramadan and served during the breaking of fast. [67] 
 Daun ubi tumbuk  or  pucuk ubi tumbuk  is a preparation of cassava leaves (known as  empasak  by the Iban) which has the consistency of pesto, and is widely eaten among Sarawak's native communities. [68]  The pounded leaves may be sauteed with seasonings like anchovies and chilli, [69]  stuffed into a bamboo tube and roasted over an open fire, or simply boiled with shallot, fat and salt. 
 Ikan terubuk masin  is salt-preserved  toli shad , which is endemic to the coastal waters of Sarawak, stretching from Sematan to Lawas. [70]  It is considered an iconic delicacy in Sarawak, and thus a prized edible gift. [71] 
 Kasam ensabi  is a fermented vegetable pickle made from an indigenous cultivar of mustard greens ( ensabi ) and is traditional to the Iban community. [72] 
 Kolo mee  or  mee kolok  (Chinese: 干捞面) is a dish of springy egg noodles tossed in a sweet and savoury shallot, lard and vinegar dressing, and topped with seasoned minced pork and char siu. It is similar to Peninsular-style Hakka mee or wonton mee in concept, but differs significantly in taste profile. A popular variant uses rendered oil from cooking char siu to flavour kolo mee instead of plain lard, which gives the noodles a reddish hue. Halal versions of kolo mee replace the pork components with beef (earning the moniker of  mee sapi ) or chicken, and lard with peanut or vegetable oil. Additional toppings can include mushrooms, chicken and crab meat.  Kampua mee  (Chinese: 干盘面) is a similar dish from  Sibu  of Fuzhou origin. 
 Laksa Sarawak  or  Kuching Laksa  (Chinese : 古晉叻沙) is noodles (usually rice vermicelli) served in an aromatic spiced coconut milk soup, topped with shredded chicken, shredded omelette, bean sprouts, prawns, and garnished with coriander. [73] 
 Manok kacangma  is a Chinese-influenced dish, traditionally taken by local women for confinement after giving birth. It consists of chicken pieces cooked with ginger and  kacangma  (Chinese: 益母草), often seasoned with some  Chinese wine  or tuak by non-Muslim cooks. [74] 
 Manok pansoh  is the most typical Iban pansoh preparation of chicken seasoned with  bungkang  leaves, lemongrass, ginger, and tapioca leaves, then stuffed into a bamboo tube and roasted in the Uma Avok (traditional fireplace). [73]  A related  Bidayuh  dish is  Asam Siok , with the addition of rice to the chicken mixture. These dishes are not commonly found in urban eateries and restaurants due to the practicality of roasting a bamboo tube over an open fire within a typical commercial kitchen. 
 Nasi goreng dabai  is rice stir-fried with dabai ( canarium odontophyllum ), an indigenous fruit found only in Sarawak. [75]  It is often compared to an olive, due to their similarity in appearance as well as taste. [76]  As dabai is highly perishable and seasonal in nature, this dish is also prepared with preserved dabai paste. 
 Nuba laya  is cooked Bario rice which is mashed and wrapped in leaves of the  phacelophrynium maximum  plant. It is considered the centerpiece of a meal for the  Lun Bawang  and  Kelabit people . [77]  Accompaniments may include a small bowl of porridge ( kikid ), shredded beef cooked with wild ginger and dried chilli ( labo senutuq ), deboned shredded fish ( a'beng ), wild jungle vegetables prepared in various ways, and so on. [78] 
 Sinamu Baka  is a Lun Bawang/Lundayeh traditional food. This is a tangy fermented food same like Bosuo but the differences is Sinamu Baka only suitable for wild bear meat. 
 Sup Terung Dayak  is a popular soup dish made with a native cultivar of wild eggplant, [68]  which is spherical in shape and slightly larger than a navel orange. Also called  terung asam  due to its natural tart flavour, this eggplant species comes in bright hues ranging from yellow to orange. Other ingredients for the soup may include fish, prawns, or fish products (dried, salted or smoked fish). 
 Tebaloi  is a sago biscuit snack which is traditionally associated with the Melanau people of Sarawak. [79] 
 Three layer tea  or  Teh C Peng Special  is an iced concoction of brewed tea, evaporated milk and gula apong (nirah palm sugar) syrup, carefully presented un-stirred in three or more layers. [73]  Originally from  Kuching , its popularity has spread to other areas of Sarawak as well as neighbouring Sabah. 
 Tuak  is a type of liquor traditional to Sarawak's Dayak communities. It is most commonly made from fermented normal or glutinous rice, but there is no accepted convention or definition on what constitutes tuak. Tuak is essentially an alcoholic drink produced by fermenting anything that contains carbohydrates, as long as it is made in Sarawak by Sarawakians. [80]  with The Bidayuh in particular are known for their skill and expertise in brewing tuak: ingredients for tuak variants include sugarcane ( tepui ),  tampoi  (a wild fruit with a sweet and tart flavour), pineapples and apples. Tuak is normally served as a welcoming drink to guests, and as an important component for ritual events and festive occasions like Gawai and Christmas. Tuak may also be distilled to make a spirit called  langkau . 
 Umai  is a traditional  Melanau  food, accompanied with a bowl of baked or toasted sago pearls. There are two different versions of umai – the traditional sambal campur and a more contemporary variation called  sambal cecah jeb . The former is a raw seafood salad which consists of raw sliced seafood (anything from freshwater and seawater fish, prawns and even jellyfish) cured in calamansi lime juice, tossed with ground peanuts, sliced onions and chillies. For  umai jeb , the raw sliced seafood is undressed, and is simply dipped into a spicy sauce for consumption. [81] 
 White Lady  is a chilled drink made with milk, mango juice, longan and pineapple. Invented in 1975 by a Kuching hawker, multiple variations can be found in various hawker stalls throughout the city. [82] 
 Peranakan food [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Peranakan cuisine 
 Peranakan cuisine, also called Nyonya food, was developed by the Straits Chinese whose descendants reside in today's Malaysia and Singapore. The old Malay word nyonya (also spelled nonya), a term of respect and affection for women of prominent social standing (part "madame" and part "auntie"), has come to refer to the cuisine of the Peranakans. It uses mainly Chinese ingredients but blends them with Malay ingredients such as coconut milk, lemon grass, turmeric, tamarind, pandan leaves, chillies and  sambal . It can be considered as a blend of Chinese and Malay cooking, with influences from Indonesian Chinese cuisine (for the Nyonya food of Malaccan and Singaporean) and Thai cuisine (for  Penang  Nyonya cuisine). Traditional Nyonya cooking is often very elaborate, labour-intensive and time-consuming, and the Peranakan community often consider the best Nyonya food is to be found in private homes.
 
   A bowl of Asam laksa 
 Examples of Nyonya dishes include:
 
 Acar  - various pickled meats and vegetables like acar keat-lah (honey lime/calamansi), achar hu (fried fish), acar kiam hu (salt fish), acar timun ( cucumber ), acar awat (mixed vegetables). 
 Asam Laksa  (Mandarin: 亞三叻沙). Considered one of  Penang 's three signature dishes, Asam laksa is similar to the Malay  laksa utara , which consists of a bowl of translucent  al dente  rice noodles served in a spicy soup made of fish (usually  mackerel ),  tamarind  (both  asam jawa  and  asam gelugor ), and  daun kesum . Toppings differ considerably, and may include onion, mint, chopped torch ginger flower, and slices of pineapple and cucumber. A dollop of pungent, viscous  sweet fermented shrimp paste ( Petis udang  or  Hae Ko )  is usually served on the side. 
 Ayam buah keluak , a chicken stew cooked with the nuts from the Kepayang tree ( Pangium edule ). For this recipe, the contents of the buah keluak is dug out and sauteed with aromatics and seasonings, before it is stuffed back into the nuts and braised with the chicken pieces. 
 Ayam/Babi Pongteh , a stew of chicken or pork cooked with  tauchu  or salted fermented soy beans, and  gula melaka . It is usually saltish-sweet and can be substituted as a soup dish in Peranakan cuisine.Commonly use pork as this is a Peranakan version of Chinese braised pork belly. 
 Babi assam , a pork stew cooked with tamarind juice. The Kristang community also cook a similar dish of pork in tamarind gravy. 
 Enche Kabin , deep fried chicken pieces marinated in a paste of coconut milk and  rempah (spices). 
 Itik Tim  or  Kiam Chye Ark Th'ng  is a soup of duck, preserved mustard greens and cabbage flavoured with  nutmeg , Chinese mushrooms, tomatoes and peppercorns. 
 Jiu Hu Char  is a dish made up mainly of shredded vegetables like turnip or  jicama , carrot, and cabbage and fried together with thinly shredded dried  cuttlefish . 
 Kari Kapitan  is a  Penang  Nonya take on the ubiquitous chicken curry. Kaffir lime leaves and coconut milk are among the key ingredients for this mild curry. 
 Kerabu Bee Hoon  is a salad dish consisting of  rice vermicelli  mixed with  sambal  belacan, calamansi lime juice, and finely chopped herbs and spices. Other famous salad dishes are kerabu bok ni ( cloud ear fungus /tikus telinga), kerabu ke (chicken), kerabu ke-kha (chicken feet), kerabu timun (cucumber), kerabu kobis (cabbage), kerabu kacang botol (four angled bean), kerabu bak pue (pork skin). 
 Kiam Chye Boey  is a mixture of leftovers from Kiam Chye Ark Th'ng, Jiu Hu Char, Tu Thor Th'ng and various other dishes. "Boey" literally means "end". 
 Laksa lemak  is a type of  laksa  served in a rich coconut gravy, served with prawns, cockles, lime and a dollop of sambal belacan. 
 Masak titik  is a style of vegetable soup that makes liberal use of white peppercorns. One version uses watermelon rind as the main ingredient. Another makes use of green or semi ripe papaya. 
 Nasi kunyit  - glutinous rice seasoned with turmeric powder, coconut milk and  asam gelugur . It is usually served with a chicken curry, ang koo kueh, and pink-dyed hard-boiled eggs as gifts in celebration of a child of friends and family turning one month old. 
 Nyonya  Bak Chang , Nonya-style  zongzi  made in a similar manner as a typical southern Chinese zongzi. However, the filling is typically minced pork with candied winter melon, ground roasted peanuts, and a spice mix. The blue butterfly pea flower is used to colour the rice with a shade of blue, and pandan leaves are sometimes used as the wrapping instead. 
 Nyonya chap chye  - the Nyonya take of this  Chinese Indonesian  classic incorporates tauchu and dried or fresh prawns. 
 Otak-otak  - a dish involving fish pieces wrapped in banana leaves. Two very different variations exist: one consists of a mixture of fish pieces and spice paste wrapped in banana leaves and char grilled. This version is particularly associated with the state of  Malacca  and the town of  Muar ,  Johor .  Penang -style otak-otak takes the form of a delicate steamed parcel, and the robust red-hued spice paste is eschewed in favour of a base of a spiced custard as well as aromatic herbs like daun kaduk. 
 Perut ikan  - a spicy stew (similar to asam pedas in flavour profile) comprising mainly vegetables/herbs and getting its distinctive taste mainly from fish bellies preserved in brine and daun kaduk (The Wild Pepper leaf is from the Piper stylosum or the Piper sarmentosum). A classic  Penang  Nyonya dish. 
 Pie Tee  - A thin and crispy pastry  tart  shell filled with a spicy, sweet mixture of thinly sliced vegetables and  prawns . 
 Roti babi  -  a sandwich of spiced minced pork, dipped in its entirety in egg wash and deep fried. Roti babi is typically served with a dip of  Worcestershire sauce  and sliced red chillies. 
 Seh Bak  - a dish of pork marinated overnight with herbs and spices, then cooked over a slow fire and simmered to tenderness. Seh Bak is also traditional to Malacca's Eurasian community. 
 Ter Thor T'ng  - this soup of pig stomach requires a skilled cook to prepare and deodorise the ingredients thoroughly before cooking. Its main ingredients are pig stomach and white peppercorns. 
 Eurasian food [ edit ] 
 Ambilla  - a tangy dish of meat cooked with long beans (kacang), brinjals (terung) or pumpkin (labu). 
 Caldu Pescator  - A seafood soup traditionally prepared by fishermen, as well as during the Feast of St Peter ("Festa San Pedro", in the local Cristang dialect, usually observed on 29 June), the Patron Saint of Fishermen. 
 Curry Debal  - a quintessential Kristang dish, usually cooked during Christmas season to make use of the left-over meats from feasting. It is a very spicy curry flavoured with candlenuts, galangal and vinegar. 
 Curry Seku  - a very dry curry prepared in a wok. Seku means "bottom" in  Papia Kristang , and the wok was probably so-named because of the roundness of its shape that resembled the human bottom. 
 Chicken pie  -, this  meat pie , known as empada de galinha or galinha pia, is usually served during Christmas season and other special occasions. 
 Feng  - a curried dish of pig offal, traditionally served for Christmas. 
 Pang Susi  - a savoury meat bun with a dough that is bread-like and sweet in texture, made for auspicious and festive occasions such as Easter. 
 Pesce Assa or commonly known as Ikan Bakar   or  Sambal stingray - Portuguese baked/grilled fish is one of the Kristang community's most famous specialties, now found in major urban areas throughout Malaysia. The fish is smothered with diced  lady's fingers  and a robust sambal, before it is wrapped in banana leaves as well as a layer of metal foil, and then cooked on a grill. In spite of its name, this dish has little in common with modern  Portuguese fish recipes . 
 Semur  or  Smoore  -  a fragrant beef stew. Versions of this dish are found wherever the Dutch have settled in Asia, including Malacca. 
 Soy Limang  - a braised dish of fried brinjals, with soy sauce and lime juice as the primary seasonings. 
 Other Malaysian cuisines [ edit ] 
 Chicken chop  - also known as  Hainanese chicken chop , a basic Western style of Malaysian cuisine. It was invented by the Hainanese migrant workers during the Malaya period. The cuisine is similar with the American  chicken fried steak  but different on sides; the gravy is made with the black pepper sauce and the dish comes with the either French fries or wedges, and some salads. [83] 
 Kuih (delicacy) and snack [ edit ] 
 This section  does not  cite  any  sources .  Please help  improve this section  by  adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and  removed .   ( December 2015 )  ( Learn how and when to remove this template message ) 
   A selection of Nyonya kuih 
 Kuih  (plural:  kuih-muih ) are usually, but not always, bite-sized foods associated with the Malay and  Min-speaking Chinese  communities of Malaysia. In the context of the term being cultural as opposed to being physically descriptive, the concept of  kuih  may refer to a selection of cakes, cookies, confections, pastries and sweetmeats. Kuih may be eaten throughout the day for light breakfast, afternoon tea (a tradition adopted from the British), as a snack and increasingly as an after-meal course.
 More often steamed or fried and based on rice or glutinous rice,  kuih  items are very different in texture, flavour and appearance from Western oven-baked cakes or puff pastries. Most  kuih  items are sweet, and may be classified and eaten as  desserts , but some are also savoury.  Kuih  is an important feature of festive occasions and is traditionally made at home, but is now available for purchase from home caterers, street vendors, market stallholders and specialist cafes, shops and restaurants. It is difficult to distinguish between  kuih  of Malay or Peranakan (also known as "Straits Chinese") origin because the histories of traditional  kuih  recipes have not been well-documented, and cross-cultural influences over the centuries were commonplace. Even the word  kuih  itself is derived from the Hokkien/Teochew word 粿 (pronounced  kueh  or  kway ).
 Examples of notable  kuih-muih  include:
 
 Ang koo kueh  (Chinese: 紅龜粿) - a small round or oval-shaped Chinese pastry with red-coloured soft sticky glutinous rice flour skin wrapped around a sweet filling in the centre. 
 Apam balik  - a turnover pancake with a texture similar to a crumpet with crisp edges, made from a thin flour-based batter with  raising agent . It is typically cooked on a griddle and topped with caster sugar, ground peanut, creamed corn, and grated coconut in the middle, and then turned over. Many different takes on this dish exist as part of the culinary repertoire of the Malay, Chinese, Peranakan, Indonesian, and ethnic Bornean communities, all under different names. 
 Bahulu  - tiny crusty sponge cakes which come in distinctive shapes like buttons and goldfish, acquired from being baked in moulded pans.  Bahulu  is usually baked and served for festive occasions. 
 Cucur  - deep-fried fritters, sometimes known as  jemput-jemput . Typical varieties include  cucur udang  (fritters studded with a whole unshelled prawn),  cucur badak  (sweet potato fritters), and  cucur kodok  (banana fritters). 
 Curry puff  -  a small pie filled with a curried filling, usually chicken or potatoes, in a deep-fried or baked pastry shell. 
 Cincin  - a deep fried dough pastry-based snack popular with East Malaysia's Muslim communities. 
 Dadar/Ketayap  - a rolled crepe (usually flavoured with pandan juice) and filled with grated sweet coconut filling (flavoured with palm sugar). 
 Jelurut  - also known as  kuih selorot  in Sarawak, this  kuih  is made from a mixture of  gula apong  and rice flour, then rolled with palm leaves into cones and steamed. 
 Kapit, sapit or sepi  - crispy folded coconut-flavoured wafer biscuits, colloquially known as "love letters". 
 Kochi  - glutinous rice dumplings filled with a sweet paste, shaped into pyramids and wrapped with banana leaves. 
 Niangao  (Chinese : 年糕) or  kuih bakul  - a brown sticky and sweet rice cake customarily associated with Chinese New Year festivities. It is also available year-round as a popular street food, made with pieces of  niangao  sandwiched between slices of taro and sweet potato, dipped in batter and deep-fried. 
 Pie tee  - this  Nyonya  speciality is a thin and crispy pastry tart shell filled with a spicy, sweet mixture of thinly-sliced vegetables and prawns. 
 Onde onde  - small round balls made from glutinous rice flour coloured and flavoured with pandan, filled with palm sugar syrup and rolled in freshly grated coconut. 
 Or Kuih  (Chinese : 芋粿) - a steamed savoury cake made from pieces of taro (commonly known as "yam" in Malaysia), dried prawns and rice flour. It is then topped with deep fried shallots, spring onions, sliced chilli and dried prawns, and usually served with a chilli dipping sauce. 
 Pineapple tart  - flaky pastries filled with or topped with pineapple jam. 
 Pinjaram or penyaram  - a saucer-shaped deep fried fritter with crisp edges and a dense, chewy texture towards the centre. It is widely sold by street food vendors in the open air markets of East Malaysia. 
 Putu piring  - a round steamed cake made of rice flour dough with a palm sugar-sweetened filling. 
 Seri Muka  -  a two-layered  kuih  with steamed glutinous rice forming the bottom half and a green custard layer made with pandan juice. 
 Wajid  or  wajik  - a compressed Malay confection made of glutinous rice cooked with coconut milk and  gula melaka . 
   Mee Siput Muar 
 Examples of snack include:
 
 Lekor  - A  keropok  fish cracker snack. 
 Mee Siput Muar  - A deep-fried circular dried noodle snack, made from flour with other ingredients, eaten with  sambal . 
 Rempeyek  - A deep-fried savoury cracker, made from flour with other ingredients, bound or coated by crispy flour batter. 
 Desserts and sweets [ edit ] 
   Ais kacang 
   Batik cake 
 Desserts and sweets in Malaysia are diverse, due to the multi-ethnic and multicultural characteristics of its society. Traditional Malay and Nyonya desserts tend to share a common feature however: generous amounts of  coconut milk  are used, and the finished product usually flavoured with  gula melaka  (palm sugar) and pandan leaves. Some notable desserts include:
 
 Agar agar  - the Malay word for a species of red algae. A natural vegetarian gelatin counterpart, agar-agar is used to make puddings and flavoured jellies like  almond tofu , as well as fruit  aspics . 
 Ais kacang  - also known as  air batu campur  or abbreviated as ABC, this dessert consists of a base of shaved ice, coloured syrup, and evaporated or condensed milk with a variety of toppings. These may include sweet corn kernels, red beans, kidney beans,  cincau  ( grass jelly ),  cendol , buah atap (fruit of the  nipa palm ), soaked basil seeds, peanuts, and ice cream. 
 Aiskrim potong  - an ice cream popsicle made from coconut milk or milk, flavoured with localised ingredients like red beans, rose syrup, durian, pandan, creamed corn and jackfruit. Its texture is different from Western ice cream; aiskrim potong is less creamy and has a slightly starchy taste when it begins to melt. [84] 
 Batik cake  - a type of  chocolate cake  similar like the  hedgehog slice  made using  Marie biscuit . 
 Bolu cocu  - a traditional Kristang cake topped with liberal amounts of shredded coconut and served with a custard sauce. [85] 
 Bubur cha cha  - a Nyonya dessert of bananas, sweet potatoes, taro, black eyed beans and sago pearls cooked in pandan-flavoured coconut milk. May be served hot or cold. 
 Bubur kacang hijau  - mung bean porridge cooked with coconut milk and sweetened with palm or cane sugar. It is called canje mungoo by the Kristang community, and is usually served in conjunction with the feast day of St John the Baptist (Festa da San Juang). 
   Bubur pulut hitam, without coconut milk. 
   Sarawak layered cake . 
 Bubur pulut hitam  - black glutinous rice porridge cooked with palm sugar and pandan leaves, served hot with coconut milk. 
 Cendol  - smooth green-coloured droplets made from mung bean or rice flour, usually served by itself in chilled coconut milk and  gula melaka , or as a topping for ABC. In Malacca, mashed durian is a popular topping for cendol. 
 Coconut candy  - a confection of grated coconut, sugar, condensed milk, flavouring and colouring, coconut candies are a popular sweet served at homes during festive occasions and available at restaurants specialising in Indian sweets. [86] 
 Dadih  - a Malay dairy-based dessert made from milk, sugar and salt which has been acidified with whey (obtained by fermenting milk overnight with  asam gelugur ) and steamed to form a custard like texture. Although popular in contemporary recipes, agar agar is not used as a gelling agent for authentic  dadih . [87] 
 Dodol  - a sweet, sticky, and thick toffee-like confection, made with heavily reduced coconut milk, jaggery, and rice flour. Commonly served during festivals such as Eid ul-Fitr and Eid al-Adha as sweet treats for children. 
 Halva or Halwa  - the term refers to a range of dense and sweet confections in Malaysia bearing similar names, though they may have little in common in terms of ingredients and texture. Various types of fudge-like flour and nut-based halva cooked with ghee, which are based on traditional recipes brought over from India, are commonly available at specialist sweet shops and regularly prepared by the Indian communities for festive occasions. [41]  The Malay community have different recipes for a range of confectionery bearing similar names, which includes candied fruit [88]  and Halwa Maskat, a gelatinous jelly made from flour, ghee and pieces of fruit or nut which is similar in texture to  Turkish delight . [89] 
 Hinompuka  - a native Sabahan steamed confection traditionally wrapped in  banana  or  irik  ( phacelophrynium maximum ) leaves. Sold in local markets and is also an essential food item for celebrating weddings, birthdays and festivals,  hinompuka  is made with a moistened blend of pounded white glutinous rice and purplish-black glutinous rice ( tadung ) sweetened with brown or palm sugar. Kadazandusun communities beyond Sabah's  West Coast Division  make similar desserts but are known under different names, including but not limited to   bintanok ,  lompuka ,  tinapung , and  pais . Variations include the substitution of rice flour batter with grated tapioca or mashed corn kernels; banana leaves or coconut husks as alternative wrappers; and the addition of ripe bananas or freshly grated coconut to the starchy mixture. 
 Keria Gula Melaka  - is a type of  doughnuts  that made of  sweet potato  and slicked with smoky gula Melaka, Malaysian  palm sugar . 
 Ladoo  -  the most popular of all Indian sweetmeats in Malaysia, particularly during  Diwali/Deepavali  season,  ladoo  comes in many different flavours. A typical  ladoo  recipe involves cooking chickpea flour, semolina and ground coconut in ghee. [90] 
 Leng Chee Kang  (Chinese : 莲子羹) - a mixture of cooked ingredients immersed in a  sweet soup . Ingredients vary greatly depending on the cook, but lotus seed is always the primary ingredient, and the soup may include dried longan, white fungus, barley,  kembang semangkuk  jelly and rock sugar as secondary ingredients. [91]  Leng Chee Kang may be served warm or cold. 
 Matterhorn  - crushed ice with pineapples, longan, cendol, grass jelly and lemon slices. The Kuching hawker who came up with this popular dessert as well as the original White Lady drink was inspired by the  Matterhorn , an ice-capped mountain on the Swiss-Italian border. [82] 
 Mooncake  (Chinese : 月饼) -  round or rectangular pastries with a rich thick filling, traditionally eaten during the  Mid-Autumn Festival  and accompanied with  Chinese tea . Both the traditional baked mooncake and the  snow skin version  are popular and widely available in Malaysia during the festival season. [92] 
 Nanggiu  - a Kadazandusun dessert, which consists of jelly noodles made from fresh sago flour cooked in a coconut milk soup sweetened with palm sugar. [55] 
 Pandan cake  - coloured and flavoured with pandan juice, this light and fluffy cake is also known as pandan chiffon. 
 Payasam  - a sweet spiced pudding made from starchy staples like rice or vermicelli, payasam is an integral part of traditional South Indian culture. 
 Pengat  - a soupy dessert cooked with gula melaka and coconut milk. Also known as  serawa ,  pengat  is made with pieces of fruit like banana, jackfruit and durian, or root vegetables like sweet potatoes and tapioca. It may be reduced further into a thick dipping sauce and served with glutinous rice,  roti jala , or  pancakes  ( lempeng ). 
 Pisang goreng  - a common snack sold by street vendors, battered fried bananas are also served in a more elaborate manner at some cafes and restaurants as a dessert. Cempedak and various tuber vegetables are also battered and fried in the same manner as variations. 
 Puding Diraja  -  also known as Royal Pudding, this dessert was developed and served to the  royal family  of  Pahang  state. Its basic ingredients are pisang lemak manis (a local cultivar of banana), evaporated milk, prunes, candied cherries and cashew nuts. The  pudding  is garnished with  jala emas , and served with a cold sauce made from milk and cornflour. Nowadays it is popularly served during Ramadan, as well as a special afternoon tea treat for the family on weekends. [93] 
 Pulot tartal   - a  Nyonya   glutinous rice  dessert. [94] 
 Sago pudding  - a dessert of cooked translucent sago pearls, which may be served as a liquid dessert with coconut milk and palm sugar, or allowed to set as a pudding ( sagu gula melaka ) and drizzled with thickened coconut milk and  gula melaka  syrup. 
 Sarawak layer cake  - these famously intricate layer cakes are essential for festive occasions celebrated throughout Sarawak, like Hari Raya,  Chinese New Year ,  Gawai  and  Christmas . 
 Sugee cake  - a baked speciality of the Eurasian community, made with semolina flour and a high concentration of egg yolks. 
 Tangyuan  (Chinese :  汤圆 or 湯圓) - plain white or coloured sweet dumplings made from glutinous rice flour. Traditionally homemade and eaten during  Yuanxiao  (Chinese : 元宵) as well as the  Dongzhi Festival  (Chinese : 冬至), tangyuan is now available year around sold as dessert. Tangyuan dumplings with filling are usually served in a lightly sweetened clear syrup, while unfilled ones are served as part of a  sweet dessert soup . 
 Tapai  - a popular dessert at Malay homes throughout Peninsular Malaysia during Hari Raya, made from fermented glutinous rice or tapioca. [95]  Tapai may be eaten on its own, or served with contemporary toppings like ice cream, chocolate and fruit. [96]  Not to be confused with the alcoholic beverage from Sabah, also known as tapai, which is made from the same ingredients and with similar methods but have undergone advanced stages of fermentation to produce alcoholic content. [8] 
 Tau foo fah  or Dau Huay (Chinese : 豆腐花 or 豆花) - a velvety pudding of very soft  silken tofu , traditionally flavoured with a brown sugar syrup. 
 UFO tart  (Chinese : 牛屎堆) - this consists of a flat, thin base of baked mini butter sponge cake topped with a creamy egg custard, which is in turn crowned with a  meringue  slurry. [97]  Its name in Chinese literally means "cow pile dung", which alludes to the piped shape of the cake base's toppings and the meringue's darker shade as a result of caramelisation. Popularized by a Hainanese bakery in Sandakan in the 1950s, the popularity of these treats has spread to Kota Kinabalu and several other towns in Sabah. [98] 
 See also [ edit ] 
 
 Food portal Malaysia portal 
 
 Cuisine of Singapore 
 Ipoh cuisine 
 List of Malaysian dishes 
 Penang cuisine 
 Chef Wan , celebrity chef 
 Zamzani Abdul Wahab ,  celebrity chef 
 
 References [ edit ] 
 
 
 ^   Joe Bindloss (2008).  Kuala Lumpur, Melaka & Penang. Ediz. Inglese . Lonely Planet.  ISBN   978-1-74104-485-0 . 
 
 ^   Kosaku Yoshino.  "Malaysian Cuisine: A Case of Neglected Culinary Globalization"   (PDF) . Sophia University Institute of Comparative Culture, Tokyo. p. 3. Archived from  the original   (PDF)  on 2 May 2014 . Retrieved  2 May  2014 . 
 
 ^   "A Brief history of Chinese food in Malaysia" . SmartBite . Retrieved  29 April  2022 . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   Raji, Mohd Nazri Abdul; Ab Karim, Shahrim; Ishak, Farah Adibah Che; Arshad, Mohd Mursyid (1 December 2017).  "Past and present practices of the Malay food heritage and culture in Malaysia" .  Journal of Ethnic Foods .  4  (4): 221–231.  doi : 10.1016/j.jef.2017.11.001 .  ISSN   2352-6181 . 
 
 ^   "Department of Statistics Malaysia Official Portal" .  www.dosm.gov.my . Retrieved  9 December  2019 . 
 
 ^   "Malaysia - The impact of British rule" .  Encyclopedia Britannica . Retrieved  9 December  2019 . 
 
 ^   Ali, M. (2012). Energy and emission analysis in the Malaysian food industries (3rd ed., Vol. 32, pp. 777-83). Wiley Online Library. 
 
 ^  a   b   c   Archived at  Ghostarchive  and the  Wayback Machine :  "PETRONASKaamatan Episode 2: Traditional Food" . PETRONAS. 27 June 2013 . Retrieved  7 June  2015 . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   "Lihing - Sabah's very own rice wine" . Flying Dusun . Retrieved  26 March  2014 . 
 
 ^   "A guide to Borneo's vibrant alcohol culture" . Anthony Bourdain Parts Unknown . Retrieved  26 April  2022 . 
 
 ^   Melati Mohd Ariff (16 April 2008).  "Malaysia's Rice Industry: A Revamp Needed?" .  Federal Agricultural and Marketing Authority .  Bernama . Archived from  the original  on 4 March 2016 . Retrieved  19 July  2014 . 
 
 ^   Sri Owen (January 1996).  The Rice Book: The Definitive Book on the Magic of Rice, with Hundreds of Exotic Recipes from Around the World . St. Martin's Griffin.  ISBN   978-0-312-14132-5 . 
 
 ^   "Manufacturing the fastest growing sector" .  New Straits Times . 17 January 1994 . Retrieved  19 July  2014 . 
 
 ^   "Can Kedah Maintain Its National Rice Bowl Status In Next 10 Years?" . Bernama. 18 August 2005. Archived from  the original  on 29 November 2014 . Retrieved  19 July  2014 . 
 
 ^   "Frequently Asked Questions" . Malaysia Rice . Retrieved  19 July  2014 . 
 
 ^   Zakaria, Mohd Khidir (14 May 2020).  "Keeping alive the tradition of lemang cooking | New Straits Times" .  NST Online . Retrieved  17 March  2021 . 
 
 ^   Dwayne A. Rules (7 April 2011).  "Nasi lemak, our 'national dish' " .  The Star . Archived from  the original  on 2 July 2014 . Retrieved  6 November  2013 . 
 
 ^   Robert Saunders (1789) "Boutan & Thibet",  Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society  Vol. 79, p. 101 
 
 ^   "McDonald's Menu" . McDonald's Malaysia. Archived from  the original  on 7 July 2014 . Retrieved  19 July  2014 . 
 
 ^   Diana Rose (3 October 2010).  "Good old sago" .  The Star . Retrieved  19 July  2014 . 
 
 ^   NIMI (17 August 2010).  "Ulat Mulong Goreng" .  Hunter Foods . Retrieved  28 April  2022 . 
 
 ^   "Malaysia Poultry and Products Annual 2006" . The Poultry Site. 10 September 2006 . Retrieved  21 November  2014 . 
 
 ^   "Understanding the patterns of fish and seafood consumptions and its nutritional roles among Malaysian population" . Research Gate Site. June 2021 . Retrieved  2 May  2022 . 
 
 ^   "Common Halal and Non-Halal Sea Foods" .  Al-Islam.org . 18 September 2012 . Retrieved  17 March  2021 . 
 
 ^   "Australian Halal Meat Information" . Australian Meat . Retrieved  21 November  2014 . 
 
 ^   "Halal food credence: do the Malaysian consumers hesitate?" . ResearchGate. 2 May 2020 . Retrieved  7 May  2022 . 
 
 ^   Syed Nadzri Syed Harun (21 August 2012).  "Digesting Raya in the 21st century" .  New Straits Times . Retrieved  21 November  2014 . 
 
 ^   "List of Registered Geographical Indication" . Statistics - Intellectual Property Corporation of Malaysia. Archived from  the original  on 19 March 2014 . Retrieved  21 November  2014 . 
 
 ^   "Rambutan vs Lychee, What's the Difference?" .  Honest Food Talks . 5 August 2020 . Retrieved  17 March  2021 . 
 
 ^   "Technical Document Carambola for Market Access on Star Fruit (Carambola)"   (PDF) .  Crop Protection and Plant Quarantine Services Division, Ministry of Agriculture and Agro-based Industry, Malaysia .  International Plant Protection Convention . 2004 . Retrieved  21 November  2014 . 
 
 ^   "An Intro to Malaysian Food: The Ingredients" .  www.seriouseats.com . Retrieved  17 March  2021 . 
 
 ^   Kurniawati Kamarudin.  "Nikmat "Air Jando Pulang" Di Kuala Pilah" .  Bernama  (in Malay).  Ministry of Domestic Trade, Co-operatives and Consumerism (Malaysia) . Retrieved  10 December  2017 . 
 
 ^   "15 Negeri Sembilan Dishes You Should Try Before You Die- Apam Johol" .  Says . Archived from  the original  on 6 December 2017 . Retrieved  6 December  2017 . 
 
 ^   Azalea (12 June 2020).  "Mee Bandung Muar: A Homemade Recipe: How To Make Mee Bandung Muar: History of Mee Bandung Muar" .  LokaTaste . Retrieved  13 April  2021 . 
 
 ^   "Best Malaysian Restaurants in London" .  Honest Food Talks . 22 November 2020 . Retrieved  24 November  2020 . 
 
 ^   Su-Lyn Tan (2003).  Malaysia & Singapore . Lonely Planet. pp.  17 –.  ISBN   978-1-74059-370-0 . 
 
 ^   "Penang's iconic 'dragon balls' and other biscuit treats | Eat/Drink | Malay Mail Online" .  www.themalaymailonline.com . Archived from  the original  on 18 March 2017 . Retrieved  18 March  2017 . 
 
 ^   Kitchen, Hebbars (5 January 2019).  "idli recipe | how to make idli | soft idli recipe | idli with idli rava" .  Hebbar's Kitchen . Retrieved  23 August  2020 . 
 
 ^   Aida Ahmad; Robert Kennard (8 February 2012).  "Thousands fulfil their vows during Thaipusam" .  The Star . Retrieved  19 July  2014 . 
 
 ^   "Sajikan Kelainan bersama MAGGI® | MAGGI® Malaysia" . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   Priya Menon; Vijenthi Nair (11 April 2014).  "Many Indians celebrate their new year in March and April" .  The Star . Retrieved  19 July  2014 . 
 
 ^   Kumar, Pradeep; Sunder, Gautam (13 January 2020).  "Which is better? 'Venn' Pongal or Sweet Pongal" .  The Hindu .  ISSN   0971-751X . Retrieved  23 August  2020 . 
 
 ^   "Why is Pongal Festival celebrated?" .  Jagranjosh.com . 14 January 2020 . Retrieved  23 August  2020 . 
 
 ^   Borneo. Ediz. Inglese . Lonely Planet. 2008. pp. 97–.  ISBN   978-1-74059-105-8 . 
 
 ^   "Keeping Kadazandusun cuisine alive for another generation" . PACOS TRUST . Retrieved  8 May  2022 . 
 
 ^   "Sabah Festivals - Sabah Annual Events" . Sabah.com . Retrieved  26 March  2014 . 
 
 ^   Konstantim Kakaes (14 August 2014).  "Sayur Manis: Delicious, But Also Deadly, Greens From Borneo" . National Public Radio . Retrieved  7 June  2015 . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   Nazri Mustapha (10 April 2012).  "Uniknya 'Gipsi Laut' Semporna" .  Utusan Malaysia  (in Malay) . Retrieved  29 March  2014 . 
 
 ^   "Amplang" . Department of Fisheries, Malaysia. Archived from  the original  on 16 August 2014 . Retrieved  16 August  2013 . 
 
 ^   "Bahar" . Kampung Panjut official website. Archived from  the original  on 28 March 2014 . Retrieved  26 March  2014 . 
 
 ^  a   b   Lydia Koh (2 December 2014).  "Sabah noodles (and more) right here in Petaling Jaya" .  Malay Mail . Retrieved  6 June  2015 . 
 
 ^   "Preserved pork delicacy" .  Daily Express . 30 October 2013. Archived from  the original  on 27 March 2014 . Retrieved  26 March  2014 . 
 
 ^   Ruben Sario (2 May 2011).  "Month-long Kaamatan festivities kick off in Sabah" .  The Star . Archived from  the original  on 26 March 2014 . Retrieved  26 March  2014 . 
 
 ^  a   b   "Rice in Many Forms" .  New Sabah Times . Archived from  the original  on 9 May 2015 . Retrieved  26 March  2014 . 
 
 ^  a   b   George, M. L. C.; Cervantes, E. P., eds. (2009).  Coconut recipes from around the world . Bioversity International. pp. 319–.  ISBN   978-92-9043-806-9 . 
 
 ^   "Nonsoom Bambangan (preserved Bambangan fruit)" . New Sabah Times. 10 July 2008. Archived from  the original  on 2 July 2015 . Retrieved  26 March  2014 . 
 
 ^   Patricia Hului (10 June 2014).  "Ngiu Chap Sarawak Style" .  The Borneo Post . Retrieved  6 June  2015 . 
 
 ^   "Piaren Ah Manuk" .  The Australian . 16 May 2015 . Retrieved  6 June  2015 . 
 
 ^  a   b   Nova Renata Piusai.  "Traditional Sabahan Gastronomic Adventure!" . New Sabah Times. Archived from  the original  on 9 May 2015 . Retrieved  26 March  2014 . 
 
 ^   King Kong (8 October 2012).  "Tawau (Maps)" . Axian.my . Retrieved  26 March  2014 . 
 
 ^   Herman Scholtz.  "The Rungus The Art of Blending Traditional Life-Style into the 20th Century" . The Flying Dusun . Retrieved  7 June  2015 . 
 
 ^   "Missing the taste of home" .  New Straits Times . 20 March 2013 . Retrieved  29 March  2014 . 
 
 ^   "Alain Ducasse's Nature" . Lifestyle Mirror. 29 February 2012 . Retrieved  26 March  2014 . 
 
 ^   Johnson K Saai (26 October 2011).  "Rice self-sufficiency crucial" .  The Borneo Post . Retrieved  11 December  2015 . 
 
 ^   Samuel Aubrey (6 October 2013).  "Bario rice enjoying new lease of life" .  The Borneo Post . Retrieved  26 March  2014 . 
 
 ^   Jonathan Chia (7 June 2010).  "Sarawak "belacan beehoon": An all-time favourite" .  The Borneo Post . Retrieved  5 June  2015 . 
 
 ^   Vanes Devindran (18 August 2010).  "Bubur pedas a must-have for buka puasa" .  The Star . Retrieved  25 August  2013 . 
 
 ^  a   b   "BHF2008" . Borneo Hornbill Festival . Retrieved  7 June  2015 . 
 
 ^   Bridgette Donald (30 June 2013).  "A Unique Dining Experience" . New Sarawak Tribune. Archived from  the original  on 22 December 2015 . Retrieved  7 June  2015 . 
 
 ^   "Studies show Sarawak terubuk changes gender as it matures" .  The Borneo Post . 25 October 2014 . Retrieved  7 June  2015 . 
 
 ^   Vanes Devindran (3 April 2014).  "Terubuk masin dapat sambutan orang ramai" .  The Borneo Post . Retrieved  7 June  2015 . 
 
 ^   Othman Ishak (8 June 2013).  "Iban traders at Sibu Central Market enjoy brisk business" .  The Borneo Post . Retrieved  19 July  2014 . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   "Teh C Peng Special" . Pullman Kuching Hotel. Archived from  the original  on 22 December 2015 . Retrieved  7 June  2015 . 
 
 ^   Raymond Tan (23 November 2014).  "The showbiz star from Balingian" .  Borneo Post . Retrieved  7 June  2015 . 
 
 ^   Zaain Zin (30 August 2013).  "Keenakan nasi goreng dabai" . Utusan Sarawak. Archived from  the original  on 19 January 2019 . Retrieved  7 June  2015 . 
 
 ^   Ronnie Teo (18 November 2010).  " 'Uniquely Sarawak' soaps" .  Borneo Post . Retrieved  7 June  2015 . 
 
 ^   "Forest feast" .  The Star . 24 December 2006. Archived from  the original  on 7 January 2017 . Retrieved  19 July  2014 . 
 
 ^   Dave Avran (15 November 2012).  "Tribal Scoops: Traditional Kelabit offering" .  Free Malaysia Today . Retrieved  19 July  2014 . 
 
 ^   "The making of Tebaloi" . Sarawak Tourism Board . Retrieved  7 June  2015 . 
 
 ^   Michael Cheang (25 August 2013).  "Spirit of the harvest" .  The Star . Archived from  the original  on 29 November 2014 . Retrieved  19 July  2014 . 
 
 ^   Ng Ai Fern (31 March 2014).  "Unravelling the delicacies of Melanau food" . FZ.com. Archived from  the original  on 6 April 2014 . Retrieved  19 July  2014 . 
 
 ^  a   b   Yu Ji (5 April 2010).  "Hui Sing Hawker Centre boasts creative hawkers and raw ambience" .  The Star . Archived from  the original  on 29 November 2014 . Retrieved  26 March  2014 . 
 
 ^   Hong Chieh, Yong (22 November 2021).  "The Secret History of Chicken Chop, Malaysia's Original 'Western Food' " .  airasia . Retrieved  25 February  2023 . 
 
 ^   "Imbau kenangan aiskrim potong"  (in Malay).  Harian Metro . 15 January 2014 . Retrieved  19 July  2014 . 
 
 ^   Naveen Mathew Menon (2 March 2012).  "Cristang cuisine soars on KLM" .  New Straits Times . Retrieved  19 July  2014 . 
 
 ^   Faridah Begum (27 July 2008).  "Sweet and comforting" .  The Star . Archived from  the original  on 11 March 2016 . Retrieved  19 July  2014 . 
 
 ^   Nifea; R. Ahmad; A.A. Putra (2012).  "Effect of milk powder, sugar and citric acid on chemical and organoleptic properties of jackfruit-flavoured Malaysian dadih"   (PDF) .  Asian Journal of Food and Agro-Industry Ajofai . Asian Journal of Food and Agro-Industry.  5  (2): 135–140.  ISSN   1906-3040 . Retrieved  22 November  2014 . 
 
 ^   Zazali Musa (15 August 2013).  "Octogenarian continues to make delicacy despite it being a tedious affair" .  The Star . Retrieved  19 July  2014 . 
 
 ^   Syed Nadzri Syed Harun (21 August 2012).  "Digesting Raya in the 21st century" .  New Straits Times . Retrieved  19 July  2014 . 
 
 ^   "Diwali is sweeter with ladoo" .  The Star . Asia News Network. 22 October 2013. Archived from the original on 24 October 2013 . Retrieved  19 July  2014 . {{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: unfit URL ( link ) 
 
 ^   Sangeetha Nair (20 January 2008).  "Cooling sensation" .  The Star . Archived from  the original  on 3 November 2014 . Retrieved  19 July  2014 . 
 
 ^   Eu Hooi Khaw (13 September 2013).  "Mooncakes to love" .  The Malaysian Insider . Archived from  the original  on 14 April 2014 . Retrieved  19 July  2014 . 
 
 ^   "Puding Diraja Sajian Istimewa Rakyat Pahang Semasa Ramadan" .  Bernama  (in Malay).  Yahoo! News . 17 July 2013. Archived from  the original  on 26 March 2014 . Retrieved  26 March  2014 . 
 
 ^   "Pulut Tai Tai" . Retrieved  28 February  2022 . 
 
 ^   Sulaiman Jaafar (30 July 2013).  "Tapai pulut is a favourite dessert at many homes during Hari Raya" .  New Straits Times . Retrieved  26 March  2014 . 
 
 ^   Grace Chen (13 April 2008).  "Dare to be different" .  The Star . Archived from  the original  on 29 November 2014 . Retrieved  19 July  2014 . 
 
 ^   Swee Har (24 January 2014).  "山打根美味攻略" .  Air Asia  (in Chinese). Travel3Sixty . Retrieved  19 July  2014 . 
 
 ^   UFO on Astro  on  YouTube 
 
 
 External links [ edit ] 
 
 
 
 Wikivoyage has a travel guide for  Malaysian cuisine . 
 
  Media related to  Cuisine of Malaysia  at Wikimedia Commons 
 v t e   Malaysian cuisine  by  ethnicity Common dishes Malay 
 Asam pedas 
 Ayam bakar 
 Ayam goreng 
 Ayam masak kicap 
 Ayam masak merah 
 Ayam penyet 
 Bubur 
 Bubur asyura 
 Bubur ayam 
 Bubur kacang hijau 
 Bubur lambuk 
 Bubur pedas 
 Bubur pulut hitam 
 Dendeng 
 Gulai 
 Ikan bakar 
 Ikan goreng 
 Kangkung belacan 
 Ketupat 
 Kway teow goreng 
 Laksa 
 Lemang 
 Lontong 
 Mee bakso 
 Mee bandung Muar 
 Mee goreng 
 Mee jawa 
 Mee kari 
 Mee rebus 
 Mee siam 
 Nasi ambeng 
 Nasi campur 
 Nasi dagang 
 Nasi goreng 
 American fried rice 
 Nasi goreng pattaya 
 Nasi kerabu 
 Nasi kuning 
 Nasi lemak 
 Nasi minyak 
 Nasi paprik 
 Nasi tumpang 
 Nasi ulam 
 Otak-otak 
 Pais 
 Pecal 
 Pekasam 
 Pindang 
 Pulot tartal 
 Ramly burger 
 Roti canai 
 Roti Jala 
 Rendang 
 Rojak 
 Rojak bandung 
 Sayur lodeh 
 Sata 
 Satay 
 Satay celup 
 Serundeng 
 Soto 
 Soto ayam 
 Mee soto 
 Sup 
 Soup kambing 
 Sup tulang 
 Tauhu goreng 
 Telur pindang 
 Ulam 
 Chinese 
 Bakkwa 
 Bak kut teh 
 Banmian 
 Bean sprouts chicken 
 Beef kway teow 
 Chai tow kway 
 Char kway teow 
 Char siu 
 Chee cheong fun 
 Chwee kueh 
 Claypot chicken rice 
 Curry Mee 
 Duck rice 
 Duck soup noodles 
 Economy rice/Mixed rice 
 Fish ball 
 Fish head bee hoon 
 Hae mee 
 Heong Peng 
 Hokkien mee 
 Kolo mee 
 Kway chap 
 Kway Teow Th'ng 
 Loh bak 
 Lor mee 
 Mee pok 
 Oyster omelette 
 Pan mee 
 Pao 
 Popiah 
 Sar Hor Fun 
 Lou Shee Fun 
 Teochew Porridge 
 Tong sui 
 Wonton mee 
 Tambun biscuit 
 Yee Foo Mee 
 Yong tau foo 
 You char kway 
 Yusheng 
 Zongzi 
 Indian 
 Banana leaf rice 
 Butter chicken 
 Dalcha 
 Puliyodarai 
 Curd rice 
 Chapati 
 Fish molee 
 Dosai 
 Idli 
 Laddu 
 Mee goreng 
 Maggi goreng 
 Mee goreng mamak 
 Mee rebus 
 Mamak Rojak  ( Rojak Klang ) 
 Modak 
 Murtabak 
 Mutton curry 
 Nasi biryani 
 Nasi kandar 
 Korma 
 Pasembur 
 Puri 
 Putu mayam 
 Roti canai 
 Roti tissue 
 Naan 
 Sup kambing 
 Appam 
 Payasam 
 Upma 
 Paniyaram 
 Pongal 
 Vadai 
 Adhirasam 
 Murukku 
 Bajji 
 Rasam 
 Sambar 
 Papadum 
 Tandoori chicken 
 East Malaysian  ( Sabah  and  Sarawak ) 
 Ambuyat 
 Bosou 
 Hinava 
 Linatan 
 Linongot 
 Manok pansoh 
 Midin 
 Nasi kombos 
 Nasi laru 
 Nasik aruk 
 Sinalau bakas 
 Tonokon 
 Tuhau 
 Umai 
 Peranakan 
 Acar 
 Asam laksa/Laksa lemak 
 Buah keluak 
 Bubur cha cha 
 Cap cai 
 Kerabu Bihun 
 Perut Ikan 
 Pie tee 
 Pongteh 
 Nyonya Bak Chang 
 Eurasian 
 Shepherd's pie 
 Oxtail   stew 
 Chicken chop 
 Devil's curry 
 Semur 
 Snacks Cake  and  pastries 
 Bahulu 
 Batik cake 
 Heong peng 
 Roti bakar 
 Sarawak layer cake 
 Keropok ,  Crackers 
 Amplang 
 Lekor 
 Rempeyek 
 Mee Siput Muar 
 Kuih 
 Apam balik 
 Bingka 
 Borasa 
 Cakoi 
 Cincin 
 Cucur 
 Jemput-jemput 
 Penyaram 
 Pisang goreng 
 Dodol 
 Jala 
 Jelurut 
 Karipap 
 Kelupis 
 Kochi 
 Gelang 
 Goyang 
 Gulung 
 Laddu 
 Lapis 
 Lidah 
 Makmur 
 Modak 
 Mooncake 
 Ondeh-ondeh 
 Otokon 
 Pais 
 Red peach cake 
 Red tortoise cake 
 Pie tee 
 Pulut inti 
 Pulut panggang 
 Puto 
 Putu bambu/Putu bumbong 
 Putu mangkuk/piring 
 Qasidah 
 Sapit/Gulong/Kapit 
 Seri Muka 
 Soon kueh 
 Tat/Tae 
 Desserts 
 Lamban 
 Punjung 
 Roti tisu 
 Sagu Gula Melaka 
 Tapai 
 Wajid 
 Drinks Non-alcoholic 
 ABC 
 Bandung 
 Cendol 
 Cheng tng 
 Cincau 
 Chrysanthemum tea 
 Ginger tea 
 Ipoh white coffee 
 Kopi 
 Janda pulang 
 Milo 
 Sarsi 
 Soy milk 
 Teh tarik 
 Alcoholic 
 Jaz 
 Lihing 
 Montoku 
 Sikat 
 Tapai 
 Tuak 
 Condiments 
 Acar 
 Kaya 
 Sambal 
 Belacan 
 Budu 
 Cincalok 
 Tempoyak 
 Taucu 
 Tuhau 
 
   Malaysia portal 
   Food portal 
   Category: Malaysian cuisine 
 List of Malaysian dishes 
 
 v t e Malaysia   articles History 
 Timeline 
 Prehistoric 
 Portuguese Malacca 
 Dutch Malacca 
 British Malaya 
 British Borneo 
 Japanese occupation of Malaya  /  Borneo 
 Malayan Union 
 Federation of Malaya 
 Malayan Emergency 
 Malaysia Agreement 
 Indonesia–Malaysia confrontation 
 Sarawak communist insurgency 
 Singapore in Malaysia 
 Second Malayan Emergency 
 13 May incident 
 1988 constitutional crisis 
 1997 Asian financial crisis 
 1MDB scandal 
 2018 general election 
 2020–2022 Malaysian political crisis 
 2022 general election 
 Geography 
 Borders 
 Cities, towns and villages 
 Districts 
 Divisions 
 East Malaysia 
 Environment 
 climate change 
 environmental issues 
 deforestation 
 wildlife 
 plants 
 World Heritage Sites 
 Hill stations 
 Islands 
 Lakes 
 Mountains 
 National parks 
 Peninsular Malaysia 
 Rivers 
 States 
 Earthquakes 
 Volcanoes 
 Politics 
 Cabinet 
 Shadow Cabinet 
 Constitution 
 Elections 
 Foreign relations 
 Government 
 Human rights 
 Censorship 
 Judiciary 
 Law 
 Law enforcement 
 Military 
 Monarchies 
 Parliament 
 Political parties 
 Prime Minister 
 State legislative assemblies 
 Head of state 
 Economy 
 Agriculture 
 Banks 
 Central bank 
 Energy 
 Federal budget 
 Ringgit  (currency) 
 States by GDP 
 Science and technology 
 Stock exchange 
 Telecommunications 
 Tourism 
 Transport 
 Unions 
 World Bank Relations 
 Society 
 Crime 
 Demographics 
 Education 
 Ethnic groups 
 Health 
 Income inequality 
 Languages 
 LGBT 
 Malaysian diaspora 
 Poverty 
 Religion 
 Sex trafficking 
 Squatting 
 Water supply and sanitation 
 Women 
 Culture 
 Art 
 Architecture 
 Cinema 
 Cuisine 
 Folklore 
 Literature 
 Malay ethnic nationalism 
 Media 
 Music 
 Names 
 Public holidays 
 Sport 
 Symbols 
 Animal 
 Anthem 
 Emblem 
 Flag 
 Flower 
 Rukun Negara 
 Outline Index Bibliography 
 Category 
 Portal 
 v t e Cuisine of Southeast Asia 
 Brunei 
 Cambodia 
 Christmas Island 
 Cocos (Keeling) Islands 
 East Timor 
 Indonesia 
 Laos 
 Malaysia 
 Myanmar 
 Philippines 
 Singapore 
 Thailand 
 Vietnam 
 
 v t e Asian cuisine Sovereign states 
 Afghanistan 
 Armenia 
 Azerbaijan 
 Bahrain 
 Bangladesh 
 Bhutan 
 Brunei 
 Burma (Myanmar) 
 Cambodia 
 China 
 Cyprus 
 East Timor (Timor-Leste) 
 Egypt 
 Georgia 
 India 
 Indonesia 
 Iran 
 Iraq 
 Israel 
 Japan 
 Jordan 
 Kazakhstan 
 North Korea 
 South Korea 
 Kuwait 
 Kyrgyzstan 
 Laos 
 Lebanon 
 Malaysia 
 Maldives 
 Mongolia 
 Nepal 
 Oman 
 Pakistan 
 Philippines 
 Qatar 
 Russia 
 Saudi Arabia 
 Singapore 
 Sri Lanka 
 Syria 
 Tajikistan 
 Thailand 
 Turkey 
 Turkmenistan 
 United Arab Emirates 
 Uzbekistan 
 Vietnam 
 Yemen 
 States with limited recognition 
 Abkhazia 
 Artsakh 
 Northern Cyprus 
 Palestine 
 South Ossetia 
 Taiwan 
 Dependencies and other territories 
 British Indian Ocean Territory 
 Christmas Island 
 Cocos (Keeling) Islands 
 Hong Kong 
 Macau 
 
 v t e Cuisines Continental 
 African 
 North 
 West 
 list 
 Americas 
 Caribbean 
 North 
 South 
 list 
 Asian 
 Caucasian 
 Central 
 Indian subcontinent 
 Levantine 
 list 
 European 
 Balkan 
 Central 
 Eastern 
 list 
 Oceanic 
 Intercontinental
 Global 
 Latin American 
 Mediterranean 
 Middle Eastern 
 National  and regional 
 Afghan 
 Albanian 
 Algerian 
 American 
 Californian 
 Floribbean 
 Hawaiian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Lowcountry (South Carolina) 
 New England 
 New Mexico 
 Pacific Northwest 
 Pennsylvania Dutch 
 Puerto Rican 
 Southern US 
 Southwest US 
 Texas 
 Angolan 
 Argentine 
 Armenian 
 Australian 
 Austrian 
 Azerbaijani 
 Bahraini 
 Bangladeshi 
 Barbadian 
 Belarusian 
 Belgian 
 Belizean 
 Beninese 
 Bhutanese 
 Bolivian 
 Bosnian-Herzegovinian 
 Botswana 
 Brazilian 
 British 
 Channel Islands 
 English 
 Gibraltarian 
 Northern Irish 
 Saint Helena 
 Scottish 
 Welsh 
 Bruneian 
 Bulgarian 
 Burkinabé 
 Burmese 
 Burundian 
 Cambodian 
 Cameroonian 
 Canadian 
 Acadian 
 Québécois 
 Central African Republic 
 Chadian 
 Chilean 
 Chinese 
 Cantonese 
 Hong Kong 
 Macanese 
 Tibetan 
 Xinjiang 
 Colombian 
 Congolese 
 Corsican 
 Croatian 
 Cuban 
 Cypriot 
 Czech 
 Danish 
 Faroese 
 Greenlandic 
 Djiboutian 
 Dominican 
 Dominican Republic 
 Dutch 
 East Timorese 
 Ecuadorian 
 Egyptian 
 Emirati 
 Equatorial Guinean 
 Eritrean 
 Estonian 
 Ethiopian 
 Fijian 
 Filipino 
 Finnish 
 French 
 Occitan 
 French Guianan 
 Gabonese 
 Gambian 
 Georgian 
 German 
 Ghanaian 
 Greek 
 Cretan 
 Epirotic 
 Greek Macedonian 
 Heptanesean 
 Guatemalan 
 Guinea-Bissauan 
 Guinean 
 Haitian 
 Honduran 
 Hungarian 
 Icelandic 
 Indian 
 Arunachalese 
 Assamese 
 Bengali 
 Bihari 
 Goan 
 Gujarati 
 Himachal Pradesh 
 Kashmiri 
 Jharkhandi 
 Karnataka 
 Kerala 
 Maharashtrian 
 Manipuri 
 Meghalayan 
 Mizo 
 Naga 
 Odia 
 Punjabi 
 Rajasthani 
 Sikkimese 
 Sindhi 
 Tamil 
 Telangana 
 Telugu 
 Indonesian 
 Acehnese 
 Balinese 
 Banjar 
 Batak 
 Betawi 
 Indo 
 Javanese 
 Madurese 
 Makassar 
 Minahasan 
 Minangkabau 
 Palembangese 
 Sundanese 
 Iranian 
 Iraqi 
 Irish 
 Israeli 
 Italian 
 Abruzzese 
 Ligurian 
 Lombard 
 Lucanian 
 Neapolitan 
 Roman 
 Sardinian 
 Sicilian 
 Venetian 
 Ivorian 
 Jamaican 
 Japanese 
 Okinawan 
 Jordanian 
 Kazakh 
 Kenyan 
 Korean 
 North Korean 
 South Korean 
 Kosovan 
 Kuwaiti 
 Kyrgyz 
 Lao 
 Latvian 
 Lebanese 
 Lesotho 
 Liberian 
 Libyan 
 Liechtensteiner 
 Lithuanian 
 Luxembourg 
 Macedonian 
 Malagasy 
 Malawian 
 Malaysian 
 Sabahan 
 Sarawakian 
 Maldivian 
 Malian 
 Maltese 
 Mauritanian 
 Mauritian 
 Mexican 
 Moldovan 
 Monégasque 
 Mongolian 
 Montenegrin 
 Moroccan 
 Mozambican 
 Namibian 
 Nauruan 
 Nepalese 
 New Zealand 
 Nicaraguan 
 Niger 
 Nigerian 
 Niuean 
 Norwegian 
 Omani 
 Pakistani 
 Palestinian 
 Panamanian 
 Peruvian 
 Polish 
 Portuguese 
 Qatari 
 Romanian  (incl.  Transylvanian Saxon ) 
 Russian 
 Bashkir 
 Chechen 
 Circassian 
 Komi 
 Mordovian 
 Sakha 
 Tatar 
 Udmurt 
 Yamal 
 Rwandan 
 Saint Lucian 
 Salvadoran 
 Sammarinese 
 São Tomé and Príncipe 
 Saudi Arabian 
 Senegalese 
 Serbian 
 Seychellois 
 Sierra Leonean 
 Singaporean 
 Slovak 
 Slovenian 
 Somali 
 South African 
 Spanish 
 Andalusian 
 Asturian 
 Balearic 
 Basque 
 Canarian 
 Cantabrian 
 Catalan 
 Extremaduran 
 Galician 
 Manchegan 
 Valencian 
 Sri Lankan 
 Sudanese 
 Swazi 
 Swedish 
 Swiss 
 Syrian 
 Taiwanese 
 Tajik 
 Tanzanian 
 Zanzibari 
 Thai 
 Togolese 
 Tunisian 
 Turkish 
 Turkmen 
 Trinidadian and Tobagonian 
 Ugandan 
 Ukrainian 
 Uruguayan 
 Uzbek 
 Venezuelan 
 Vietnamese 
 Western Saharan 
 Yemeni 
 Zambian 
 Zimbabwean 
 Ethnic 
 Ainu 
 Arab 
 Indonesian 
 Aromanian 
 Assyrian 
 Balochi 
 Berber 
 Cajun 
 Chinese 
 American 
 Canadian 
 Chifa 
 Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Crimean Tatar 
 Greek American 
 Hazaragi 
 Indian 
 Anglo-Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Indigenous American 
 Inuit 
 Italian American 
 Kurdish 
 Livonian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Malay 
 Ossetian 
 Parsi 
 Pashtun 
 Peranakan 
 Romani 
 Sámi 
 Soul food 
 Sylheti 
 Transylvanian Saxon 
 Yup'ik 
 Religious 
 Buddhist 
 Christian 
 Goan Catholic 
 Mangalorean Catholic 
 Mennonite 
 Hindu 
 Islamic 
 Chinese 
 Ital 
 Jain 
 Jewish 
 American 
 Ashkenazi 
 Bukharan 
 Ethiopian 
 Mizrahi 
 Sephardic 
 Syrian 
 Ritual slaughter 
 Sikh 
 Historical 
 Ancient Egyptian 
 Ancient Greek 
 Ancient Israelite 
 Ancient Roman 
 Antebellum America 
 Aztec 
 Byzantine 
 Early modern European 
 Historical Chinese 
 Historical Indian subcontinent 
 Historical North Indian and Pakistani 
 History of agriculture 
 History of alcoholic drinks 
 History of bread 
 History of seafood 
 History of vegetarianism 
 Historical Argentine 
 Historical Japanese 
 Inca 
 Mayan 
 Muisca 
 Mughal 
 Medieval 
 Ottoman 
 Peasant 
 Soviet 
 Thirteen Colonies 
 Styles 
 Classique 
 Fast food 
 Fusion 
 New American 
 Eurasian 
 Haute 
 Molecular gastronomy 
 Note by Note 
 Nouvelle 
 Lists 
 List of cuisines 
 List of historical cuisines 
 Lists of prepared foods 
 Related 
 Cookbook 
 Cooking 
 Culinary arts 
 Drink 
 Food 
 history 
 Diet 
 Meal preparation 
 
   Food portal 
   Drink portal 
   Category 
   Commons 
   Cookbook 
   WikiProject 
   Outline 
 
 Portals :   Food   Malaysia 
 Authority control : National libraries  
 Israel 
 United States 
 
  
NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw2327
Cached time: 20230311165423
Cache expiry: 1814400
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc, no‐toc‐conversion]
CPU time usage: 1.992 seconds
Real time usage: 2.330 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 28695/1000000
Post‐expand include size: 559535/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 25873/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 18/100
Expensive parser function count: 51/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 366534/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.036/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 21642299/52428800 bytes
Lua Profile:
    ?                                                                300 ms       24.2%
    recursiveClone <mwInit.lua:41>                                   200 ms       16.1%
    MediaWiki\Extension\Scribunto\Engines\LuaSandbox\LuaSandboxCallback::callParserFunction      200 ms       16.1%
    dataWrapper <mw.lua:672>                                          60 ms        4.8%
    <mw.lua:694>                                                      60 ms        4.8%
    MediaWiki\Extension\Scribunto\Engines\LuaSandbox\LuaSandboxCallback::fetchLanguageNames       40 ms        3.2%
    pcall                                                             40 ms        3.2%
    MediaWiki\Extension\Scribunto\Engines\LuaSandbox\LuaSandboxCallback::redirectTarget       40 ms        3.2%
    select_one <Module:Citation/CS1/Utilities:426>                    40 ms        3.2%
    MediaWiki\Extension\Scribunto\Engines\LuaSandbox\LuaSandboxCallback::preprocess       40 ms        3.2%
    [others]                                                         220 ms       17.7%
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/400
 
 
Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1729.158      1 -total
 30.12%  520.832      1 Template:Reflist
 14.53%  251.229    129 Template:Lang
 14.52%  251.003     65 Template:Cite_web
 14.27%  246.712      7 Template:Navbox
 12.42%  214.820      3 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 10.82%  187.173      1 Template:Cuisine_of_Malaysia
 10.17%  175.941      1 Template:Asian_topic
  6.47%  111.892     52 Template:Iso2country
  6.04%  104.513     12 Template:Citation_needed
 
  Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:idhash:314132-0!canonical and timestamp 20230311165420 and revision id 1141493971. Rendering was triggered because: page-view
  
 esi <esi:include src="/esitest-fa8a495983347898/content" />  
 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Malaysian_cuisine&oldid=1141493971 " 
 Categories :  Malaysian cuisine Southeast Asian cuisine Hidden categories:  CS1 Malay-language sources (ms) CS1 maint: unfit URL CS1 Chinese-language sources (zh) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from May 2017 All articles needing additional references EngvarB from October 2019 Use dmy dates from October 2019 Articles containing Malay (macrolanguage)-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2022 Articles needing additional references from July 2022 Articles with unsourced statements from December 2015 Articles needing additional references from December 2015 Articles containing Central Melanau-language text Articles needing additional references from October 2015 Articles containing Tamil-language text Articles with unsourced statements from September 2020 Articles with unsourced statements from October 2015 Commons category link is on Wikidata Region topic template using suffix Articles with J9U identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  This page was last edited on 25 February 2023, at 09:55  (UTC) . 
 Text is available under the  Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0 ;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the  Terms of Use  and  Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the  Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. 
 
 
 Privacy policy 
 About Wikipedia 
 Disclaimers 
 Contact Wikipedia 
 Mobile view 
 Developers 
 Statistics 
 Cookie statement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
