
 
 
 Jump to content 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle sidebar 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Create account Log in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Personal tools 
 
 
 
 
   Create account   Log in 
 
 
 
 
		Pages for logged out editors  learn more 
 
 
 Contributions Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Navigation 
 
 
 Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate 
 
 
 
 
 Contribute 
 
 
 Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file 
 
 
 
 
 Tools 
 
 
 What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item 
 
 
 
 
 Print/export 
 
 
 Download as PDF Printable version 
 
 
 
 
 Languages 
 
 On this Wikipedia the language links are at the top of the page across from the article title.  Go to top . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CentralNotice  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Contents 
 move to sidebar 
 hide 
 
 
 
 
 (Top) 
 
 
 
 
 
 1 List of dishes found in Malaysian Chinese cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 Chinese  guo 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 Desserts and sweets 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4 Vegetarian cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5 See also 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6 References 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
						Toggle the table of contents
					 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle the table of contents 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Malaysian Chinese cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 1 language 
 
 
 
 Bahasa Melayu 
 Edit links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Article Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 English 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Read View source View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 More 
 
 
 
 Read View source View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
 
 
 
 
 Culinary traditions of Chinese Malaysian immigrants and their descendants 
 
 
   Bak Kut Teh 
 Nasi lemak on banana leaf.jpg This article is part of the series on Malaysian cuisine Masakan Malaysia 
 Regional and cultural cuisines 
 Chinese 
 Eurasian 
 Indian 
 Javanese 
 Malay 
 Peranakan 
 Sabah 
 Sarawak 
 
 Ingredients 
 Belacan 
 Budu 
 Gula Melaka 
 Kerisik 
 Kicap Manis 
 Pandan 
 Sambal 
 Santan 
 Tapai 
 Tempoyak 
 
 Types of food 
 Foods 
 Dishes 
 Soups 
 Kuih 
 Keropok 
 Kerepek 
 Drinks 
 Alcohol 
 
 Holidays and festivals 
 Chinese New Year 
 Hari Raya Puasa 
 Hari Raya Qurban 
 Deepavali 
 Christmas 
 Tadau Kaamatan 
 Gawai 
 
 Related cuisines 
 Bruneian 
 Chinese 
 Filipino 
 Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Singaporean 
 Thai 
 
 See also 
 History 
 Cookbook: Cuisine of Malaysia 
 
   Malaysia portal   Food portal v t e 
 Part of a series on Chinese cuisine 
 Regional cuisines 
 Four Great Traditions 
 Chuan (Sichuan) 
 Lu (Shandong) 
 Yue (Guangdong) 
 Huaiyang (Jiangsu) 
 Eight Great Traditions (+all above) 
 Anhui 
 Fujian 
 Hunan 
 Zhejiang 
 Ten Great Traditions (+all above) 
 Beijing 
 Shanghai 
 Twelve Great Traditions (+all above) 
 Henan 
 Shaanxi 
 Fourteen Great Traditions (+all above) 
 Hubei 
 Liaoning 
 Sixteen Great Traditions (+all above) 
 Tianjin 
 Yunnan 
 New Eight Great Traditions 
 Gansu 
 Hangzhou 
 Jilin 
 Liaoning 
 Ningbo 
 Shaanxi 
 Shanghai 
 Shanxi 
 Beijing and the vicinity 
 Beijing 
 Imperial 
 Aristocrat 
 Tianjin 
 Other regional styles 
 Teochew 
 Guangxi 
 Guizhou 
 Hainan 
 Haipai 
 Hakka 
 Hong Kong 
 Jiangxi 
 Macanese 
 Manchu 
 Northeastern 
 Putian (Henghwa) 
 Qinghai 
 Taiwan 
 Tibetan 
 Xinjiang 
 
 Overseas cuisine 
 Australia 
 Britain 
 Burma 
 Canada 
 Caribbean 
 Philippines 
 India 
 Indonesia 
 Japan 
 Latin America 
 Perú 
 Puerto Rico 
 Korea 
 Malaysia 
 Pakistan 
 Singapore 
 United States 
 
 Religious cuisines 
 Buddhist 
 Islamic 
 Taoist 
 
 Ingredients and types of food 
 Main dishes 
 Desserts 
 Noodles 
 
 Preparation and cooking 
 Stir frying 
 Double steaming 
 Red cooking 
 
 See also 
 Customs and etiquette 
 List of Chinese desserts 
 List of Chinese dishes 
 List of Chinese restaurants 
 List of restaurants in China 
 
   Asia portal 
   China portal 
   Hong Kong portal 
   Taiwan portal v t e 
 Malaysian Chinese cuisine  is derived from the culinary traditions of Chinese Malaysian immigrants and their descendants, who have adapted or modified their culinary traditions under the influence of Malaysian culture as well as immigration patterns of Chinese to Malaysia. Because the vast majority of Chinese Malaysians are descendants of immigrants from southern China, Malaysian Chinese cuisine is predominantly based on an eclectic repertoire of dishes with roots from  Fujian ,  Cantonese ,  Hakka  and  Teochew  cuisines.
 As these early immigrants settled in different regions throughout what was then  British Malaya  and  Borneo , they carried with them traditions of foods and recipes that were particularly identified with their origins in China, which gradually became infused with the characteristics of their new home locale in Malaysia while remaining distinctively Chinese. For example, Hainanese chicken rice is usually flavoured with tropical pandan leaves and served with chilli sauce for dipping, and tastes unlike the typical chicken dishes found in  Hainan Island  itself. Some of these foods and recipes became closely associated with a specific city, town or village, eventually developing iconic status and culminating in a proliferation of nationwide popularity in the present day.
 Chinese food is especially prominent in areas with concentrated Chinese communities, at roadside stalls, hawker centres and kopitiam, as well as smart cafes and upmarket restaurants throughout the nation. Many Chinese dishes have pork as a component ingredient, but chicken is available as a substitution for Muslim customers from the wider community, and some Chinese restaurants are even  halal -certified.
 
 
 List of dishes found in Malaysian Chinese cuisine 
   Fish ball with rice vermicelli 
 Bak Kut Teh  ( Chinese :  肉骨茶 ) (pork ribs soup). The root meaning for the dish, "Bak Kut" (Hokkien dialect) is the term for meaty ribs, at its simplest cooked with garlic, dark soy sauce and a specific combination of herbs and spices which have been boiled for many hours. Popularly regarded as a health tonic, this soup is historically eaten by hard working Chinese coolies working on the wharfs at Port Swettenham (now  Port Klang ) and clearing estates, accompaniment with strong  tea  ("Teh") on the side. There are some differences in seasoning amongst other Chinese communities; the Teochew prefer a clear broth which is heavier on garlic and pepper, while the Cantonese may include additional varieties of medicinal herbs and spices. Variations include the so-called  chik kut teh  (made with chicken and a version that is gaining popularity with Muslim diners), seafood bak kut teh, and a "dry" (reduced gravy) version which originated from the town of  Klang . 
 Bakkwa  ( Chinese :  肉干 ) - literally "dried meat", bakkwa is better understood as barbequed meat jerky. While this delicacy is especially popular during the  Chinese New Year  celebration period, it is available everywhere and eaten year round as a popular snack. 
 Bean Sprouts Chicken  ( Chinese :  芽菜雞 ) -  Ipoh 's most well known dish, Bean Sprouts Chicken consists of poached or steamed chicken accompanied with a plate of blanched locally grown bean sprouts in a simple dressing of soy sauce and sesame oil. The crunchy and stout texture of Ipoh-grown bean sprouts is attributed to the mineral-rich properties of local water supplies. The dish is usually served with hor fun noodles in a chicken broth, or plain rice. 
 Beaufort Mee  ( Chinese :  保佛炒麵 ) is a speciality of  Beaufort  town. Handmade noodles are smoked, then wok-tossed with meat (usually slices of char siu and marinated pork) or seafood and plenty of  choy sum , and finished off with a thick viscous gravy. [1] 
 Cantonese fried noodles  ( Chinese :  廣府炒麵 ) refers to a preparation of noodles which are shallow or deep fried to a crisp, then served as the base for a thick egg and cornstarch white sauce cooked with sliced lean pork, seafood, and green vegetables like choy sum. A related dish called wa tan hor ( Chinese :  滑旦河 ) uses  hor fun  noodles, but the noodles are not deep fried, merely charred. Another variation called yuen yong ( Chinese :  鴛鴦 ) involves mixing both crisp-fried  rice vermicelli  as well as  hor fun  to form a base for the sauce. 
 Chai tow kway   ( Chinese :  菜頭粿 ) - a common dish in Malaysia made of rice flour. It also known as fried  radish  cake, although no radish is included within the rice cakes, save perhaps the occasional addition of preserved radish (Chinese:  菜圃 ) during the cooking process. Seasonings and additives vary from region, and may include bean sprouts and eggs. 
   Penang -style  char kway teow 
   Penang -style  chee cheong fun 
 Char kway teow  ( Chinese :  炒粿條，炒河粉 ). Stir fried  rice noodles  with bean sprouts, prawns, eggs (duck or chicken), chives and thin slices of preserved Chinese sausages. Cockles and  lardons  were once standard offerings, but mostly relegated to optional additions these days due to changing taste preferences and growing health concerns.  Penang -style char kway teow is the most highly regarded variant both in Malaysia as well as abroad. 
 Chee cheong fun  ( Chinese :  豬腸粉 ) is square rice sheets made from a viscous mixture of rice flour and water. This liquid is poured onto a specially made flat pan in which it is steamed to produce the square rice sheets. The steamed rice sheets is rolled or folded for ease in serving. It is usually served with tofu stuffed with fish paste. The dish is eaten with accompaniment of semi sweet fermented bean paste sauce, chilli paste or light vegetable curry gravy.  Ipoh  and  Penang  have different versions of the dish as well; certain stalls in  Ipoh  serve the dish with a red sweet sauce, thinly sliced pickled green chillies and fried shallots, while in  Penang , a type of sweet, black  shrimp sauce  called  hae ko  is the main condiment. 
 Chun gen  (Chinese : 春卷) is an oblong roll of seasoned ground pork or beef wrapped with a thin omelette and steamed. The name is derived from the Hakka word for the spring season, which is pronounced as "chun". (Another explanation is that "chun" is for "egg" instead.) It is said to have been around since  Chunqiu period  with a rumor of Duke Huan of Qi and since then it's been a custom in Fujian. Today it is available beyond  Tenom , and found throughout Sabah's Chinese communities. It may be eaten on its own, cooked in broth or soup, and stir-fried with noodles or vegetables. 
 Chicken rice  (Chinese : 雞飯) - chicken rice is one of the most popular Chinese-inspired dishes in Malaysia. Hainanese chicken rice (Chinese : 海南雞飯) is the best known version: it is prepared with the  same traditional method  used for cooking  Wenchang chicken , which involve steeping the entire chicken at sub-boiling temperatures within a master stock until cooked, to ensure the chicken meat becomes moist and tender. The chicken is then chopped up, and served with a bowl or plate of rice cooked in  chicken fat  and chicken stock, along with another bowl of clear chicken broth and a set of dips and condiments. Sometimes the chicken is dipped in ice to produce a jelly-like skin finishing upon the completion of the poaching process. In  Malacca , the chicken rice is served shaped into balls. 
   Curry mee. 
 Curry Mee  (Chinese : 咖喱麵). A bowl of thin yellow noodles mixed with bihun in a spicy curry soup enriched with coconut milk, and topped with tofu puffs, prawns, cuttlefish, chicken, long beans, cockles and mint leaves, with sambal served on the side. It is often referred to as  curry laksa . 
 Fish ball  ( Chinese :  魚丸、鱼蛋、魚圓 ) are fish paste shaped into a spherical shape. Usually fish ball is served as a condiment together with  rice vermicelli  or yellow noodles in a  clear soup  base. Bean sprouts and  spring onions  are also commonly added, complemented by a small plate of  chilli padi  soaked in  soy sauce .  Fishcake  is also a common addition. 
 Fish head bihun  (Chinese : 魚頭米粉). A noodle soup in which the main ingredients are rice vermicelli and a deep fried fish head cut into chunks. The soup itself is somewhat creamy, which is usually achieved using a mixture of rich fish stock and milk. Tomatoes and pickled vegetables are sometimes added to cut the richness and provide a tangy foil for the noodle soup. 
 Fuzhou cuisine  can be found in the  Sitiawan , Perak  area, as well as several cities and towns in  Sarawak  where the  Hookchiu diaspora  have formed settlements. Well known specialities include  ang zhao mee sua  (Chinese : 红槽面线), and  kompyang  or  kompia  (Chinese : 光餅). 
 Hakka mee  (Chinese : 客家麵) - Hakka Mee is a simple dish of noodles topped with a ground meat gravy. A popular hawker dish with Hakka cultural roots, it is based on an older recipe called Dabumian (Chinese : 大埔麵); the name indicates its place of origin as  Dabu County  (Chinese:  大埔县 ), the center of Hakka culture in mainland China. 
 Heong Peng  (Chinese : 香餅) - these fragrant pastries, which resemble slightly flattened balls, are a famed speciality of Ipoh. It contains a sweet sticky filling made from malt and shallots, covered by a flaky baked crust and garnished with sesame seeds on the surface. 
   A bowl of  Penang   Hokkien mee 
 Hokkien Mee  (Chinese:  福建炒麵 ) actually has two variants, with each being ubiquitous to a particular region of  Peninsular Malaysia .
 Penang   Hokkien mee , colloquially referred to in  Penang  as  Hokkien mee , is also known as  hae mee  (Chinese : 蝦麵) in other parts of  Malaysia . One of  Penang 's most famous specialties, it is a noodle soup with yellow and rice noodles immersed in a spicy stock made from prawns and pork (chicken for halal versions), and garnished with a boiled egg, poached prawns, chopped  kangkung  and a dollop of  sambal . 
 Hokkien char mee, a dish of thick yellow noodles braised, fried with thick black soy sauce and added with crispy lardons, is more commonly served in the  Klang Valley . It was originally developed in  Kuala Lumpur . Thus, within central  Peninsular Malaysia , the term  Hokkien mee  refers to this particular version. 
 Ipoh white coffee  (Chinese : 怡保白咖啡). A popular coffee drink which originated in Ipoh. Unlike the robust dark roast used for typical Malaysian-style black coffee ("Kopi-O"), "white" coffee is produced with only palm oil margarine and without any sugar and wheat, resulting in a significantly lighter roast. It is typically enriched with condensed milk prior to serving. 
 Kam Heong  (Chinese : 金香) - literally "golden fragrance" in English, Kam Heong is a method of cooking developed in Malaysia, and is a good example of the country's culinary style of mixing cultures. The tempering of aromatics with bird's eye chilies, curry leaves, crushed dried shrimp, curry powder, oyster sauce and various other seasonings yields a versatile stir-fry sauce that goes well with chicken, clams, crabs, prawns, and squid. 
 Kolo mee  or  mee kolok  (Chinese : 乾撈麵) is a dish of springy egg noodles tossed in a sweet and savoury shallot, lard and vinegar dressing, and topped with seasoned minced pork and char siu. It is similar to Peninsular-style Hakka mee or wonton mee in concept, but differs significantly in taste profile. A popular variant uses rendered oil from cooking char siu to flavour kolo mee instead of plain lard, which gives the noodles a reddish hue. Halal versions of kolo mee replace the pork components with beef (earning the moniker of  mee sapi ) or chicken, and lard with peanut or vegetable oil. Additional toppings may include mushrooms, chicken and crab meat.  Kampua mee  (Chinese:  乾盤面 ) is a similar dish from  Sibu  and  Sitiawan  of Fuzhou origin. 
 Kuching Laksa  or  Laksa Sarawak  (Chinese : 古晉叻沙) is noodles (usually rice vermicelli) served in an aromatic spiced coconut milk soup, topped with shredded chicken, shredded omelette, bean sprouts, prawns, and garnished with coriander.This famous Sarawak dish looks like curry laksa however the Sarawak's version is subtler and more flavorful. It is made using a laksa paste consisting of sambal belacan, tamarind, lemongrass, herbs and spices with a little coconut milk thus giving it a fine balance of aromatic herbs and spices with a kind hint of sour and spicy note while presenting a soft but not overly rich creamy broth. 
 Kway chap  (Chinese : 粿汁). Teochew dish of rice noodle sheets in a dark soy sauce gravy, served with pork pieces, pig offal, tofu products and boiled eggs. 
 Lor Bak (Chinese : 滷肉) - a fried meat roll made from spiced minced pork and chopped water chestnuts rolled up in soya bean curd sheets, and deep fried. It is usually served with small bowl of  Lor  (a thick broth thickened with corn starch and beaten eggs) and chili sauce. The term also extends to other items sold alongside the meat rolls, like  tao kwa  (hard tofu), pork sausages,  tofu skin  sheets etc. 
 Lor Mee  (Chinese : 滷麵). A bowl of thick yellow noodles served in a thickened gravy made from eggs, starch and pork stock. 
 Marmite chicken  (Chinese : 媽蜜雞) - a unique dish of marinated fried chicken pieces glazed in a syrupy sauce made from  marmite , soy sauce, maltose and honey. This dish may also be prepared with other ingredients like pork ribs and prawns. 
   Claypot chicken rice 
 Mee Hailam  (Chinese : 海南麵) - stir-fried egg noodles with meat or seafood and copious amounts of vegetables, bathed in a gravy seasoned with dark soy sauce and calamansi lime. It is an ubiquitous menu item in Hainanese-run eateries and restaurants. [2] 
 Ngah Po Fan  or  Sha Po Fan  (Chinese : 瓦煲飯 or 沙煲飯) - seasoned rice  cooked in a claypot  with secondary ingredients, and finished with soy sauce. A typical example is rice cooked with chicken, salted fish, Chinese sausage, and vegetables. Claypots are also used for braising noodles, meat dishes and reducing soups. 
   Pan Mee as served in Malaysia. 
 Ngiu chap  (牛什) is a Chinese-influenced dish of beef broth served with noodles, usually dunked in the soup with poached beef slices, meatballs, stewed brisket, tendon, liver and various offal parts. An iconic Sabahan dish, ngiu chap has many different variations, from the lighter Hainanese style to heartier Hakka-influenced flavours, and even village-style ngiu chap adapted for indigenous Sabahan tastes. 
 Oyster omelette  or  O-chian  ( Chinese :  蚝煎 ) - a medley of small oysters is sauteed on a hot plate before being folded into an egg batter, which then has moistened starch mixed in for thickening, and finally fried to a crisp finish. Unlike other versions of oyster omelettes found throughout the Hokkien and Teochew diaspora, a thick savoury gravy is never poured onto Malaysian-style oyster omelettes; a chilli sauce is provided on the side for dipping instead. 
 Pan mee  ( Chinese :  板面 ) - noodle soup with hand-kneaded and torn pieces of noodles or regular strips of machine-pressed noodles, with a toothsome texture not unlike Italian pasta. A variant popular in the  Klang Valley  is known as "Chilli Pan Mee", and which of cooked noodles served with minced pork, a poached egg, fried anchovies and fried chilli flakes which are added to taste. Chilli Pan Mee is accompanied with a bowl of clear soup with leafy vegetables. 
 Popiah  ( Chinese :  薄餅 ) - Hokkien/Teochew-style crepe stuffed and rolled up with cooked shredded tofu and vegetables like turnip and carrots. The Peranakan version contains julienned bangkuang ( jicama ) and bamboo shoots, and the filling is seasoned with  tauchu  (fermented soybean paste) and meat stock. Another variation consists of popiah doused in a spicy sauce. Popiah can also be deep fried and served in a manner similar to the mainstream Chinese  spring roll . 
 Sang nyuk mian  ( Chinese :  生肉麵 ) is a dish of noodles served with pork broth, originating from  Tawau . Very popular with the non-Muslim communities of Sabah, it is named after the poached-to-order slices of tender marinated pork served in pork broth which is flavoured with fried lard bits. The noodles (usually thick yellow noodles) are either dressed in dark soy and lard, or dunked into the soup along with the aforementioned pork slices, vegetables, meatballs and offal. [3] 
 Seremban Siew Pau  ( Chinese :  芙蓉燒包 ). The town of  Seremban , the state capital of Negeri Sembilan, is famous for its  siew pau , a flaky oven-baked pastry bun with a treacly BBQ pork and green pea filling. Chicken fillings are available as a halal option. 
 Teochew porridge  - Teochew porridge or  muay  ( Chinese :  糜 ) is a type of rice porridge or soup. Unlike congee, Teochew porridge is thin and watery in texture, with visible rice grains sitting loosely at the bottom of the bowl. Eaten as a substitute for plain cooked rice instead of a complete meal by itself, it is served with an assortment of side dishes like vegetables, meat and salted egg. At eateries specialising in Teochew porridge, one can find a buffet spread of at least a dozen different dishes to choose from. Some variant recipes add sweet potatoes or even  shark meat  to the porridge during the cooking process. 
   Tau sar pneah , also known as  Tambun pneah , from  Penang 
 Tau sar pneah  (Chinese:  豆沙餅 ) - A famous  Penang  delicacy, this round-shaped Chinese pastry is made of wheat flour, sugar, green bean paste, fried onions, lard and salt. It is also known as Tambun biscuits as the pastry was believed to be invented in Bukit Tambun,  Penang . Its popularity as a delicacy has made this biscuit one of the must-buy souvenirs from  Penang . [4] 
 Tomato kway teow  ( Chinese :  茄汁粿條 ) - kway teow noodles stir-fried with sweet tomato gravy, meat (usually chicken pieces), eggs and vegetables. A popular dish in Chinese restaurants throughout Sarawak, another variant ( Chinese :  茄汁麵 ) utilises egg noodles which have been fried to a crisp, and then immersed with the gravy and ingredients. 
 Tuaran mee  ( Chinese :  斗亞蘭面 ) is a speciality of  Tuaran  town. This dish of wok fried fresh handmade noodles is well known in the nearby city of Kota Kinabalu as well as in neighbouring  Tamparuli  town, where the localised adaptation is called Tamparuli mee ( Chinese :  担波羅利炒生面 ). The noodles must first be toasted with oil in the wok to prevent it from clumping together, then blanched to reduce the stiff crunchy texture from toasting. The final step involves stir frying the noodles to a dry finish with eggs, vegetables, and meat or seafood. [1] 
   Wonton Mee 
 Wonton Mee  ( Chinese :  雲吞麵 ) - thin egg noodles with  wonton  dumplings ( Chinese :  雲吞 ),  choy sum  and char siu. The dumplings are usually made of pork or prawns and typically boiled or deep fried. The noodles may be served in a bowl of broth with dumplings as in the traditional Cantonese manner, but in Malaysia it is more commonly dressed with a dark soy sauce dressing, with boiled or deep-fried wonton dumplings as a topping or served on the side in a bowl of broth. Variations of this dish are usually in the meat accompaniments with the noodles. These may include roast pork (烧肉), braised chicken feet, and roast duck (燒鴨). 
   The tossing of yee sang 
 Yam rice  ( Chinese :  芋頭飯 ) - savoury rice dish cooked with taro, Chinese sausage, chicken, dried prawns and mushrooms. It is often served as an accompaniment for dishes like bak kut teh or yong tau foo. 
 Yau Zha Gwai  or Eu Char Kway or You Tiao ( Chinese :  油炸鬼  or  油條 ) - a version of the traditional Chinese crueller, which is a breakfast favourite. It can be eaten plain with a beverage like coffee and soy milk, spread with butter or kaya, or dipped into congee. It is shaped like a pair of chopsticks, stuck together. The name itself amusingly translates into "greasy fried ghosts". 
 Yong tau foo  ( Chinese :  酿豆腐 ) - tofu products and vegetables like  brinjals ,  lady's fingers , bitter gourd and chillies stuffed with fish or pork paste. Originally developed in  Ampang, Selangor , it is a localised adaptation of a Hakka dish called  ngiong tew foo  (stuffed tofu with ground pork paste) and is usually served in a clear broth. 
 Yusheng  ( Chinese :  魚生 ) - a festive raw fish salad, also pronounced  yee sang  in the Cantonese manner. While raw fish preparations are thought to have existed in China during antiquity and can be found in the  Chaoshan  region of Guangdong province in modern times, yusheng was created and developed in  Singapore  in 1964 when the republic was still a member state of the Federation of Malaysia. [5]  It consists of strips of raw fish tossed at the dining table with shredded vegetables, crispy tidbits and a combination of sauces and condiments. Yusheng literally means "raw fish" but since "fish (魚)" is commonly conflated with its homophone "abundance (餘)", Yúshēng (魚生) is interpreted as a homophone for Yúshēng (余升) meaning an increase in abundance. Therefore, yusheng is considered a symbol of abundance, prosperity and vigor. As a result, the mixing and tossing of yusheng with chopsticks and the subsequent consumption of the salad has become ritualised as part of the commemoration of  Chinese New Year  festivities in Malaysia and Singapore. 
 Zongzi  (Chinese:  粽子 ) - a traditional Chinese food made of glutinous rice stuffed with savoury or sweet fillings and wrapped in bamboo, reed, or other large flat leaves. They are cooked by steaming or boiling, and are a feature of the  Duanwu  festival, which is still celebrated by the Chinese communities in Malaysia. 
 Chinese  guo 
 Chinese kuih, written as "guo" (粿) or sometimes as "gao" (糕), are usually made from ground rice flours. Many of the kue are made especially for important festivities such as the  Qingming Festival  or  Chinese New Year , however many others are consumed as main meals or snack on a daily basis. Example of these kue include: [6] 
 
 Nian gao  (年糕): Known in the  Hokkien  language as "Ti Kueh" (甜粿) 
 Caozai Guo  (草仔粿): Pronounced in Hokkien as "Tsao wa kueh" (chháu-á-ké). Also known as "Tsukak kueh" (鼠麴粿, chhú-khak-ké) from the herb it is made from. 
 Turnip cake  (菜頭粿, 菜頭糕): Eaten straight, panfried, or stir-fried with egg as  Chai tow kway . 
 Taro cake  (芋粿, 芋糕) 
 Chwee kueh  (水粿):  Teochew  term which literally translates as "water rice cake". 
 Fun guo  (粉粿) 
 Red Tortoise Cake  (紅龜粿) (Pronounced as Ang Ku Kueh) 
 
 
 
 
 A dish of Chwee Kueh
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cantonese pan-fried brown-sugar kueh
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Chai tow kway stir-fried dark (with dark soy and molasses) or light (salt and  fish sauce )
 
 
 
 
 Many Chinese kue require the use of a Kue mould similar to that use in  mooncakes , which is either carved out of wood or made of plastics. Kue moulds with  turtles  are ubiquitous, though moulds of  peaches  are usually quite common. Red coloured turtle kue are known especially as "Ang ku kueh"/" Red Tortoise Cake " (紅龜粿). Since many Chinese no longer make kue at home, these moulds have become less common in many kitchens. [7] 
 
 Desserts and sweets 
 Bubur cha cha  - a Nyonya dessert of bananas, sweet potatoes, taro, black eyed beans and sago pearls cooked in pandan-flavoured coconut milk. May be served hot or cold. 
 Leng Chee Kang  - a mixture of cooked ingredients immersed in a  sweet soup . Ingredients vary greatly depending on the cook, but lotus seed is always the primary ingredient, and the soup may include dried longan, white fungus, barley,  kembang semangkuk  jelly and rock sugar as secondary ingredients. [8]  Leng Chee Kang may be served warm or cold. 
 Mooncake  (Chinese : 月饼) -  round or rectangular pastries with a rich thick filling, traditionally eaten during the  Mid-Autumn Festival  and accompanied with  Chinese tea . Both the traditional baked mooncake and the  snow skin version  are popular and widely available in Malaysia during the festival season. [9] 
 Muar Chee  (Chinese : 麻糍) - glutinous rice ball lumps coated in a sweetened mixture of pulverised peanuts and sesame seeds, and served with toothpicks. 
 Tangyuan  (Chinese :  汤圆 or 湯圓) - plain white or coloured sweet dumplings made from glutinous rice flour. Traditionally homemade and eaten during  Yuanxiao  (Chinese : 元宵) as well as the  Dongzhi Festival  (Chinese : 冬至), tangyuan is now available year around sold as dessert. Tangyuan dumplings with filling are usually served in a lightly sweetened clear syrup, while unfilled ones are served as part of a  sweet dessert soup . 
 Tau foo fah  or Dau Huay (Chinese : 豆腐花 or 豆花) - a velvety pudding of very soft  silken tofu , traditionally flavoured with a brown sugar syrup. 
 UFO tart  (Chinese : 牛屎堆) - this consists of a flat, thin base of baked mini butter sponge cake topped with a creamy egg custard, which is in turn crowned with a  meringue  slurry. [10]  Its name in Chinese has a literal means "cow pile dung", which alludes to the piped shape of the cake base's toppings and the meringue's darker shade as a result of caramelisation. Popularized by a Hainanese bakery in Sandakan in the 1950s, the popularity of these treats has spread to Kota Kinabalu and several other towns in Sabah. [11] 
 Vegetarian cuisine 
 Over 80% of Malaysian Chinese identify themselves as Buddhists, and some follow a vegetarian diet at least some of the time. Some Chinese restaurants offer an  exclusively vegetarian menu  (Chinese : 素食, 斎) featuring Chinese dishes which resemble meat dishes in look and even taste, like "roast pork", fried "fish" with "skin" and "bones", and "chicken drumsticks" complete with a "bone". These vegetarian restaurants are run by proprietors who abstain from consumption of animal products as well as strong tasting vegetables and spices as way of life for religious reasons, and are essentially vegan. The meat analogues used are often locally produced as opposed to imported, and are made solely from ingredients like soy, gluten, mushrooms and tuber vegetables. Buddhist vegetarian restaurants are likely to be found in areas with a high concentration of Chinese, and tend to be especially busy on certain festive days where many Buddhists temporarily adopt a strict vegetarian diet for at least a day.
 
 See also 
 Indonesian Chinese cuisine 
 Peranakan cuisine 
 References 
 
 ^  a   b   Lydia Koh (2 December 2014).  "Sabah noodles (and more) right here in Petaling Jaya" . Malay Mail . Retrieved  6 June  2015 . 
 
 ^   Philip Lim (23 February 2013).  "Old favourites at Sun Sun Nam Cheong" .  New Straits Times . Archived from  the original  on 2 May 2014 . Retrieved  19 July  2014 . 
 
 ^   King Kong (8 October 2012).  "Tawau (Maps)" . Axian.my . Retrieved  26 March  2014 . 
 
 ^   "Penang's iconic 'dragon balls' and other biscuit treats | Eat/Drink | Malay Mail Online" .  www.themalaymailonline.com . Archived from  the original  on 18 March 2017 . Retrieved  18 March  2017 . 
 
 ^   [Ref : i-weekly issue 669 26 Min Daily 15 February 2003 Page 24 Lian He Wan Bao 17 February 1996 Page 34 YUAN publisher = Singapore Federation of Chinese Clan Associations date = 1 February 2003] 
 
 ^   "臺灣閩南語常用詞辭典：粿"  (in Chinese). 中華民國教育部 . Retrieved  17 December  2008 . [ permanent dead link ] 
 
 ^   "粿印"  (in Chinese). 國立宜蘭傳統藝術中心. Archived from  the original  on 31 August 2011 . Retrieved  17 December  2008 . 
 
 ^   Sangeetha Nair (20 January 2008).  "Cooling sensation" .  The Star . Retrieved  19 July  2014 . 
 
 ^   Eu Hooi Khaw (13 September 2013).  "Mooncakes to love" .  The Malaysian Insider . Archived from  the original  on 14 April 2014 . Retrieved  19 July  2014 . 
 
 ^   Swee Har (24 January 2014).  "山打根美味攻略" .  Air Asia  (in Chinese). Travel3Sixty . Retrieved  19 July  2014 . 
 
 ^   UFO on Astro  on  YouTube 
 
 
 v t e   Malaysian cuisine  by  ethnicity Common dishes Malay 
 Asam pedas 
 Ayam bakar 
 Ayam goreng 
 Ayam masak kicap 
 Ayam masak merah 
 Ayam penyet 
 Bubur 
 Bubur asyura 
 Bubur ayam 
 Bubur kacang hijau 
 Bubur lambuk 
 Bubur pedas 
 Bubur pulut hitam 
 Dendeng 
 Gulai 
 Ikan bakar 
 Ikan goreng 
 Kangkung belacan 
 Ketupat 
 Kway teow goreng 
 Laksa 
 Lemang 
 Lontong 
 Mee bakso 
 Mee bandung Muar 
 Mee goreng 
 Mee jawa 
 Mee kari 
 Mee rebus 
 Mee siam 
 Nasi ambeng 
 Nasi campur 
 Nasi dagang 
 Nasi goreng 
 American fried rice 
 Nasi goreng pattaya 
 Nasi kerabu 
 Nasi kuning 
 Nasi lemak 
 Nasi minyak 
 Nasi paprik 
 Nasi tumpang 
 Nasi ulam 
 Otak-otak 
 Pais 
 Pecal 
 Pekasam 
 Pindang 
 Pulot tartal 
 Ramly burger 
 Roti canai 
 Roti Jala 
 Rendang 
 Rojak 
 Rojak bandung 
 Sayur lodeh 
 Sata 
 Satay 
 Satay celup 
 Serundeng 
 Soto 
 Soto ayam 
 Mee soto 
 Sup 
 Soup kambing 
 Sup tulang 
 Tauhu goreng 
 Telur pindang 
 Ulam 
 Chinese 
 Bakkwa 
 Bak kut teh 
 Banmian 
 Bean sprouts chicken 
 Beef kway teow 
 Chai tow kway 
 Char kway teow 
 Char siu 
 Chee cheong fun 
 Chwee kueh 
 Claypot chicken rice 
 Curry Mee 
 Duck rice 
 Duck soup noodles 
 Economy rice/Mixed rice 
 Fish ball 
 Fish head bee hoon 
 Hae mee 
 Heong Peng 
 Hokkien mee 
 Kolo mee 
 Kway chap 
 Kway Teow Th'ng 
 Loh bak 
 Lor mee 
 Mee pok 
 Oyster omelette 
 Pan mee 
 Pao 
 Popiah 
 Sar Hor Fun 
 Lou Shee Fun 
 Teochew Porridge 
 Tong sui 
 Wonton mee 
 Tambun biscuit 
 Yee Foo Mee 
 Yong tau foo 
 You char kway 
 Yusheng 
 Zongzi 
 Indian 
 Banana leaf rice 
 Butter chicken 
 Dalcha 
 Puliyodarai 
 Curd rice 
 Chapati 
 Fish molee 
 Dosai 
 Idli 
 Laddu 
 Mee goreng 
 Maggi goreng 
 Mee goreng mamak 
 Mee rebus 
 Mamak Rojak  ( Rojak Klang ) 
 Modak 
 Murtabak 
 Mutton curry 
 Nasi biryani 
 Nasi kandar 
 Korma 
 Pasembur 
 Puri 
 Putu mayam 
 Roti canai 
 Roti tissue 
 Naan 
 Sup kambing 
 Appam 
 Payasam 
 Upma 
 Paniyaram 
 Pongal 
 Vadai 
 Adhirasam 
 Murukku 
 Bajji 
 Rasam 
 Sambar 
 Papadum 
 Tandoori chicken 
 East Malaysian  ( Sabah  and  Sarawak ) 
 Ambuyat 
 Bosou 
 Hinava 
 Linatan 
 Linongot 
 Manok pansoh 
 Midin 
 Nasi kombos 
 Nasi laru 
 Nasik aruk 
 Sinalau bakas 
 Tonokon 
 Tuhau 
 Umai 
 Peranakan 
 Acar 
 Asam laksa/Laksa lemak 
 Buah keluak 
 Bubur cha cha 
 Cap cai 
 Kerabu Bihun 
 Perut Ikan 
 Pie tee 
 Pongteh 
 Nyonya Bak Chang 
 Eurasian 
 Shepherd's pie 
 Oxtail   stew 
 Chicken chop 
 Devil's curry 
 Semur 
 Snacks Cake  and  pastries 
 Bahulu 
 Batik cake 
 Heong peng 
 Roti bakar 
 Sarawak layer cake 
 Keropok ,  Crackers 
 Amplang 
 Lekor 
 Rempeyek 
 Mee Siput Muar 
 Kuih 
 Apam balik 
 Bingka 
 Borasa 
 Cakoi 
 Cincin 
 Cucur 
 Jemput-jemput 
 Penyaram 
 Pisang goreng 
 Dodol 
 Jala 
 Jelurut 
 Karipap 
 Kelupis 
 Kochi 
 Gelang 
 Goyang 
 Gulung 
 Laddu 
 Lapis 
 Lidah 
 Makmur 
 Modak 
 Mooncake 
 Ondeh-ondeh 
 Otokon 
 Pais 
 Red peach cake 
 Red tortoise cake 
 Pie tee 
 Pulut inti 
 Pulut panggang 
 Puto 
 Putu bambu/Putu bumbong 
 Putu mangkuk/piring 
 Qasidah 
 Sapit/Gulong/Kapit 
 Seri Muka 
 Soon kueh 
 Tat/Tae 
 Desserts 
 Lamban 
 Punjung 
 Roti tisu 
 Sagu Gula Melaka 
 Tapai 
 Wajid 
 Drinks Non-alcoholic 
 ABC 
 Bandung 
 Cendol 
 Cheng tng 
 Cincau 
 Chrysanthemum tea 
 Ginger tea 
 Ipoh white coffee 
 Kopi 
 Janda pulang 
 Milo 
 Sarsi 
 Soy milk 
 Teh tarik 
 Alcoholic 
 Jaz 
 Lihing 
 Montoku 
 Sikat 
 Tapai 
 Tuak 
 Condiments 
 Acar 
 Kaya 
 Sambal 
 Belacan 
 Budu 
 Cincalok 
 Tempoyak 
 Taucu 
 Tuhau 
 
   Malaysia portal 
   Food portal 
   Category: Malaysian cuisine 
 List of Malaysian dishes 
 
 v t e Cuisines Continental 
 African 
 North 
 West 
 list 
 Americas 
 Caribbean 
 North 
 South 
 list 
 Asian 
 Caucasian 
 Central 
 Indian subcontinent 
 Levantine 
 list 
 European 
 Balkan 
 Central 
 Eastern 
 list 
 Oceanic 
 Intercontinental
 Global 
 Latin American 
 Mediterranean 
 Middle Eastern 
 National  and regional 
 Afghan 
 Albanian 
 Algerian 
 American 
 Californian 
 Floribbean 
 Hawaiian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Lowcountry (South Carolina) 
 New England 
 New Mexico 
 Pacific Northwest 
 Pennsylvania Dutch 
 Puerto Rican 
 Southern US 
 Southwest US 
 Texas 
 Angolan 
 Argentine 
 Armenian 
 Australian 
 Austrian 
 Azerbaijani 
 Bahraini 
 Bangladeshi 
 Barbadian 
 Belarusian 
 Belgian 
 Belizean 
 Beninese 
 Bhutanese 
 Bolivian 
 Bosnian-Herzegovinian 
 Botswana 
 Brazilian 
 British 
 Channel Islands 
 English 
 Gibraltarian 
 Northern Irish 
 Saint Helena 
 Scottish 
 Welsh 
 Bruneian 
 Bulgarian 
 Burkinabé 
 Burmese 
 Burundian 
 Cambodian 
 Cameroonian 
 Canadian 
 Acadian 
 Québécois 
 Central African Republic 
 Chadian 
 Chilean 
 Chinese 
 Cantonese 
 Hong Kong 
 Macanese 
 Tibetan 
 Xinjiang 
 Colombian 
 Congolese 
 Corsican 
 Croatian 
 Cuban 
 Cypriot 
 Czech 
 Danish 
 Faroese 
 Greenlandic 
 Djiboutian 
 Dominican 
 Dominican Republic 
 Dutch 
 East Timorese 
 Ecuadorian 
 Egyptian 
 Emirati 
 Equatorial Guinean 
 Eritrean 
 Estonian 
 Ethiopian 
 Fijian 
 Filipino 
 Finnish 
 French 
 Occitan 
 French Guianan 
 Gabonese 
 Gambian 
 Georgian 
 German 
 Ghanaian 
 Greek 
 Cretan 
 Epirotic 
 Greek Macedonian 
 Heptanesean 
 Guatemalan 
 Guinea-Bissauan 
 Guinean 
 Haitian 
 Honduran 
 Hungarian 
 Icelandic 
 Indian 
 Arunachalese 
 Assamese 
 Bengali 
 Bihari 
 Goan 
 Gujarati 
 Himachal Pradesh 
 Kashmiri 
 Jharkhandi 
 Karnataka 
 Kerala 
 Maharashtrian 
 Manipuri 
 Meghalayan 
 Mizo 
 Naga 
 Odia 
 Punjabi 
 Rajasthani 
 Sikkimese 
 Sindhi 
 Tamil 
 Telangana 
 Telugu 
 Indonesian 
 Acehnese 
 Balinese 
 Banjar 
 Batak 
 Betawi 
 Indo 
 Javanese 
 Madurese 
 Makassar 
 Minahasan 
 Minangkabau 
 Palembangese 
 Sundanese 
 Iranian 
 Iraqi 
 Irish 
 Israeli 
 Italian 
 Abruzzese 
 Ligurian 
 Lombard 
 Lucanian 
 Neapolitan 
 Roman 
 Sardinian 
 Sicilian 
 Venetian 
 Ivorian 
 Jamaican 
 Japanese 
 Okinawan 
 Jordanian 
 Kazakh 
 Kenyan 
 Korean 
 North Korean 
 South Korean 
 Kosovan 
 Kuwaiti 
 Kyrgyz 
 Lao 
 Latvian 
 Lebanese 
 Lesotho 
 Liberian 
 Libyan 
 Liechtensteiner 
 Lithuanian 
 Luxembourg 
 Macedonian 
 Malagasy 
 Malawian 
 Malaysian 
 Sabahan 
 Sarawakian 
 Maldivian 
 Malian 
 Maltese 
 Mauritanian 
 Mauritian 
 Mexican 
 Moldovan 
 Monégasque 
 Mongolian 
 Montenegrin 
 Moroccan 
 Mozambican 
 Namibian 
 Nauruan 
 Nepalese 
 New Zealand 
 Nicaraguan 
 Niger 
 Nigerian 
 Niuean 
 Norwegian 
 Omani 
 Pakistani 
 Palestinian 
 Panamanian 
 Peruvian 
 Polish 
 Portuguese 
 Qatari 
 Romanian  (incl.  Transylvanian Saxon ) 
 Russian 
 Bashkir 
 Chechen 
 Circassian 
 Komi 
 Mordovian 
 Sakha 
 Tatar 
 Udmurt 
 Yamal 
 Rwandan 
 Saint Lucian 
 Salvadoran 
 Sammarinese 
 São Tomé and Príncipe 
 Saudi Arabian 
 Senegalese 
 Serbian 
 Seychellois 
 Sierra Leonean 
 Singaporean 
 Slovak 
 Slovenian 
 Somali 
 South African 
 Spanish 
 Andalusian 
 Asturian 
 Balearic 
 Basque 
 Canarian 
 Cantabrian 
 Catalan 
 Extremaduran 
 Galician 
 Manchegan 
 Valencian 
 Sri Lankan 
 Sudanese 
 Swazi 
 Swedish 
 Swiss 
 Syrian 
 Taiwanese 
 Tajik 
 Tanzanian 
 Zanzibari 
 Thai 
 Togolese 
 Tunisian 
 Turkish 
 Turkmen 
 Trinidadian and Tobagonian 
 Ugandan 
 Ukrainian 
 Uruguayan 
 Uzbek 
 Venezuelan 
 Vietnamese 
 Western Saharan 
 Yemeni 
 Zambian 
 Zimbabwean 
 Ethnic 
 Ainu 
 Arab 
 Indonesian 
 Aromanian 
 Assyrian 
 Balochi 
 Berber 
 Cajun 
 Chinese 
 American 
 Canadian 
 Chifa 
 Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Crimean Tatar 
 Greek American 
 Hazaragi 
 Indian 
 Anglo-Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Indigenous American 
 Inuit 
 Italian American 
 Kurdish 
 Livonian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Malay 
 Ossetian 
 Parsi 
 Pashtun 
 Peranakan 
 Romani 
 Sámi 
 Soul food 
 Sylheti 
 Transylvanian Saxon 
 Yup'ik 
 Religious 
 Buddhist 
 Christian 
 Goan Catholic 
 Mangalorean Catholic 
 Mennonite 
 Hindu 
 Islamic 
 Chinese 
 Ital 
 Jain 
 Jewish 
 American 
 Ashkenazi 
 Bukharan 
 Ethiopian 
 Mizrahi 
 Sephardic 
 Syrian 
 Ritual slaughter 
 Sikh 
 Historical 
 Ancient Egyptian 
 Ancient Greek 
 Ancient Israelite 
 Ancient Roman 
 Antebellum America 
 Aztec 
 Byzantine 
 Early modern European 
 Historical Chinese 
 Historical Indian subcontinent 
 Historical North Indian and Pakistani 
 History of agriculture 
 History of alcoholic drinks 
 History of bread 
 History of seafood 
 History of vegetarianism 
 Historical Argentine 
 Historical Japanese 
 Inca 
 Mayan 
 Muisca 
 Mughal 
 Medieval 
 Ottoman 
 Peasant 
 Soviet 
 Thirteen Colonies 
 Styles 
 Classique 
 Fast food 
 Fusion 
 New American 
 Eurasian 
 Haute 
 Molecular gastronomy 
 Note by Note 
 Nouvelle 
 Lists 
 List of cuisines 
 List of historical cuisines 
 Lists of prepared foods 
 Related 
 Cookbook 
 Cooking 
 Culinary arts 
 Drink 
 Food 
 history 
 Diet 
 Meal preparation 
 
   Food portal 
   Drink portal 
   Category 
   Commons 
   Cookbook 
   WikiProject 
   Outline 
 
  
NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw2412
Cached time: 20230311131248
Cache expiry: 1814400
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [no‐toc‐conversion, vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.699 seconds
Real time usage: 0.911 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2329/1000000
Post‐expand include size: 173412/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2348/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 12/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 63339/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.382/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 22532154/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/400
 
 
Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  619.133      1 -total
 32.48%  201.109      2 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 29.61%  183.307      1 Template:Cuisine_of_Malaysia
 17.57%  108.788      9 Template:Cite_web
 15.09%   93.439      1 Template:Lang
 14.53%   89.940      5 Template:Navbox
 10.99%   68.035      1 Template:Malaysian_cuisine
  7.70%   47.680      1 Template:Pp
  6.35%   39.339      1 Template:Short_description
  6.07%   37.557     10 Template:Portal-inline
 
  Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:idhash:2519611-0!canonical and timestamp 20230311131247 and revision id 1141976769. Rendering was triggered because: page-view
  
 esi <esi:include src="/esitest-fa8a495983347898/content" />  
 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Malaysian_Chinese_cuisine&oldid=1141976769 " 
 Categories :  Chinese fusion cuisine Chinese-Malaysian culture Malaysian cuisine Chinese cuisine outside China Hidden categories:  CS1 Chinese-language sources (zh) All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from January 2018 Articles with permanently dead external links Wikipedia semi-protected pages Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata EngvarB from November 2014 Use dmy dates from November 2014 Articles containing Malay (macrolanguage)-language text Articles containing Chinese-language text Articles containing traditional Chinese-language text Articles containing simplified Chinese-language text 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  This page was last edited on 27 February 2023, at 21:30  (UTC) . 
 Text is available under the  Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0 ;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the  Terms of Use  and  Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the  Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. 
 
 
 Privacy policy 
 About Wikipedia 
 Disclaimers 
 Contact Wikipedia 
 Mobile view 
 Developers 
 Statistics 
 Cookie statement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
