
 
 
 Jump to content 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle sidebar 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Create account Log in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Personal tools 
 
 
 
 
   Create account   Log in 
 
 
 
 
		Pages for logged out editors  learn more 
 
 
 Contributions Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Navigation 
 
 
 Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate 
 
 
 
 
 Contribute 
 
 
 Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file 
 
 
 
 
 Tools 
 
 
 What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item 
 
 
 
 
 Print/export 
 
 
 Download as PDF Printable version 
 
 
 
 
 In other projects 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons 
 
 
 
 
 Languages 
 
 On this Wikipedia the language links are at the top of the page across from the article title.  Go to top . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CentralNotice  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Contents 
 move to sidebar 
 hide 
 
 
 
 
 (Top) 
 
 
 
 
 
 1 History and influences 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 Terminology 
 
 
				Toggle Terminology subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 2.1 Food preparation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.2 Cooking methods 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.3 Characteristics 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 Regional cuisine variations 
 
 
				Toggle Regional cuisine variations subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 3.1 Brunei 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.2 Indonesia 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.3 Malaysia 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.4 Singapore 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.5 South Africa 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.6 Sri Lanka 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4 List of Malay dishes 
 
 
				Toggle List of Malay dishes subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 4.1 Dishes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.2 Condiments 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.3 Snacks 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.4 Kue  and  kuih 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.5 Drinks 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5 See also 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6 Notes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 7 External links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
						Toggle the table of contents
					 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle the table of contents 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Malay cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 11 languages 
 
 
 
 বাংলা فارسی Français Bahasa Indonesia Jawa Bahasa Melayu Polski Українська اردو 粵語 中文 
 Edit links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Article Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 English 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 More 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
 
 
 Cuisine of Malay people 
 
 
   Nasi lemak : a versatile fragrant  coconut rice  dish served with various accompaniments, e.g.  eggs  (either done  sunny side up  or  boiled ),  sambal   sotong ,  rendang ,  ayam goreng , etc. It is the most defining feature of a Malay-style breakfast. 
 This article is part of the series on Indonesian cuisine Masakan Indonesia 
 National dishes 
 Gado-gado 
 Nasi goreng 
 Rendang 
 Satay 
 Soto 
 Tumpeng 
 
 Regional and cultural cuisines 
 Acehnese 
 Arab 
 Balinese 
 Banjarese 
 Batak 
 Betawi 
 Chinese 
 Indian 
 Indo 
 Javanese 
 Madurese 
 Makassarese 
 Malay 
 Minahasan 
 Minangkabau 
 Palembangese 
 Peranakan 
 Sundanese 
 
 Ingredients 
 Bumbu 
 Condiments 
 Peanut sauce 
 Sambal 
 Santan 
 
 Types of food 
 Foods 
 Dishes 
 Noodles 
 Soups 
 Desserts 
 Snacks 
 Kue 
 Krupuk 
 Kripik 
 Drinks 
 Beverages 
 Alcohol 
 Coffee 
 
 Preparation and cooking 
 Main 
 Frying 
 Stir frying 
 Grilling 
 Roasting 
 Dry roasting 
 Sautéing 
 Boiling 
 Steaming 
 Other 
 Pepes 
 Pindang 
 Rendang 
 Semur 
 
 Styles 
 Nasi campur 
 Nasi padang 
 Rijsttafel 
 Tumpeng 
 Street food 
 
 Holidays and festivals 
 Kenduri 
 Lebaran  (Eid al-Fitr) 
 Naloni Mitoni 
 Natal  (Christmas) 
 Serak Gulo 
 Slametan 
 
 Related cuisines 
 Bruneian 
 Chinese 
 Dutch 
 East Timorese 
 Egyptian 
 Filipino 
 Indian 
 Malaysian 
 Portuguese 
 Singaporean 
 Sri Lankan 
 South African 
 Surinamese 
 Thai 
 Yemeni 
 
 See also 
 History 
 Etiquette 
 Cookbook: Cuisine of Indonesia 
 
   Indonesia portal   Food portal v t e 
 Nasi lemak on banana leaf.jpg This article is part of the series on Malaysian cuisine Masakan Malaysia 
 Regional and cultural cuisines 
 Chinese 
 Eurasian 
 Indian 
 Javanese 
 Malay 
 Peranakan 
 Sabah 
 Sarawak 
 
 Ingredients 
 Belacan 
 Budu 
 Gula Melaka 
 Kerisik 
 Kicap Manis 
 Pandan 
 Sambal 
 Santan 
 Tapai 
 Tempoyak 
 
 Types of food 
 Foods 
 Dishes 
 Soups 
 Kuih 
 Keropok 
 Kerepek 
 Drinks 
 Alcohol 
 
 Holidays and festivals 
 Chinese New Year 
 Hari Raya Puasa 
 Hari Raya Qurban 
 Deepavali 
 Christmas 
 Tadau Kaamatan 
 Gawai 
 
 Related cuisines 
 Bruneian 
 Chinese 
 Filipino 
 Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Singaporean 
 Thai 
 
 See also 
 History 
 Cookbook: Cuisine of Malaysia 
 
   Malaysia portal   Food portal v t e 
 Malay cuisine  is the traditional food of the  ethnic Malays  of  Southeast Asia , residing in modern-day  Malaysia ,  Indonesia  (parts of  Sumatra  and  Kalimantan ),  Singapore ,  Brunei ,  Southern Thailand  and the  Philippines  (mostly southern) as well as  Cocos Islands ,  Christmas Island ,  Sri Lanka  and  South Africa .
 The main characteristic of traditional Malay cuisine is the generous use of spices.  Coconut milk  is also important in giving Malay dishes their rich, creamy character.  The other foundation is  belacan  (prawn paste), which is used as a base for  sambal , a rich sauce or condiment made from  belacan ,  chilli peppers ,  onions  and  garlic . Malay cooking also makes plentiful use of  lemongrass  and  galangal . [1] 
 Nearly every Malay meal is served with  rice , which is also the  staple food  in many other Asian cultures. Although there are various types of dishes in a Malay meal, all are served at once, not in courses. 
A typical meal consists of a plate of rice for each person on the table. Dishes are meant to be shared among the diners and each dish is provided with a spoon. The diner proceeds to spoon the dishes of his choosing onto his rice plate.
Food is eaten delicately with the fingers of right hand, never with the left which is used for personal  ablutions , and Malays rarely use utensils. [2] 
 
 
 History and influences [ edit ] 
 It is uncertain when the Malay culinary traditions took shape, but the earliest record of the tradition is from the 15th century when  Malacca Sultanate  became the important trade centre in the  Malay archipelago . [3]  The most important legacy of Malacca derived from its involvement in the  spice trade , its openness to the ingredients and culinary techniques introduced by foreigners notably the Arabs, Persians, Chinese and Indians and its cultivation of a rich eclectic gastronomy. Malacca was also a catalyst for the development of two other rich and unique culinary cultures which are the  fusion  of Malay with Chinese and European traditions, cuisines respectively known as  Nyonya  and  Eurasian . In the centuries before and after Malacca, there were other non-Malay groups from  Buginese  and  Javanese  to  Minangkabau  who were absorbed into Malay society at different times, aided by similarity in lifestyle and a common religion, and had varying degrees of influence on Malay food. [4] 
 It is important to understand the nuance and differences of what makes a dish Malay, which is intertwined with the differences between the concept of Malay as an ethnic group or as a  race . In Indonesia, Malay cuisine more specifically refers to the cuisine of ethnic Malay people who traditionally inhabit the east coast of Sumatra, the  Malay Peninsula  and coastal  Borneo . In Malaysia, Singapore, Brunei and outside the Malay archipelago (such as Sri Lanka and South Africa) however, the term "Malay cuisine" often takes a broader scope, which includes the culinary traditions of other neighbouring common  Austronesian peoples , often including Minangkabaus, Javanese and Bugis, or even their fusion derivatives.
 Nasi lemak , rice cooked in rich coconut milk, is probably the most popular dish, ubiquitous in Malay towns and villages.  Nasi lemak  is considered Malaysia's  national dish . [5]  Another example is  ketupat  or  nasi himpit , compressed rice cooked in palm leaves. It is popular especially during  Hari Raya . Various meats and vegetables could be made into   gulai   or  kari , a type of curry dish with variations of spice mixtures that display an Indian influence long present in Malay cuisine. Since most Malays are  Muslims , Malay cuisine rigorously observes  Islamic   halal  dietary law.  Protein intake is mostly taken from beef, water buffalo, goat, and lamb, and also includes poultry and fish. Pork, non-halal meat, and alcohol are prohibited.  Laksa , a fusion of Malay and Chinese cuisine, is also a popular dish. Malay cuisine has also adopted some neighbouring food traditions, such as  rendang  adopted from  Minangkabau cuisine  in Sumatra,  nasi ulam  from  Betawi cuisine  and  satays  from  Javanese cuisine  in  Java . However, the Malays have developed distinctive tastes and recipes.
 Malay cuisine has also spread outside the Malay archipelago and influenced other cuisine there.  Bobotie  is a  South African dish  with its origins in  Cape Malay . It consists of spiced minced meat baked with an egg-based topping. Of the many dishes common to South Africa,  bobotie  is perhaps closest to being the national dish because it is not commonly found in any other country. The recipe originates from the  Dutch East India Company  colonies in  Batavia , with the name derived from the Indonesian  bobotok . In other countries,  kalu dodol  is a  Sri Lankan dessert  with  Sri Lankan Malay  origins. It consists of  kithul   jaggery  (from the sap of the  toddy palm ), rice flour and coconut milk.
 
 Terminology [ edit ] 
 Nearly every culture and language has contributed to the culinary language, including Malay with its own food terminology embracing its preparation, methods of cooking, and numerous food names. [6]  Malay food terminology has been shaped by cultural transmission over many generations. [7]  Traditionally Malay parents would pass down the skills and processes of cooking to their children through daily cooking activities as well as traditional events, including wedding ceremonies. [8] 
 
 Food preparation [ edit ] 
   Typical festive fare during  Hari Raya Puasa  or  Hari Raya Haji  (clockwise from bottom left): beef soup,  nasi himpit  (compressed rice cubes), beef  rendang  and  sayur lodeh . 
 In Malay food preparation, the ingredients used are often described as spicy and flavorful as it is a melting pot of spices, herbs and roots. Strong, tangy and flavorful fresh herbs, spices and ingredients such as  serai  ( lemongrass ),  pandan  ( screwpine ),  kemangi  (a type of  basil ),  kesum  ( polygonum ),  buah pala  ( nutmeg ),  kunyit  ( turmeric ) and  bunga kantan  ( wild ginger buds ),  biji sawi  ( mustard seeds ) and  halba  ( fenugreek ) are often used. There are also a number of terms used for the equipment and utensils used for food preparation. [9]  Traditional cooking equipment includes several types of grinders called  lesung batu  ( pestle and mortar ),  batu giling  (stone roller), and the  batu boh  (mill) used for preparing spices and pastes. Vegetables are diced on a  landas  (wooden cutting board); while a coconut scraper or  kukur niyur  is indispensable in making both curries and sweets. Pastries are also made for desserts and for this a  torak  (rolling pin) and  papan penorak  (pastry board) are considered essential.
 
 Cooking methods [ edit ] 
   Tempoyak  ikan patin ,  pangasius  fish in fermented durian sauce 
 Different cultures and language tend to have their own unique ways of cooking and each of them has different terminologies which often come from historical necessity. [10]  Traditional cooking methods in Malay cuisine are quite similar to life in Malay villages, slow and relaxed, as most Malay food is cooked on low heat for a long time compared to Chinese food. [11]  There are numerous methods of cooking which consist of dry and moist methods. [12]   Tumis  (using a small amount of oil or fat in a shallow pan over relatively high heat),  salai  (food smoked or grilled with the ingredients often cut into pieces or thinly sliced to facilitate fast cooking),  sangai  (food, mainly dried spices, fried without oil), and  layur  (warmed over low heat to dry) are examples of terms for dry-heat cooking methods. On the other hand, moist-heat cooking methods includes terms such as  tanak  (cooking in a pot, especially rice),  jerang  (boiling or simmering),  celur  (blanching or dipping food such as vegetables into hot water) and  reneh  (simmering or boiling food). [13] 
 
 Characteristics [ edit ] 
 As defined by Ainuddin, Malay food has five characteristics: 
 
 It is rich in herbs and spices; 
 Coconut milk is one of the main ingredients; 
 It is usually spicy; 
 Meat is usually stewed with a thick gravy; and 
 Fried fish  and seafood are usually seasoned with  turmeric  powder. 
 Regional cuisine variations [ edit ] 
 Brunei [ edit ] 
   Ambuyat , national dish of  Brunei 
 Bruneian Malay   cuisine  is often spicy and commonly eaten with either rice or noodles.  Beef  rendang ,  nasi lemak  and  pajeri nanas  are popular foods in  Brunei . [14]  Among the few dishes peculiar to Brunei is  ambuyat , a sticky ball of flavourless  sago   starch , which is wrapped around a bamboo fork and dipped into a spicy and sour gravy.
 Nasi katok , which literally means "knock rice", is a popular meal which consists of plain rice,  fried chicken  and  sambal , a spicy relish made from ground chilli peppers and a variety of secondary ingredients including but not limited to  shrimp paste , garlic, ginger, shallot, scallion, palm sugar, lime juice, vinegar and anchovies.  Nasi katok  is traditionally served wrapped in brown paper.
 
 Indonesia [ edit ] 
   Otak-otak  in  banana leaf 
 The cuisine of  Malay Indonesians  spread on the east coast of  Sumatra  and  Kalimantan , primarily  West Kalimantan . Because of the close ethnic kinship and proximity to Malaysian Malays, many dishes are shared between the two countries. For example,  nasi lemak  and  nasi ulam  are considered native dishes of  Riau  and  Jambi . Malay cuisine also shares many similarities with the neighboring  Minangkabau cuisine  of West Sumatra,  Palembangese cuisine  of South Sumatra and  Acehnese cuisine  of Aceh, such as sharing  gulai ,  asam pedas ,  kari ,  lemang ,  nasi minyak ,  pempek ,  pindang ,  rendang  and  roti canai . This is due to the fact that the Minangkabaus are culturally closely related to the Malays. Malay Indonesian cuisine has also been influenced by  Arab ,  Betawi ,  Chinese ,  Indian  and  Javanese cuisine .
 Otak-otak  is a dish involving fish pieces wrapped in banana leaves. The grilled fish cake is made of ground fish mixed with tapioca starch and  spices .
 
   Sambal   belacan  made of fresh chillies and  belacan 
 Tempoyak  is a fermented durian sauce [15]  and  sambal   belacan  is a Malay-style  sambal  made of fresh chillies and toasted  belacan  in a stone mortar. Both are familiar condiments in Sumatra.
 Other Malay Indonesian dishes include  acar ,  amplang ,  ayam goreng ,  ayam pansuh ,  ayam penyet ,  ayam percik ,  begedil ,  bihun goreng ,  bobotok ,  bubur asyura ,  bubur cha cha ,  bubur lambuk ,  bubur pedas ,  cincalok ,  epok-epok , various  gulai ,  ikan bakar , various  ikan patin  dishes,  kangkung belacan ,  kemplang ,  ketupat ,  kwetiau goreng , various  laksa ,  lepat ,  lontong ,  martabak ,  mi celor ,  mi goreng ,  mi kari ,  mi rebus ,  nasi ambeng ,  nasi briyani , various  nasi goreng ,  nasi kari ,  nasi kebuli ,  pekasam ,  rojak ,  roti jala ,  roti john ,  roti tisu ,  sambal   sotong ,  samosa ,  satay ,  sayur lodeh , various  siput gonggong  dishes,  soto ,  soto mi ,  sup ikan ,  sup kambing ,  sup rusa ,  tauhu goreng ,  tekwan ,  terang bulan  and  ulam .
 
 Malaysia [ edit ] 
   Sirap bandung  drinks 
 Malaysian Malay   cuisine  bears many similarities to Malay Indonesian  cuisine . It has also been influenced by  Chinese ,  Indian , Thai, Javanese and Minangkabau cuisine. Many Malay dishes revolve around the  rempah , which is usually sauteed in oil to draw out its flavours to form the base of a dish. A dipping relish called  sambal  is an essential accompaniment for most Malay dishes.
 Nasi lemak  is rice cooked in rich coconut milk and considered Malaysia's national dish.
 The drink  sirap bandung  consists of evaporated or condensed milk flavoured with  rose syrup , giving it a pink colour. The drink is an adaptation of  rose milk  from India.
 Other Malay dishes in Malaysia include  apam balik ,  ayam goreng ,  ayam masak merah ,  ayam pansuh ,  ayam percik ,  bubur pedas ,  char kway teow ,  cincalok ,  ikan bakar , various  kari ,  karipap ,  kebebe ,  kerabu ,  keropok lekor ,  kerutuk daging , various  laksa ,  Maggi  goreng ,  masak lemak ,  mee bandung ,  mee Jawa ,  mee kolo ,  mee siam ,  mee soto ,  mee wantan ,  nasi ambeng ,  nasi beriani ,  nasi dagang ,  Nasi kerabu ,  nasi goreng ,  nasi paprik ,  nasi tumpang ,  pek nga ,  roti canai ,  roti john ,  satay ,  taugeh ayam ,  tempoyak  and  ulam .
 
 Singapore [ edit ] 
 Situated between Malaysia and Indonesia,  Singaporean Malay  dishes are influenced by the food of the neighbouring Malay Peninsula, Sumatra, Java and the Riau Islands. Despite absorbing regional influences, it tends to be adapted to local tastes and differ from its counterparts in neighbouring countries. [16]  Hence,  Singaporean Malay cuisine  features a unique set of influences, especially from Minangkabau and Javanese cuisine.
 Dendeng  is a thinly sliced dried meat. It is preserved through a mixture of sugar and spices and dried via a frying process and shows Minangkabau influences.
 Other Malay Singaporean dishes include  assam pedas ,  bakso ,  curry puff ,  gulai  daun ubi ,  Katong laksa ,  ketupat ,  lemak siput ,  mee siam ,  mee goreng ,  naan ,  nasi goreng ,  nasi lemak ,  nasi padang ,  rojak bandung ,  roti john ,  sambal stingray ,  satay ,  satay bee hoon ,  soto  and  sup tulang .
 
 South Africa [ edit ] 
   Sosatie  made up of chicken 
 Cape Malay   cuisine  is a tradition of the  Cape Malay people  in  South Africa . It has been influenced by Malay and Javanese cuisine. Thus, Cape Malay influence has brought spicy curries,  sambals , pickled fish and a variety of fish stews to South Africa. Adaptations of traditional foods such as  bobotie  and  sosatie  are staples in many South African homes.  Faldela Williams  wrote three cookbooks, including the  Cape Malay Cookbook , which was instrumental in preserving the cultural traditions of Cape Malay cuisine. [17] [18] 
 Sosatie  is a traditional Cape Malay dish of meat (usually lamb or mutton) cooked on skewers. [19]  The term is derived from  sate  (skewered meat) and  saus  (spicy sauce). To prepare it, mutton chunks are marinated overnight in fried onions, chillies, garlic,  curry leaves  and  tamarind  juice, then threaded on skewers and either pan-fried or grilled. [20] 
 Cape Malay yellow rice, a sweet dish made with raisins, cinnamon and sugar, also has its origins in Cape Malay cookery, often referred to as Cape Malay yellow rice. [21] 
 Other Cape Malay dishes include  biryani ,  boeber ,  chutney ,  falooda ,  frikkadel ,  koesister ,  roti ,  sambals ,  samoosa  and  tomato bredie .
 
 Sri Lanka [ edit ] 
 Sri Lankan Malay   cuisine  has played a significant role in shaping  Sri Lankan cuisine .  Achcharu  is a dish that originates from the local Malay community and is now widely popular among all ethnic groups in the country. [22] [23]  It is a selection of vegetables in a pickled sauce and blends sweet, sour and spicy flavours. [24]   Mee goreng  and  nasi goreng  are also popular, a result of cultural influences from Indonesia and the country's Malay community. [25] [26] [27] 
 Other Sri Lankan Malay dishes include varieties of  curry ,  ekor sop ,  kalu dodol ,  sambals  and  watalappam .
 
 List of Malay dishes [ edit ] 
 Malay cuisine Asam pedas Ayam golek Ayam masak merah Bobotie Cincalok Gulai Kangkung belacan Laksa asam Lekor Mi rebus Nasi kerabu Nasi dagang Nasi goreng pattaya Nasi minyak Pekasam Pindang Rendang Roti canai Roti john Samosa Satay Siput gonggong Soto mi 
 Dishes [ edit ] 
 Acar , pickled vegetables or fruits with dried chilli, peanuts, and spices 
 Ambuyat , a dish derived from the interior trunk of the sago palm. It is a starchy bland substance, similar to tapioca starch. It is the national dish of Brunei. 
 Amplang , a cracker made from  Spanish mackerel , tapioca starch and other seasonings, and then deep fried. 
 Apam johol , a sweetened rice cake, wrapped in  rambai  leaves to preserve the aroma and make it look good. It is sometimes eaten with  rendang ,  sambal   tumis  and bean porridge. [28] 
 Arisa , a boiled, cracked, or coarsely-ground wheat, mixed with meat and seasoned. Its consistency varies between a porridge and a dumpling. 
 Asam pedas , a sour stew of fish (usually mackerel),  tamarind , chilli, tomatoes,  okra  and  Vietnamese coriander . 
 Ayam golek  or  ayam percik , grilled chicken with spicy sauce. 
 Ayam goreng , a generic term for deep-fried chicken, typically marinated in a base of seasonings prior to cooking.
 Ayam goreng kunyit , deep-fried chicken, marinated in a base of turmeric and other seasonings. 
 Ayam masak merah , a casserole of chicken pieces in dried chilli sambal. [29]  It tends to be a home-cooked dish, so many variations on the recipe exist. 
 Ayam pansuh , a dish prepared by cooking chicken in a bamboo stalk, filled with water (which will later be the soup), seasonings and covered with tapioca leaves from the cassava plant. 
 Begedil , spherical fritters made from mashed potato and occasionally ground meat. 
 Bihun belacan , rice  vermicelli  dressed in a gravy made from ground chillies,  belacan , tamarind, and dried shrimp. It is garnished with cured  cuttlefish , julienned cucumber, bean sprouts and  century egg  wedges. [30] 
 Bihun goreng , stir-fried rice vermicelli. 
 Bihun kari , rice vermicelli mixed with curry, served with mung bean sprout, fried tofu and red chilli  sambal . 
 Bobotie , Cape Malay dish consisting of spiced minced meat baked with an egg-based topping. 
 Bubur cha cha , breakfast dish prepared using pearled  sago , sweet potatoes, yams, bananas, coconut milk, pandan leaves, sugar and salt. 
 Bubur lambuk , a savoury rice porridge consumed during the fasting month of  Ramadhan , made with a mixture of lemongrass, spices, vegetables, and chicken or beef. It is usually cooked communally at a local mosque, which is then distributed to the congregation as a meal to break the fast every evening. 
 Bubur pedas , a traditional porridge made from finely-ground sauteed rice and grated coconut, a specialty of  West Kalimantan . 
 Cincalok , fermented small shrimp or  krill . It is usually served as a condiment together with chillies, shallots and lime juice. 
 Dalca , a stewed vegetable curry with lentils. [31] 
 Dendeng ,  a thinly-sliced dried meat. 
 Frikkadel , Cape Malay dish comprising usually baked, but sometimes deep-fried, meatballs prepared with onion, bread, eggs, vinegar and spices. 
 Gulai , a type of soupy curry-like dishes made from various ingredients: meats, fish or vegetables. This dish originates from Minangkabau.
 Gulai ayam , chicken  gulai . 
 Gulai kambing , goat or mutton  gulai . 
 Gulai ketam , crab  gulai , a speciality of the Deli Malays of  Medan , North Sumatra. 
 Ikan bakar , grilled/barbecued fish with either chilli,  kunyit  ( turmeric ) or other spice-based sauce.
 Ikan mas panggang , barbecued  common carp  dish, a specialty of  Jambi . 
 Ikan pari bakar , barbecued  stingray  dish. 
 Ikan patin , large catfish cooked in various ways such as  gulai  and  asam pedas , a speciality of Riau, Sumatra and Pahang. 
 Kacang pool , a stew of cooked  broad beans  served with vegetable oil, cumin, and optionally with chopped parsley, garlic, onion, lemon juice, chilli pepper and other vegetable, herb and spice ingredients. 
 Kangkung belacan ,  water spinach  wok-fried in shrimp paste  ( belacan )  and hot chilli peppers. Various other items are cooked this way, including  petai  (which is quite bitter when eaten raw) and  yardlong beans . 
 Kari , the Malay adaptation of curry dishes. Just like  gulai , it can be made from various meats or vegetables. A popular style is  kari ayam  (chicken curry).
 Kari ayam , chicken curry. 
 Kari kambing , goat curry. 
 Kari kepala ikan , fish head curry. 
 Kebebe , food made of thirteen ingredients with a bitter, salty, sweet, sour and spicy taste. It is allegedly able to cure indigestion after a large meal. 
 Kemplang , traditional savoury  fish cracker  commonly found in southern parts of Sumatra, made of  wahoo  or  Spanish mackerel . 
 Kerabu , a type of  salad -like dish which can be made with any combination of cooked or uncooked fruits and vegetables, as well as the occasional meat or seafood ingredient. There are many kerabu recipes; a popular style is  kerabu taugeh . 
 Kerutuk daging , a type of coconut milk-based curry. Traditionally it is eaten with white rice,  sambal belacan  and  ulam . 
 Ketupat , a type of glutinous rice dumpling wrapped in a woven palm leaf pouch and boiled. As the rice cooks, the grains expand to fill the pouch and the rice becomes compressed. This method of cooking gives the  ketupat  its characteristic form and texture. Usually eaten with  rendang  (a type of dry beef curry) or served as an accompaniment to satay or  gado-gado .  Ketupat  is also traditionally served at open houses on festive occasions such as  Eid al-Fitr . 
 Kuning , rice dish cooked with turmeric, lemongrass, salt, bay leaves, and other spices to taste. 
 Kurma ,  chicken or mutton braised with a medley of ground spices, nuts, and coconut milk or grated coconut. [32] 
 Kuzi ayam , a thick curry. Traditionally it is eaten with white rice,  sambal belacan  and  ulam . 
 Kwetiau goreng , a stir-fried flat rice noodle dish from  Indonesia . The Malay version is without pork. 
 Laksa , a spicy noodle soup that consists of thick wheat noodles or rice vermicelli with chicken, prawn or fish, served in spicy soup based on either rich and spicy curry coconut milk or sour  asam  (tamarind or  gelugur ) of various types.
 Laksa asam , sour, fish and tamarind-based soup of  laksa . 
 Laksa kari , coconut-based curry soup of  laksa . 
 Lakso , noodle dish served in savoury yellowish coconut milk-based soup, flavoured with fish, and sprinkled with fried shallots. 
 Lekor , a speciality of the state of  Terengganu  and other states on the east coast of the Malaysian Peninsula. It is a savoury cake made from a combination of batter and shredded fish. Sliced and fried just before serving, it is eaten with hot sauce. 
 Lemang , glutinous rice and coconut milk cooked in a hollowed bamboo stick lined with banana leaves. 
 Lepat , a sticky rice dumpling mixed with peanuts cooked with coconut milk and packed inside a  young coconut leaf  or palm leaf. 
 Lontong , compressed  rice cake  in the form of a cylinder wrapped inside a banana leaf. 
 Masak lemak , a style of cooking which employs liberal amounts of turmeric-seasoned coconut milk. 
 Mi bandung , a famous noodle dish cooked with dried shrimp and blended chilli. Often served with half-boiled egg. 
 Mi celor , a noodle soup served in a coconut milk and shrimp-based broth, specialty of  Palembang , South Sumatra. 
 Mi goreng , spicy  stir-fried  noodle dish, originating from Indonesia
 Maggi goreng , a variant of mi goreng using  Maggi  instant noodles. 
 Mi jawa , noodle dish made up of yellow egg noodles drenched in a blended sweet potato base with tomato sauce and prawn stock. 
 Mi kari , thin yellow noodles or  rice vermicelli  with spicy curry soup, sambal, coconut milk, spices and a choice of toppings. 
 Mi kolo , light and tossed noodles in a transparent sauce. 
 Mi rebus , a famous noodle dish which consisting of  mee  (noodle, salt and egg) served with a tangy, spicy, sweet potato-based sauce. It is sometimes also called  mee jawa , perhaps as a nod to its Javanese origins. 
 Mi siam , noodle dish of fried rice vermicelli with spicy gravy. 
 Mi wantan , thin egg noodles with  wonton  dumplings. 
 Murtabak , a stuffed pancake or pan-fried bread eaten with curry gravy, commonly found in Indonesia and Peninsular Malaysia. 
 Nasi ambeng , a fragrant rice dish that consists of steamed white rice, chicken curry or chicken stewed in soy sauce, beef or chicken  rendang ,  sambal goreng ,  urap ,  perkedel  and  serundeng . 
 Nasi Beringin , a fragrant rice dish that used to be served to  Johor royalties  in the late 1890s; the sultans would have this fragrant dish especially when guests were invited to dine in the palace. 
 Nasi briyani , Malay style of flavoured rice dish cooked or served with mutton, chicken, vegetable or fish curry.
 Beriani gam , a flavoured rice dish usually served with chicken or mutton, specialty of  Johor . 
 Nasi berlauk , plain rice served with a variety of dishes. 
 Nasi dagang , the east coastal counterpart of  nasi lemak  found mostly in the states of  Terengganu  and  Kelantan , as well as  Riau province  in Indonesia. 
 Nasi goreng , a fried rice dish with various types.
 Nasi goreng kampung , a typical variant, traditionally flavoured with pounded fried fish (normally mackerel), though recently fried  anchovies  are used in place of it. 
 Nasi goreng kari , fried rice cooked with curry. 
 Nasi goreng masak pedas , spicy fried rice served with chicken or beef. 
 Nasi goreng pattaya , chicken fried rice covered or wrapped in a thin fried egg or omelette. 
 Nasi goreng teri medan , anchovy fried rice. This dish is a  Malay Deli  speciality of North Sumatra. 
 Nasi kari , curry rice dish with Indonesian origin. 
 Nasi katok , rice dish consisting of plain rice, fried chicken and  sambal . 
 Nasi kerabu , a type of rice which is blue in colour (dyed by  Clitoria ternatea  flowers), originating from  Kelantan . 
 Nasi lemak , rice steamed with coconut milk. 
 Nasi Lemuni , It's like nasi lemak but cooked with herb that's called daun lemuni(English:  Vitex trifolia  leaves). 
 Nasi minyak , rice flavoured with whole dried spices and  ghee , usually served with  rendang . As the name implies, it is buttery and rich ( minyak  means oil). A variation of dyed in multiple shades is called  nasi hujan panas . 
 Nasi padang , steamed white rice served with an array – sometimes twelve or more– pre-cooked dishes, a miniature banquet usually laid out on small plates. 
 Nasi paprik , a rice dish with  lauk , typically chicken, originating from southern Thailand. 
 Nasi tumpang , rice packed in a cone-shaped banana leaf. It consists of an omelette,  meat floss , chicken or shrimp curry and sweet gravy. The dish originates from  Kelantan . 
 Nasi ulam , a steamed rice dish mixed with various herbs, especially the leaves of  Centella asiatica  or often replaced with  kemangi , vegetables, and spices and accompanied with various side dishes. 
 Otak-otak , a spicy fish cake grilled in a banana leaf wrapping. 
 Pekasam , the Malay term for fermented food. In Malay cookery,  pekasam  usually refers to freshwater fish fermented with salt, palm sugar, toasted rice grains and pieces of  asam gelugur . Making  pekasam  is a tradition in  South Kalimantan  as well as the northern states of  Peninsular Malaysia .  Chenderoh Lake  in the state of  Perak  is a hub for freshwater fishing as well as the production of  pekasam . [33] 
 Pasembur , a salad of shredded cucumber, boiled potatoes, fried bean curd, turnip, bean sprouts, prawn fritters, spicy fried crab, and fried octopus. 
 Pempek , a savoury  fishcake , made of fish and tapioca, from  Palembang ,  South Sumatra . 
 Perut ikan , a spicy stew comprising mainly vegetables and herbs which gets its distinctive taste mainly from fish bellies preserved in brine and  piper sarmentosum . 
 Pindang , fish or eggs cooked in salt and certain spices. 
 Pulut , glutinous rice, is a type of short-grained Asian rice that is especially sticky when cooked. It is widely eaten during the  Raya  festive seasons as traditional food. 
 Rendang , a spicy meat stew originating from the  Minangkabau  ethnic group of Indonesia, [34]  and adopted by Malay throughout the archipelago.  Rendang  is traditionally prepared by the Malay community during festive occasions. 
 Rojak , a traditional fruit and vegetable salad of various types which shows Javanese influences.
 Rojak bandung , a  rojak  dish consisting of boiled  water spinach , cucumber, and cuttlefish, dressed with a black shrimp paste sauce with added garlic and chilli paste. 
 Roti , a term encompassing all forms of bread in the  Malay  and  Indonesian languages . In Cape Malay cuisine,  roti  is a round flatbread usually made from wheat flour. 
 Roti canai , a thin unleavened bread with a flaky crust, fried on a skillet with oil and served with condiments or curry.
 Roti prata , Singaporean Malay fried flatbread cooked over a flat grilling pan. 
 Roti jala , a special bread with a five-hole perforation used to make the bread look like a fishing net. It is usually eaten as an accompaniment to a curried dish or served as a sweet with  serawa .  Serawa  is made from a mixture of boiled coconut milk, brown sugar and  pandan  leaves. 
 Roti john , a spiced meat omelette sandwich, popularly eaten for breakfast or as a snack. 
 Roti kaya bakar , a traditional breakfast dish.  Kaya  is a sweet coconut and egg jam which is spread over toasted bread. 
 Roti tissue , a variant of  roti canai  made as thin as a piece of tissue paper and 40–50 cm (16–20 in) in diameter. It is then carefully folded by the cook into a tall, conical shape and left to stand upright.  Roti tissue  may be served with curry gravy,  dal  and chutneys, or finished off with sweet ingredients such as caramelised sugar and eaten as a dessert. 
 Samosa  or  samoosa , Malay-style of samosa—a fried or baked pastry with a savoury filling, such as spiced potatoes, onions,  rousong , cheese, beef or other meats. 
 Sata , a traditional dish from Terengganu, consisting of spiced fish wrapped in banana leaves and cooked on a grill. 
 Satay , a dish originally from Java and Sumatra in Indonesia, and distributed widely across the Malay Archipelago. It is widely popular and common in Indonesian cuisine with rich variations and recipes. Malay chicken satay closely resembles  Madura  satay with a rich  peanut sauce . In Malaysia, the most popular variant is  kajang  satay. 
 Satay celup , a dish in which an assortment of raw and semi-cooked seafood, meats (including raw meat) and vegetables on skewers are dunked into a boiling pot of satay gravy. 
 Sayur lodeh , a stew of vegetables cooked in a lightly spiced coconut milk gravy. It has Javanese influences and is mostly popular in the southern region of Malaysia. 
 Siput gonggong , a seafood dish made of  Laevistrombus canarium , a specialty of the  Riau Islands  and  Bangka Belitung . 
 Sosatie , a traditional Cape Malay dish of meat (usually lamb or mutton) cooked on skewers. The term derives from  sate  ( skewered meat ) and  saus  (spicy sauce). 
 Soto , a noodle soup. The most popular variety is  soto ayam , chicken soup with rice vermicelli and  ketupat , with influences from Indonesian cuisine.
 Soto mi , a spicy noodle soup dish with  soto  gravy. 
 Sup ikan , a fish soup specialty of the Riau Islands usually made of red snapper and dried shrimp, seasoned with shallot, garlic, pepper, soy sauce, and fish sauce, with tomato, scallion and fried shallots. 
 Sup kambing , a hearty mutton soup slowly simmered with aromatic herbs and spices and garnished with fried shallots and fresh cilantro. 
 Sup rusa , a soup dish made of  venison , carrots, cabbage, celery and spices. 
 Sup tulang , a soup dish made of mutton or beef leg bones stewed in spices. The bones are broken to allow the marrow to be eaten. 
 Tahu goreng , fried bean curd served with condiments, such as  sambals  or sweet sauce. 
 Taugeh ayam , steamed chicken with bean sprouts and light soya sauce flavoured with oil. 
 Tekwan ,  surimi  fishcake akin to  pempek ,  bihun  rice noodles,  jicama  and mushroom soup. 
 Telur pindang , marbled eggs boiled with herbs and spices. 
 Tharid , a lamb stew of pieces of bread in a vegetable and lamb broth. [32] 
 Tomato bredie , mutton stew cooked for a long time; its seasonings include cinnamon, cardamom, ginger and cloves as well as chilli. 
 Tumis kangkung , stir-fried water spinach. 
 Ulam , a traditional salad of undressed herbs, greens and vegetables which may be cooked or uncooked. An  ulam  spread may include items such as  banana blossoms , cucumber,  winged beans ,  pegaga  leaves,  petai , and yardlong beans.  Ulam  is typically eaten with a pungent dipping sauce like  sambal belacan . 
 Condiments [ edit ] 
 Malay condiments Budu Tempoyak 
 Balado , a hot and spicy sauce, made by stir-frying ground red hot chilli pepper with other spices including garlic, shallot, tomato and  key lime  juice in coconut or palm oil. 
 Budu , a fermented anchovy sauce. 
 Kerisik , coconut-based condiment made with coconut which is grated, toasted, and ground to a paste. It is sometimes referred to as coconut butter. It is used in dishes such as  kerabu  salads and  rendang . 
 Sambal , a common chilli-based condiment to accompany many foods.
 Sambal belacan ,  sambal  made with chillies, shallots, garlic, stewed tomatoes, tamarind paste, coconut sugar, salt and  belacan  (shrimp paste). 
 Sambal gesek ,  sambal  made by pounding fried anchovies,  bird's eye chilli , onions, and garlic together and frying until fragrant. [28] 
 Sambal sotong ,  squid  cooked in a  sambal -based sauce made with chillies, shallots, garlic, stewed tomatoes, tamarind paste and  belacan . 
 Serikaya , a  jam  made from a base of coconut milk, eggs and sugar. 
 Serunding , spiced  meat floss  originating from  Javanese cuisine .  Serunding  may also refer to any dish where the primary meat or vegetable ingredient is shredded and pulled into thin strands. In Indonesia, this term strictly refers to a dry-toasted grated coconut mix. 
 Tempoyak , a popular Malay condiment made of  durian  extract which is preserved and kept in an urn. Commonly eaten with chillies and other dishes. 
 Snacks [ edit ] 
 Malay snacks Keropok Lekor Mee Siput Muar 
 Keropok Lekor , a traditional fried fish cracker ( keropok ) from  Terengganu . 
 Mee Siput Muar , a deep-fried circular dried noodle snack from  Muar ,  Johor  made from flour and eaten with  sambal . 
 Kue  and  kuih [ edit ] 
 Malay  kue  and  kuih Apam balik Bika ambon Epok-epok Koe'sister Makmur Kochi Pinjaram Pai ti 
 Main articles:  Kue  and  kuih 
 Kue  and  kuih  (plural:  kuih muih ) [35]  is a selection of confectionery eaten as a snack during the morning or during midday, and is an important feature of festive occasions. It is a tradition shared by both the  Malay  and the  Peranakan  communities.
 
 Agar-agar , the Malay word for a species of  red algae . A natural vegetarian  gelatin  counterpart, it is used to make puddings and flavoured jellies such as  almond tofu , as well as fruit  aspics . 
 Akok , a traditional sweet dessert in  Kelantan , Malaysia. Made mainly from eggs, coconut milk, flour and brown sugar,  akok  has a distinctive caramel taste. It is often served during afternoon snack together with coffee.  Akok  is prepared in a cooking utensil called  dapur tembaga  made of solid brass, which is surrounded with charcoal. 
 Apam balik ,  terang bulan  or  martabak manis  (in Indonesia), a bread-like puff with  sugar , corn, and coarsely-ground nuts in the middle. 
 Bahulu , a traditional round  sponge cake . 
 Batik , a type of chocolate cake similar to a  hedgehog slice , made using  Marie biscuits . 
 Bika ambon , a sponge cake made from ingredients such as tapioca flour, eggs, sugar, yeast and coconut milk. This cake is a specialty of North Sumatra. 
 Bingka ubi , a baked  kuih  of grated tapioca mixed with a little tapioca flour, coconut milk and white or brown sugar.  The  kuih  is yellow if white caster sugar is used and brown if raw sugar or palm sugar is used. After baking, a dark brown crust tops the cake. 
 Cara berlauk , a cake made of flour, egg, coconut milk and turmeric. The mixture is mixed thoroughly before being cooked in a special mould until it hardens. Before it hardens, a filling of either spiced beef or chicken is added. This  kuih  is very popular in the month of  Ramadhan . 
 Cincin , a deep fried dough pastry-based snack. 
 Clorot , a traditional cake with Javanese influences made from a mixture of  gula apong  and rice flour, then rolled with palm leaves into cones and steamed. 
 Dadar gulung  or  ketayap , a pancake mix filled with coconut filling. Traditionally, the juice of  pandan  leaves is added to the batter to get the green colour. Today green colouring is added and the flavour of the pandan leaves is obtained with artificial essence or by using pandan leaves to flavour the filling. 
 Dodol , a sweet, sticky, and thick toffee-like confection, made with heavily reduced coconut milk,  jaggery , and rice flour. 
 Epok epok  or  karipap , a small pie consisting of curry with chicken and potatoes in a deep-fried pastry shell. The curry is especially thick and rich to keep it from running. 
 Jemput-jemput , a traditional  fritter  made from flour and then fried. 
 Kalu dodol , a solid toffee- and jelly-like confection made by lengthy reduction of coconut milk, thickened with rice flour and sweetened with jaggery. This dish is a specialty of  Sri Lankan Malay   cuisine . 
 Kochi , a pyramid of glutinous rice flour filled with a sweet peanut paste. 
 Koe'sister , a traditional  Cape Malay  pastry often described as a spicy dumpling with a cake-like texture, finished off with a sprinkling of coconut. [36] 
 Kaswi , rice cakes made with palm sugar. The ingredients are mixed into a batter and poured into small cups (traditionally Chinese teacups). When served, the cup is removed and the rice cake is topped with grated coconut. 
 Keria ,  sweet potato  doughnuts. Each doughnut is rolled in caster sugar. They are usually eaten in Malaysia for breakfast or morning tea along with other cakes such as  apam  or the more savoury  pratha . 
 Ku , a small round or oval-shaped cake made of a soft, sticky glutinous rice flour skin wrapped around a sweet filling. 
 Lapis sagu  or  sembilan lapis , a steamed multicoloured and multilayered firm  kuih  made from tapioca flour, coconut milk, and flavoured with  pandan . The layers are separately steamed. 
 Lapis sarawak , a layered cake served in  Sarawak  on special occasions. It originates as a form of layer cake with various spices found in Indonesia called  lapis legit . 
 Makmur , a traditional cake made from butter,  ghee  and flour. Served during  Eid al-Fitr  and identified by its white colour and typical round shape. 
 Pai ti , a thin and crispy pastry tart shell filled with a spicy, sweet mixture of thinly-sliced vegetables and prawns. 
 Pinjaram , a saucer-shaped deep fried fritter with crisp edges and a dense, chewy texture towards the centre. 
 Pisang goreng , battered fried bananas. 
 Pulut inti , glutinous rice topped with caramelised grated coconut and wrapped in a cut banana leaf to resemble a square pyramid. 
 Pulut tartal , glutinous rice served with white coconut milk sauce. 
 Pulut tekan , a glutinous rice cake. It is served with  kaya  coconut jam (jam from pandan leaves). The glutinous rice cakes are coloured with  bunga telang . Half-cooked glutinous rice is divided into two portions. Both have coconut milk added but one half has  bunga telang  juice added. This gives the rice cake a bright blue-indigo colour. The half-cooked glutinous rice is then scooped in an alternating fashion into the tray to give it a blue and white marble effect. The rice is cooked longer and cut into tall rectangles after cooling. 
 Seri muka , a two-layered dessert with steamed glutinous rice forming the bottom half and a green  custard  layer made with  pandan  juice. Coconut milk is a key ingredient in this variety of  kuih . It is used as a substitute for water when cooking the glutinous rice and making the custard layer. 
 Talam  (lit. tray cake), a  kuih  consisting of two layers. The top white layer is made from rice flour and coconut milk, while the bottom green layer is made from green pea flour and extract of pandan leaf. 
 Wajik , a compressed confection made of glutinous rice cooked with coconut milk and  palm sugar . 
 Drinks [ edit ] 
   Teh tarik 
 Air janda pulang , a traditional drink from  Negeri Sembilan . It is suitable to drink with lunch and on hot days. [37] 
 Ais kacang , a dessert drink made of shaved ice and red beans. 
 Ais krim potong , a popsicle made from coconut milk or milk, flavoured with ingredients such as red beans, rose syrup, durian, pandan, creamed corn and  jackfruit . 
 Boeber , a Cape Malay sweet milk drink made with vermicelli, sago, sugar, and flavoured with cardamom, stick cinnamon and rose water. 
 Cendol , an iced dessert that contains droplets of green rice flour jelly, [38]  coconut milk and palm sugar syrup. [39] 
 Dadiah , a dairy-based dessert made from milk, sugar and salt which has been acidified with whey (obtained by fermenting milk overnight with  asam gelugur ) and steamed to form a custard-like texture. It shows influences from  Minangkabau cuisine . 
 Faluda , a cold drink made by mixing rose syrup, vermicelli, and  sweet basil  seeds with milk, often served with ice cream. [40] 
 Kopi tarik , a coffee drink made of dark roasted coffee with margarine and sugar, sweetened with condensed milk and frothed. 
 Laksamana mengamuk , a traditional drink from  Riau  made from mango mixed with coconut milk and sugar. 
 Milo dinosaur , a beverage made of a cup of iced  Milo  with undissolved Milo powder on top. 
 Sirap bandung , a drink made of evaporated or condensed milk flavoured with  rose syrup , giving it a pink colour. The drink is an adaptation of rose milk served in India. [41] 
 Teh krisan , a  Chrysanthemum  tea. 
 Teh tarik , a popular hot milk tea beverage most commonly found in Indonesia, Malaysia and Singapore. It is made from a strong brew of black tea blended with condensed milk. 
 See also [ edit ] 
 
 Food portal Drink portal Indonesia portal Malaysia portal Philippines portal Singapore portal Thailand portal 
 
 Kue 
 Acehnese cuisine 
 Betawi cuisine 
 Indonesian Arab cuisine 
 Indonesian Chinese cuisine 
 Indonesian Indian cuisine 
 Javanese cuisine 
 Malaysian cuisine 
 Malaysian Chinese cuisine 
 Malaysian Indian cuisine 
 Minangkabau cuisine 
 Palembangese cuisine 
 Peranakan cuisine 
 
 Notes [ edit ] 
 
 
 ^   James Alexander (2006).  Malaysia Brunei & Singapore . New Holland Publishers. p. 58.  ISBN   1-86011-309-5 . 
 
 ^   World and Its Peoples: Malaysia, Philippines, Singapore, and Brunei . New York: Marshall Cavendish Corporation. 2008. p. 1222. 
 
 ^   "Tracking down fine Malay food" . Star Publications (M) Bhd. 17 October 2010. Archived from  the original  on 28 June 2011 . Retrieved  18 March  2011 . 
 
 ^   Rosemary Brissenden (2007).  Southeast Asian Food: Classic and Modern Dishes from Indonesia, Malaysia, Singapore, Thailand, Laos, Cambodia and Vietnam . Periplus Editions. pp. 175–176.  ISBN   978-0-7946-0488-2 . 
 
 ^   "Nasi Lemak" . Malaysia.com. Archived from  the original  on 27 July 2010 . Retrieved  6 July  2010 . 
 
 ^   Omar, Asmah (2004).  The Encyclopedia of Malaysia, Languages and Literature . Singapore: Didier Millet.  ISBN   9789813018525 . 
 
 ^   Mohamed, A; Mohamad, S; Hussain, H (2010). "Food gifts in Malay Weddings: Custom and Interpretation".  Journal of Social Studies, Development and Environmental .  5  (1): 103–115. 
 
 ^   Kasim, Aishah (2008).  "Malay Language As a Foreign Language And The Singapore's"   (PDF) .  GEMA Online Journal of Language Studies .  8  (1): 47–56. [ permanent dead link ] 
 
 ^   Chan, Kim Lian (2011).  Authenticity Representation of Malay Kelantan Ethnic Cuisine   (doc) . The 2nd International Research Symposium in Service Management. Yogyakarta. p. 458 . Retrieved  9 February  2016 . 
 
 ^   Levy, J; Auld, G (2004). "Cooking classes outperform cooking demonstrations for college sophomores".  Journal of Nutrition Education and Behavior .  36  (4): 197–203.  doi : 10.1016/s1499-4046(06)60234-0 .  PMID   15544728 . 
 
 ^   S.H, Hassan (2011). "Consumption of functional food model for Malay Muslims in Malaysia".  Journal of Islamic Marketing .  2  (2): 104–124.  doi : 10.1108/17590831111139839 . 
 
 ^   S.A, Rahman (2010).  "Malay cultural and heritage tourism at Bukit Chandan, Kuala Kangsar, Perak, Malaysia" .  Unitar e-Journal .  6  (2). Archived from  the original  on 16 June 2016. 
 
 ^   Abdullah, Khairunnisa (2014).  Malay Cooking Method Terminologies: Understanding and Usage   (PDF) . 2nd ASEAN Entrepreneurship Conference 2014. Penang. pp. 7–12. [ permanent dead link ] 
 
 ^   "Brunei - Cuisines of Brunei" . 1Up Travel. 17 May 2007 . Retrieved  30 September  2010 . 
 
 ^   "What Is Tempoyak?" .  Year of the Durian . 14 November 2014. 
 
 ^   Minorities at Risk (MAR) Project assessment for Malays in Singapore   Archived  28 March 2016 at the  Wayback Machine 
 
 ^   Jackman, Rebecca (28 May 2014).  "Cape Malay Cooking Guru Faldela Williams Dies at 62" .  Cape Times . Cape Town, South Africa . Retrieved  13 November  2016  – via  HighBeam Research . [ dead link ] 
 
 ^   Lewis, Esther (27 May 2014).  "Faldela Williams lives on in cookbook" . Johannesburg, South Africa:  IOL . Archived from  the original  on 13 November 2016 . Retrieved  13 November  2016 . 
 
 ^   Raichlen, S. (2015).  Planet Barbecue!: 309 Recipes, 60 Countries  (in German). Workman Publishing Company. p. 251.  ISBN   978-0-7611-6447-0 . Retrieved  26 May  2017 . 
 
 ^   "Footprints in the Sand" .  SouthAfrica.info . South African Tourism. Archived from  the original  on 7 January 2007 . Retrieved  19 January  2007 . 
 
 ^   "Cape Malay Yellow Rice Recipe" .  Group Recipes . Retrieved  29 January  2019 . 
 
 ^   "Sri Lankan Malay Pickle (Malay Achcharu) - Food Corner" . 29 September 2011. 
 
 ^   "Malay Pickle (Sri Lankan Style)" .  www.dailyfoodrecipes.com . 
 
 ^   Kareem, Nasuha (21 September 2014).  "Lavish Treats: Malay Pickle (Achcharu)" . 
 
 ^   "Nasi Goreng (Indonesian Fried Rice) - Food Corner" . 30 April 2011. 
 
 ^   ShaliniIR.  "Nasi Goreng" .  YAMU . 
 
 ^   "Mee Goreng - Unilever Food Solutions" .  Unilever Food Solutions . 
 
 ^  a   b   "15 Negeri Sembilan Dishes You Should Try Before You Die- Apam Johol" .  Says . Archived from  the original  on 6 December 2017 . Retrieved  6 December  2017 . 
 
 ^   Borneo: Sabah, Brunei, Sarawak . Bradt Travel Guides. 2012. p. 106.  ISBN   9781841623900 . 
 
 ^   Jonathan Chia (7 June 2010).  "Sarawak "belacan beehoon": An all-time favourite" .  The Borneo Post . Retrieved  5 June  2015 . 
 
 ^   "Simple Malay Food Recipes" . Retrieved  2 August  2020 . 
 
 ^  a   b   "22 Delicious Malay And Indonesian Dishes The Whole Family Will Love" . Women's Weekly. 17 May 2020. 
 
 ^   "Pekasam" . Department of Fisheries Malaysia. Archived from  the original  on 26 March 2014 . Retrieved  26 March  2014 . 
 
 ^   Owen, Sri (1993).  The Rice Book .  Doubleday .  ISBN   0-7112-2260-6 . 
 
 ^   "Kuih muih" .  Kamus Besar Bahasa Indonesia  (in Indonesian).  /kuih muih/ bermacam-macam kue 
 
 ^   "Cape Malay Koesisters" .  Gateway Magazine . 
 
 ^   Kurniawati Kamarudin.  "Nikmat "Air Jando Pulang" Di Kuala Pilah" .  Bernama  (in Malay).  Ministry of Domestic Trade, Co-operatives and Consumerism (Malaysia) . Retrieved  10 December  2017 . 
 
 ^   Jane Freiman (19 May 1986).  "Underground Gourmet: Sampling Indonesia" .  New York . p. 119. 
 
 ^   Witton, Patrick (2002).  Indonesia, Lonely planet: World food . Lonely Planet. p. 141.  ISBN   9781740590099 . 
 
 ^   "Falooda Recipe" . Sailu's Food. 26 May 2015 . Retrieved  7 April  2019 . 
 
 ^   Naleeza Ebrahim, Yaw Yan Yee,  Singapore. Not just a good food guide  (Ed. rev. et augm.) 2007, p.253-4 
 
 
 External links [ edit ] 
 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons has media related to  Malay cuisine . 
 
 Malay Cuisine, Melayu Online 
 v t e   Bruneian cuisine Common dishes 
 Ambuyat 
 Ayam bakar 
 Ayam goreng 
 Belutak 
 Ikan bakar 
 Ikan goreng 
 Nasi goreng 
 Rendang 
 Snacks 
 Cucur  ( Cucur pisang ) 
 Martabak 
 Dessert 
 Batik cake 
 Ketupat 
 Lamban 
 Lemang 
 Punjung 
 
 Kuih 
 Apam balik 
 Bahulu 
 Bingka 
 Celurut 
 Cincin 
 Jala 
 Karipap 
 Kelupis 
 Kochi 
 Gelang 
 Goyang 
 Gulung 
 Kasturi 
 Laddu 
 Lidah 
 Modak 
 Makmur 
 Ondeh-ondeh 
 Pais 
 Penyaram 
 Sapit 
 Tapai 
 Wajid 
 
 Drinks 
 ABC 
 Bandung 
 Cendol 
 Cincau 
 
   Food portal 
   Category: Bruneian cuisine 
 List of Bruneian dishes 
 
 v t e   Indonesian cuisine  by  ethnicity Dishes Common Indonesian dishes 
 Abon 
 Acar 
 Ayam bakar 
 Ayam goreng 
 Ayam kecap 
 Ayam kodok 
 Bakmi 
 Bakpau 
 Bakso 
 Bakwan 
 Bihun goreng 
 Bubur ayam 
 Bubur kacang hijau 
 Bubur ketan hitam 
 Bubur sumsum 
 Gado-gado 
 Gorengan 
 Gulai 
 Ikan asin 
 Ikan bakar 
 Ikan goreng 
 Jagung rebus 
 Kacang rebus 
 Kari 
 Kari ayam 
 Kari domba 
 Kari kambing 
 Kari udang 
 Kuaci 
 Ketupat 
 Laksa 
 Lontong 
 Macaroni schotel 
 Martabak 
 Mi bakso 
 Mi goreng 
 Mi kuah 
 Nasi campur 
 Nasi goreng 
 Nasi kari 
 Nasi kuning 
 Nasi bakar 
 Otak-otak 
 Panekuk 
 Pastel tutup 
 Perkedel 
 Perkedel jagung 
 Pindang 
 Rendang 
 Rijsttafel 
 Roti bakar 
 Roti bolen 
 Roti meses 
 Rujak 
 Sambal 
 Sambal goreng udang 
 Satay 
 Sayur bayam 
 Sayur sop 
 Semur 
 Serundeng 
 Sop buntut 
 Soto 
 Soto ayam 
 Soto mi 
 Sup ayam 
 Sup ercis 
 Sup makaroni 
 Sup wortel 
 Tahu 
 Tahu goreng 
 Telur asin 
 Telur pindang 
 Tempeh 
 Tumis kangkung 
 Tumpeng 
 Acehnese 
 Meuseukat 
 Mi aceh 
 Mi caluk 
 Nasi gurih 
 Sate matang 
 Arab 
 Asida 
 Falafel 
 Hummus 
 Kofta 
 Manakish 
 Katayef 
 Nasi kabsah 
 Nasi mandi 
 Maamoul 
 Marak 
 Roti maryam 
 Roti pita 
 Saltah 
 Shawarma 
 Tabbouleh 
 Tharid 
 Balinese 
 Babi guling 
 Betutu 
 Be urutan 
 Iga babi 
 Laklak 
 Lawar 
 Matah 
 Nasi bali 
 Nasi jinggo 
 Pai susu 
 Rawon babi 
 Rujak kuah pindang 
 Sate babi 
 Sate lilit 
 Soto babi 
 Tipat cantok 
 Banjarese 
 Bingka 
 Laksa banjar 
 Pekasam 
 Soto banjar 
 Batak 
 Arsik 
 Babi panggang Karo 
 Dali ni horbo 
 Dengke mas na niura 
 Itak gurgur 
 Lampet 
 Manuk napinadar 
 Mi gomak 
 Na tinombur 
 Ombusombus 
 Pagit-pagit 
 Pohulpohul 
 Saksang 
 Sasagun 
 Sate kerang 
 Tipatipa 
 Tuktuk 
 Betawi 
 Asinan betawi 
 Bubur cha cha 
 Kerak telor 
 Ketoprak 
 Ketupat sayur 
 Laksa betawi 
 Lontong sayur 
 Mi kangkung 
 Nasi goreng kambing 
 Nasi kebuli 
 Nasi uduk 
 Nasi ulam 
 Pindang 
 Roti buaya 
 Roti gambang 
 Rujak juhi 
 Sate taichan 
 Sayur asem 
 Semur jengkol 
 Soto betawi 
 Soto kaki 
 Soto tangkar 
 Sup kambing 
 Buginese  and Makassar 
 Burasa 
 Coto makassar 
 Dangke 
 Jalangkote 
 Kaledo 
 Konro 
 Mi kering 
 Pallubasa 
 Sop saudara 
 Chinese 
 Babi hong 
 Babi kecap 
 Bak kut teh 
 Bakkwa 
 Banmian 
 Bihun goreng 
 Cakwe 
 Cap cai 
 Chai tow kway 
 Char kway teow 
 Cha sio 
 Fu yung hai 
 Fish ball 
 Haisom cah 
 Ifumi 
 Kembang tahu 
 Kepiting saus tiram 
 Kuaci 
 Kwetiau ayam 
 Kwetiau goreng 
 Kwetiau siram sapi 
 Lapchiong 
 Locupan 
 Lontong cap go meh 
 Lumpia 
 Mi ayam 
 Mi lor 
 Mi pangsit 
 Mi tarik 
 Mun tahu 
 Nasi ayam hainan 
 Nasi bebek 
 Nasi campur 
 Nasi tim 
 Ngo hiang 
 Pangsit 
 Popiah 
 Rujak shanghai 
 Sapo tahu 
 Sate babi 
 Sekba 
 Siomay 
 Soto 
 Sup hisit 
 Sup sarang burung 
 Swikee 
 Tahu sumedang 
 Tauge ayam 
 Tee long pan 
 Telur pitan 
 Telur teh 
 Tong sui 
 Yong tau fu 
 Yusheng 
 Cirebonese 
 Empal gentong 
 Docang 
 Kue gapit 
 Mi koclok 
 Nasi jamblang 
 Nasi lengko 
 Tahu gejrot 
 Indian 
 Ayam mentega 
 Ayam tandori 
 Chapati 
 Chutney 
 Dosa 
 Idli 
 Laddu 
 Kari kambing 
 Kari kepala ikan 
 Korma 
 Modak 
 Naan 
 Nasi biryani 
 Raita 
 Roti canai 
 Sambar 
 Samosa 
 Indo 
 Ayam kodok 
 Babi panggang 
 Bitterballen 
 Erwtensoep 
 Hutspot 
 Makaroni schotel 
 Oliebol 
 Ontbijtkoek 
 Pannenkoek 
 Poffertjes 
 Shepherd's pie 
 Spekkoek 
 Javanese 
 Apem 
 Arem-arem 
 Ayam bumbu rujak 
 Ayam geprek 
 Ayam goreng kalasan 
 Ayam penyet 
 Bakso 
 Bakpia 
 Bakpia pathok 
 Botok 
 Brongkos 
 Buntil 
 Gudeg 
 Iga penyet 
 Kamir 
 Kelan antep 
 Krechek 
 Kuluban 
 Lepet 
 Lontong balap 
 Lontong dekem 
 Lontong kupang 
 Lumpia 
 Lumpia goreng 
 Lumpia semarang 
 Sumpia 
 Mendoan 
 Mi bakso 
 Mi goreng 
 Mi jawa 
 Mi rebus 
 Nasi ambeng 
 Nasi bebek 
 Nasi bogana 
 Nasi empal 
 Nasi gandul 
 Nasi goreng 
 Nasi goreng jawa 
 Nasi kare 
 Nasi kucing 
 Nasi liwet 
 Nasi megono 
 Nasi pecel 
 Nasi tempong 
 Opor 
 Opor ayam 
 Pecel 
 Pecel ayam 
 Pecel lele 
 Rambak petis 
 Rawon 
 Roti ganjel rel 
 Roti konde 
 Rujak cingur 
 Rujak soto 
 Sambal ulek 
 Sate ambal 
 Sate blora 
 Sate kambing 
 Sate hati 
 Sate kelinci 
 Sate kikil 
 Sate klatak 
 Sate madura 
 Sate ponorogo 
 Sate tegal 
 Sate udang 
 Sayur lodeh 
 Selat solo 
 Serundeng 
 Soto babat 
 Soto ceker 
 Tahu campur 
 Telur pindang 
 Tempe bacem 
 Tempe goreng 
 Tempe mendoan 
 Tongseng 
 Trancam 
 Tumpeng 
 Urap 
 Madurese 
 Rujak 
 Rujak cingur 
 Sate madura 
 Serundeng 
 Soto madura 
 Malay 
 Amplang 
 Ayam goreng 
 Ayam pansuh 
 Bubur cha cha 
 Bubur pedas 
 Cincalok 
 Epok-epok 
 Gulai 
 Ikan bakar 
 Ikan patin 
 Kangkung belacan 
 Kari 
 Kemplang 
 Laksa 
 Mi kari 
 Mi rebus 
 Nasi berlauk 
 Nasi briyani 
 Nasi dagang 
 Nasi goreng 
 Nasi goreng pattaya 
 Nasi lemak 
 Nasi minyak 
 Otak-otak 
 Pekasam 
 Pulut 
 Roti canai 
 Roti jala 
 Roti john 
 Roti tisu 
 Sayur lodeh 
 Siput gonggong 
 Soto 
 Sup kambing 
 Tahu goreng 
 Tempoyak 
 Ulam 
 Minahasan 
 Ayam rica-rica 
 Brenebon 
 Cakalang fufu 
 Dabu-dabu 
 Klappertaart 
 Mi cakalang 
 Nasi kuning 
 Panada 
 Paniki 
 Rica-rica 
 Rintek wuuk 
 Tinorangsak 
 Tinutuan 
 Woku 
 Minangkabau 
 Asam pedas 
 Ayam pop 
 Balado 
 Daun ubi tumbuk 
 Dendeng 
 Gulai 
 Gulai ayam 
 Gulai kambing 
 Gulai otak 
 Kalio 
 Kepiting saus padang 
 Keripik sanjai 
 Lemang 
 Lontong gulai pakis 
 Nasi kapau 
 Nasi kari 
 Nasi padang 
 Palai bada 
 Rendang 
 Sambal lada muda 
 Sate padang 
 Soto padang 
 Udang balado 
 Moluccan and  Papuan 
 Asida 
 Babi bakar 
 Bibingka 
 Colo-colo 
 Papeda 
 Puding sagu 
 Sagu 
 Soto ambon 
 Palembang 
 Burgo 
 Gulai 
 Kemplang 
 Laksan 
 Lakso 
 Mi celor 
 Nasi minyak 
 Otak-otak 
 Pempek 
 Pindang 
 Tekwan 
 Tempoyak ikan patin 
 Peranakan 
 Bubur cha cha 
 Cincalok 
 Laksa 
 Pai ti 
 Swikee 
 Sasak 
 Ayam taliwang 
 Plecing kangkung 
 Sate ampet 
 Sate belut 
 Sate pusut 
 Sundanese 
 Asinan bogor 
 Batagor 
 Empal gepuk 
 Karedok 
 Kupat tahu 
 Laksa bogor 
 Laksa tangerang 
 Lalab 
 Mi kocok 
 Nasi timbel 
 Nasi tutug oncom 
 Oncom 
 Pepes 
 Rujak tumbuk 
 Sate bandeng 
 Sate maranggi 
 Sayur asem 
 Seblak 
 Soto bandung 
 Tauge goreng 
 Uli bakar 
 Timorese 
 Feijoada 
 Ikan bakar 
 Katemak 
 Pastel de nata 
 Se'i 
 Snacks Krupuk 
 Amplang 
 Emping 
 Kemplang 
 Krupuk 
 Krupuk ikan 
 Krupuk kulit 
 Krupuk udang 
 Kripik 
 Kripik sanjai 
 Rempeyek 
 Rengginang 
 Kue 
 Agar-agar 
 Apam 
 Ape 
 Arem-arem 
 Asida 
 Bagea 
 Bahulu 
 Bakcang 
 Bakpau 
 Bakpia 
 Bakpia pathok 
 Bangkit 
 Bibingka 
 Bika ambon 
 Bingka 
 Bitterballen 
 Bolen 
 Bolu gulung 
 Bolu kukus 
 Bolu pandan 
 Bugis 
 Bulan 
 Busa 
 Cakwe 
 Cilok 
 Clorot 
 Cubit 
 Cucur 
 Dadar gulung 
 Dodol 
 Donat jawa 
 Donat kentang 
 Gapit 
 Geplak 
 Gethuk 
 Jalangkote 
 Jemput-jemput 
 Kaak 
 Kaasstengels 
 Kamir 
 Karipap 
 Kembang goyang 
 Keranjang 
 Klappertaart 
 Klepon 
 Kochi 
 Kroket 
 Ku 
 Kukis jagung 
 Laddu 
 Laklak 
 Lapis 
 Lapis legit 
 Leker 
 Lemper 
 Lidah kucing 
 Lumpia 
 Lumpia goreng 
 Lumpia semarang 
 Sumpia 
 Lupis 
 Madumongso 
 Makmur 
 Martabak 
 Mangkok 
 Mochi 
 Modak 
 Nagasari 
 Nastar 
 Ombusombus 
 Onde-onde 
 Pai susu 
 Pai ti 
 Panada 
 Pancong 
 Pastel 
 Pastel de nata 
 Pinyaram 
 Pisang cokelat 
 Pisang goreng 
 Poffertjes 
 Popiah 
 Pukis 
 Putri salju 
 Putu 
 Putu mangkok 
 Putu mayang 
 Rangi 
 Rempah udang 
 Risoles 
 Samosa 
 Satu 
 Semar mendem 
 Semprit 
 Semprong 
 Serabi 
 Seri muka 
 Sus 
 Spekulaas 
 Stroopwafel 
 Talam 
 Tapai 
 Timphan 
 Terang bulan 
 Untir-untir 
 Wajik 
 Wingko 
 Beverages Alcoholic 
 Arak 
 Beer 
 Brem 
 Cap tikus 
 Ciu 
 Lapen 
 Saguer 
 Sopi 
 Tuak 
 Non-alcoholic 
 Adon-adon coro 
 Angsle 
 Bajigur 
 Bandrek 
 Bir jawa 
 Bir kocok 
 Bir pletok 
 Cendol 
 Chocolate milk 
 Cincau 
 Dadiah 
 Es asam jawa 
 Es buah 
 Es campur 
 Es doger 
 Es durian 
 Es goyobod 
 Es kelapa muda 
 Es kopyor 
 Es selendang mayang 
 Es tebak 
 Es tebu 
 Es teler 
 Hot chocolate 
 Jahe telur 
 Jamu 
 Java coffee 
 Kembang tahu 
 Kopi luwak 
 Kopi susu 
 Kopi tarik 
 Kopi tiam 
 Kopi tubruk 
 Lahang 
 Laksamana mengamuk 
 Legen 
 Milo 
 Moke 
 Ronde 
 Sarsi 
 Badak 
 Indo saparelle 
 Sekoteng 
 Soda gembira 
 Susu kedelai 
 Sweet tea 
 Teh botol 
 Teh krisan 
 Teh liang 
 Teh poci 
 Teh jahe 
 Teh tarik 
 Teh talua 
 Wedang jahe 
 Wedang uwuh 
 Bumbu Spices 
 Adas manis 
 Andaliman 
 Asam jawa 
 Bawang bombai 
 Bawang merah 
 Bawang perei 
 Bawang putih 
 Bunga lawang 
 Bunga pala 
 Cabai rawit 
 Cabai merah 
 Cengkih 
 Daun bawang 
 Daun jeruk 
 Daun kari 
 Daun kemangi 
 Daun pandan 
 Daun salam 
 Jahe 
 Jeruk purut 
 Jeruk nipis 
 Jintan 
 Kapulaga 
 Kayu manis 
 Kecombrang 
 Kencur 
 Kemiri 
 Ketumbar 
 Keluak 
 Kunyit 
 Lengkuas 
 Lada hitam 
 Lada putih 
 Lokio 
 Pala 
 Peterseli 
 Seledri 
 Serai 
 Temu kunci 
 Temu lawak 
 Seasonings and condiments 
 Abon 
 Acar 
 Balado 
 Bawang goreng 
 Budu 
 Coconut jam 
 Cuka 
 Dabu-dabu 
 Hagelslag 
 Kecap asin 
 Kecap ikan 
 Kecap inggris 
 Kecap manis 
 Kerisik 
 Lalab 
 Mayones 
 Minyak samin 
 Minyak wijen 
 Minyak zaitun 
 Moster 
 Muisjes 
 Nata de coco 
 Peanut sauce 
 Petis 
 Petis ikan 
 Rica-rica 
 Sambal 
 Sambal goreng teri 
 Serundeng 
 Saus tiram 
 Saus tomat 
 Tapai 
 Tauco 
 Tempoyak 
 Terasi 
 Tongcai 
 Tuktuk 
 Vlokken 
 Influences  and overseas dishes 
 Achat 
 Asam pedas 
 Ayam penyet 
 Babi pangang 
 Bami 
 Bamischijf 
 Begedil 
 Biryani 
 Bobotie 
 Bobotok 
 Boeber 
 Dendeng 
 Kaassoufflé 
 Kalu dodol 
 Koe'sister 
 Lumpia 
 Martabak 
 Mie goreng 
 Mie rebus 
 Nasi ambeng 
 Nasi goreng 
 Nasi kuning 
 Nasischijf 
 Pechal 
 Pisang goreng 
 Rawon 
 Rendang 
 Rojak 
 Roti canai 
 Satay 
 Sayur lodeh 
 Serundeng 
 Sosatie 
 Soto 
 Telur pindang 
 Tempeh 
 Tomato bredie 
 List articles 
 Indonesian beverages 
 Indonesian condiments 
 Indonesian desserts 
 Indonesian dishes 
 Indonesian noodles 
 Indonesian snacks 
 Indonesian soups 
 Related topics 
 List of Indonesian dishes 
 Alcohol in Indonesia 
 Jamu 
 Bumbu (seasoning) 
 Street food of Indonesia 
 Jajan pasar 
 Sri Owen 
 
   Food portal 
   Category: Indonesian cuisine 
 
 v t e   Malaysian cuisine  by  ethnicity Common dishes Malay 
 Asam pedas 
 Ayam bakar 
 Ayam goreng 
 Ayam masak kicap 
 Ayam masak merah 
 Ayam penyet 
 Bubur 
 Bubur asyura 
 Bubur ayam 
 Bubur kacang hijau 
 Bubur lambuk 
 Bubur pedas 
 Bubur pulut hitam 
 Dendeng 
 Gulai 
 Ikan bakar 
 Ikan goreng 
 Kangkung belacan 
 Ketupat 
 Kway teow goreng 
 Laksa 
 Lemang 
 Lontong 
 Mee bakso 
 Mee bandung Muar 
 Mee goreng 
 Mee jawa 
 Mee kari 
 Mee rebus 
 Mee siam 
 Nasi ambeng 
 Nasi campur 
 Nasi dagang 
 Nasi goreng 
 American fried rice 
 Nasi goreng pattaya 
 Nasi kerabu 
 Nasi kuning 
 Nasi lemak 
 Nasi minyak 
 Nasi paprik 
 Nasi tumpang 
 Nasi ulam 
 Otak-otak 
 Pais 
 Pecal 
 Pekasam 
 Pindang 
 Pulot tartal 
 Ramly burger 
 Roti canai 
 Roti Jala 
 Rendang 
 Rojak 
 Rojak bandung 
 Sayur lodeh 
 Sata 
 Satay 
 Satay celup 
 Serundeng 
 Soto 
 Soto ayam 
 Mee soto 
 Sup 
 Soup kambing 
 Sup tulang 
 Tauhu goreng 
 Telur pindang 
 Ulam 
 Chinese 
 Bakkwa 
 Bak kut teh 
 Banmian 
 Bean sprouts chicken 
 Beef kway teow 
 Chai tow kway 
 Char kway teow 
 Char siu 
 Chee cheong fun 
 Chwee kueh 
 Claypot chicken rice 
 Curry Mee 
 Duck rice 
 Duck soup noodles 
 Economy rice/Mixed rice 
 Fish ball 
 Fish head bee hoon 
 Hae mee 
 Heong Peng 
 Hokkien mee 
 Kolo mee 
 Kway chap 
 Kway Teow Th'ng 
 Loh bak 
 Lor mee 
 Mee pok 
 Oyster omelette 
 Pan mee 
 Pao 
 Popiah 
 Sar Hor Fun 
 Lou Shee Fun 
 Teochew Porridge 
 Tong sui 
 Wonton mee 
 Tambun biscuit 
 Yee Foo Mee 
 Yong tau foo 
 You char kway 
 Yusheng 
 Zongzi 
 Indian 
 Banana leaf rice 
 Butter chicken 
 Dalcha 
 Puliyodarai 
 Curd rice 
 Chapati 
 Fish molee 
 Dosai 
 Idli 
 Laddu 
 Mee goreng 
 Maggi goreng 
 Mee goreng mamak 
 Mee rebus 
 Mamak Rojak  ( Rojak Klang ) 
 Modak 
 Murtabak 
 Mutton curry 
 Nasi biryani 
 Nasi kandar 
 Korma 
 Pasembur 
 Puri 
 Putu mayam 
 Roti canai 
 Roti tissue 
 Naan 
 Sup kambing 
 Appam 
 Payasam 
 Upma 
 Paniyaram 
 Pongal 
 Vadai 
 Adhirasam 
 Murukku 
 Bajji 
 Rasam 
 Sambar 
 Papadum 
 Tandoori chicken 
 East Malaysian  ( Sabah  and  Sarawak ) 
 Ambuyat 
 Bosou 
 Hinava 
 Linatan 
 Linongot 
 Manok pansoh 
 Midin 
 Nasi kombos 
 Nasi laru 
 Nasik aruk 
 Sinalau bakas 
 Tonokon 
 Tuhau 
 Umai 
 Peranakan 
 Acar 
 Asam laksa/Laksa lemak 
 Buah keluak 
 Bubur cha cha 
 Cap cai 
 Kerabu Bihun 
 Perut Ikan 
 Pie tee 
 Pongteh 
 Nyonya Bak Chang 
 Eurasian 
 Shepherd's pie 
 Oxtail   stew 
 Chicken chop 
 Devil's curry 
 Semur 
 Snacks Cake  and  pastries 
 Bahulu 
 Batik cake 
 Heong peng 
 Roti bakar 
 Sarawak layer cake 
 Keropok ,  Crackers 
 Amplang 
 Lekor 
 Rempeyek 
 Mee Siput Muar 
 Kuih 
 Apam balik 
 Bingka 
 Borasa 
 Cakoi 
 Cincin 
 Cucur 
 Jemput-jemput 
 Penyaram 
 Pisang goreng 
 Dodol 
 Jala 
 Jelurut 
 Karipap 
 Kelupis 
 Kochi 
 Gelang 
 Goyang 
 Gulung 
 Laddu 
 Lapis 
 Lidah 
 Makmur 
 Modak 
 Mooncake 
 Ondeh-ondeh 
 Otokon 
 Pais 
 Red peach cake 
 Red tortoise cake 
 Pie tee 
 Pulut inti 
 Pulut panggang 
 Puto 
 Putu bambu/Putu bumbong 
 Putu mangkuk/piring 
 Qasidah 
 Sapit/Gulong/Kapit 
 Seri Muka 
 Soon kueh 
 Tat/Tae 
 Desserts 
 Lamban 
 Punjung 
 Roti tisu 
 Sagu Gula Melaka 
 Tapai 
 Wajid 
 Drinks Non-alcoholic 
 ABC 
 Bandung 
 Cendol 
 Cheng tng 
 Cincau 
 Chrysanthemum tea 
 Ginger tea 
 Ipoh white coffee 
 Kopi 
 Janda pulang 
 Milo 
 Sarsi 
 Soy milk 
 Teh tarik 
 Alcoholic 
 Jaz 
 Lihing 
 Montoku 
 Sikat 
 Tapai 
 Tuak 
 Condiments 
 Acar 
 Kaya 
 Sambal 
 Belacan 
 Budu 
 Cincalok 
 Tempoyak 
 Taucu 
 Tuhau 
 
   Malaysia portal 
   Food portal 
   Category: Malaysian cuisine 
 List of Malaysian dishes 
 
 v t e   Singaporean cuisine Articles 
 Singaporean cuisine 
 List of Singaporean dishes 
 Dishes Noodle dishes 
 Banmian 
 Beef kway teow 
 Beef noodle soup 
 Bee hoon goreng 
 Char kway teow 
 Crab bee hoon 
 Fish soup bee hoon 
 Hokkien mee 
 Katong laksa 
 Kway chap 
 Kway teow goreng 
 Mee bakso 
 Mee goreng 
 Mee rebus 
 Mee pok 
 Bak chor mee 
 Mee siam 
 Mee soto 
 Satay bee hoon 
 Vegetarian bee hoon 
 Other dishes 
 Assam pedas 
 Ayam goreng 
 Ayam penyet 
 Bak kut teh 
 Bakso 
 Biryani 
 Black pepper crab 
 Chai tow kway 
 Char siu 
 Chilli crab 
 Dendeng paru 
 Duck rice 
 Fish head curry 
 Fish ball 
 Gudeg putih 
 Gulai daun ubi 
 Hainanese chicken rice 
 Hainanese curry rice 
 Har Cheong Gai 
 Ketupat 
 Naan 
 Nasi goreng 
 Nasi lemak 
 Nasi padang 
 Oyster omelette 
 Pecel lele 
 Pig fallopian tubes 
 Pig's organ soup 
 Rawon 
 Rojak bandung 
 Roti john 
 Roti prata 
 Satay 
 Sayur lodeh 
 Sliced fish soup 
 Soto 
 Soto ayam 
 Soup kambing 
 Teochew porridge 
 Turtle soup 
 Snacks and desserts 
 Ais kacang 
 Apam balik 
 Bubur cha cha 
 Cendol 
 Cheng tng 
 Curry puff 
 Ham chim peng 
 Kaya toast 
 Keropok 
 Kueh 
 Laddu 
 Modak 
 Red peach cake 
 Soon kueh 
 Otak-otak 
 Pisang goreng 
 Putugal 
 Sugee cake 
 Drinks 
 Bandung 
 Kopi 
 Milo 
 Milo dinosaur 
 Singapore Sling 
 Teh tarik 
 
 v t e Cuisines Continental 
 African 
 North 
 West 
 list 
 Americas 
 Caribbean 
 North 
 South 
 list 
 Asian 
 Caucasian 
 Central 
 Indian subcontinent 
 Levantine 
 list 
 European 
 Balkan 
 Central 
 Eastern 
 list 
 Oceanic 
 Intercontinental
 Global 
 Latin American 
 Mediterranean 
 Middle Eastern 
 National  and regional 
 Afghan 
 Albanian 
 Algerian 
 American 
 Californian 
 Floribbean 
 Hawaiian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Lowcountry (South Carolina) 
 New England 
 New Mexico 
 Pacific Northwest 
 Pennsylvania Dutch 
 Puerto Rican 
 Southern US 
 Southwest US 
 Texas 
 Angolan 
 Argentine 
 Armenian 
 Australian 
 Austrian 
 Azerbaijani 
 Bahraini 
 Bangladeshi 
 Barbadian 
 Belarusian 
 Belgian 
 Belizean 
 Beninese 
 Bhutanese 
 Bolivian 
 Bosnian-Herzegovinian 
 Botswana 
 Brazilian 
 British 
 Channel Islands 
 English 
 Gibraltarian 
 Northern Irish 
 Saint Helena 
 Scottish 
 Welsh 
 Bruneian 
 Bulgarian 
 Burkinabé 
 Burmese 
 Burundian 
 Cambodian 
 Cameroonian 
 Canadian 
 Acadian 
 Québécois 
 Central African Republic 
 Chadian 
 Chilean 
 Chinese 
 Cantonese 
 Hong Kong 
 Macanese 
 Tibetan 
 Xinjiang 
 Colombian 
 Congolese 
 Corsican 
 Croatian 
 Cuban 
 Cypriot 
 Czech 
 Danish 
 Faroese 
 Greenlandic 
 Djiboutian 
 Dominican 
 Dominican Republic 
 Dutch 
 East Timorese 
 Ecuadorian 
 Egyptian 
 Emirati 
 Equatorial Guinean 
 Eritrean 
 Estonian 
 Ethiopian 
 Fijian 
 Filipino 
 Finnish 
 French 
 Occitan 
 French Guianan 
 Gabonese 
 Gambian 
 Georgian 
 German 
 Ghanaian 
 Greek 
 Cretan 
 Epirotic 
 Greek Macedonian 
 Heptanesean 
 Guatemalan 
 Guinea-Bissauan 
 Guinean 
 Haitian 
 Honduran 
 Hungarian 
 Icelandic 
 Indian 
 Arunachalese 
 Assamese 
 Bengali 
 Bihari 
 Goan 
 Gujarati 
 Himachal Pradesh 
 Kashmiri 
 Jharkhandi 
 Karnataka 
 Kerala 
 Maharashtrian 
 Manipuri 
 Meghalayan 
 Mizo 
 Naga 
 Odia 
 Punjabi 
 Rajasthani 
 Sikkimese 
 Sindhi 
 Tamil 
 Telangana 
 Telugu 
 Indonesian 
 Acehnese 
 Balinese 
 Banjar 
 Batak 
 Betawi 
 Indo 
 Javanese 
 Madurese 
 Makassar 
 Minahasan 
 Minangkabau 
 Palembangese 
 Sundanese 
 Iranian 
 Iraqi 
 Irish 
 Israeli 
 Italian 
 Abruzzese 
 Ligurian 
 Lombard 
 Lucanian 
 Neapolitan 
 Roman 
 Sardinian 
 Sicilian 
 Venetian 
 Ivorian 
 Jamaican 
 Japanese 
 Okinawan 
 Jordanian 
 Kazakh 
 Kenyan 
 Korean 
 North Korean 
 South Korean 
 Kosovan 
 Kuwaiti 
 Kyrgyz 
 Lao 
 Latvian 
 Lebanese 
 Lesotho 
 Liberian 
 Libyan 
 Liechtensteiner 
 Lithuanian 
 Luxembourg 
 Macedonian 
 Malagasy 
 Malawian 
 Malaysian 
 Sabahan 
 Sarawakian 
 Maldivian 
 Malian 
 Maltese 
 Mauritanian 
 Mauritian 
 Mexican 
 Moldovan 
 Monégasque 
 Mongolian 
 Montenegrin 
 Moroccan 
 Mozambican 
 Namibian 
 Nauruan 
 Nepalese 
 New Zealand 
 Nicaraguan 
 Niger 
 Nigerian 
 Niuean 
 Norwegian 
 Omani 
 Pakistani 
 Palestinian 
 Panamanian 
 Peruvian 
 Polish 
 Portuguese 
 Qatari 
 Romanian  (incl.  Transylvanian Saxon ) 
 Russian 
 Bashkir 
 Chechen 
 Circassian 
 Komi 
 Mordovian 
 Sakha 
 Tatar 
 Udmurt 
 Yamal 
 Rwandan 
 Saint Lucian 
 Salvadoran 
 Sammarinese 
 São Tomé and Príncipe 
 Saudi Arabian 
 Senegalese 
 Serbian 
 Seychellois 
 Sierra Leonean 
 Singaporean 
 Slovak 
 Slovenian 
 Somali 
 South African 
 Spanish 
 Andalusian 
 Asturian 
 Balearic 
 Basque 
 Canarian 
 Cantabrian 
 Catalan 
 Extremaduran 
 Galician 
 Manchegan 
 Valencian 
 Sri Lankan 
 Sudanese 
 Swazi 
 Swedish 
 Swiss 
 Syrian 
 Taiwanese 
 Tajik 
 Tanzanian 
 Zanzibari 
 Thai 
 Togolese 
 Tunisian 
 Turkish 
 Turkmen 
 Trinidadian and Tobagonian 
 Ugandan 
 Ukrainian 
 Uruguayan 
 Uzbek 
 Venezuelan 
 Vietnamese 
 Western Saharan 
 Yemeni 
 Zambian 
 Zimbabwean 
 Ethnic 
 Ainu 
 Arab 
 Indonesian 
 Aromanian 
 Assyrian 
 Balochi 
 Berber 
 Cajun 
 Chinese 
 American 
 Canadian 
 Chifa 
 Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Crimean Tatar 
 Greek American 
 Hazaragi 
 Indian 
 Anglo-Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Indigenous American 
 Inuit 
 Italian American 
 Kurdish 
 Livonian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Malay 
 Ossetian 
 Parsi 
 Pashtun 
 Peranakan 
 Romani 
 Sámi 
 Soul food 
 Sylheti 
 Transylvanian Saxon 
 Yup'ik 
 Religious 
 Buddhist 
 Christian 
 Goan Catholic 
 Mangalorean Catholic 
 Mennonite 
 Hindu 
 Islamic 
 Chinese 
 Ital 
 Jain 
 Jewish 
 American 
 Ashkenazi 
 Bukharan 
 Ethiopian 
 Mizrahi 
 Sephardic 
 Syrian 
 Ritual slaughter 
 Sikh 
 Historical 
 Ancient Egyptian 
 Ancient Greek 
 Ancient Israelite 
 Ancient Roman 
 Antebellum America 
 Aztec 
 Byzantine 
 Early modern European 
 Historical Chinese 
 Historical Indian subcontinent 
 Historical North Indian and Pakistani 
 History of agriculture 
 History of alcoholic drinks 
 History of bread 
 History of seafood 
 History of vegetarianism 
 Historical Argentine 
 Historical Japanese 
 Inca 
 Mayan 
 Muisca 
 Mughal 
 Medieval 
 Ottoman 
 Peasant 
 Soviet 
 Thirteen Colonies 
 Styles 
 Classique 
 Fast food 
 Fusion 
 New American 
 Eurasian 
 Haute 
 Molecular gastronomy 
 Note by Note 
 Nouvelle 
 Lists 
 List of cuisines 
 List of historical cuisines 
 Lists of prepared foods 
 Related 
 Cookbook 
 Cooking 
 Culinary arts 
 Drink 
 Food 
 history 
 Diet 
 Meal preparation 
 
   Food portal 
   Drink portal 
   Category 
   Commons 
   Cookbook 
   WikiProject 
   Outline 
 
 Authority control : National libraries  
 Israel 
 United States 
 
  
NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw2407
Cached time: 20230311165849
Cache expiry: 1814400
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc, no‐toc‐conversion]
CPU time usage: 1.339 seconds
Real time usage: 1.635 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 6685/1000000
Post‐expand include size: 431276/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 4227/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 16/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 175033/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.645/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 23161396/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/400
 
 
Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  991.024      1 -total
 26.84%  266.039      1 Template:Reflist
 26.05%  258.164    119 Template:Lang
 21.10%  209.155      2 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 20.39%  202.061      1 Template:Cuisine_of_Indonesia
 13.10%  129.846     15 Template:Navbox
  8.37%   82.942      8 Template:Cite_book
  6.10%   60.490     20 Template:Cite_web
  5.27%   52.220      1 Template:Bruneian_cuisine
  4.70%   46.613      1 Template:Short_description
 
  Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:idhash:451025-0!canonical and timestamp 20230311165848 and revision id 1121415879. Rendering was triggered because: page-view
  
 esi <esi:include src="/esitest-fa8a495983347898/content" />  
 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Malay_cuisine&oldid=1121415879 " 
 Categories :  Malay cuisine Malay culture Bruneian cuisine Indonesian cuisine Malaysian cuisine Philippine cuisine Singaporean cuisine South African cuisine Sri Lankan cuisine Thai cuisine Indonesian cuisine-related lists Hidden categories:  All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from August 2018 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with dead external links from December 2017 Webarchive template wayback links Articles with dead external links from February 2019 CS1 German-language sources (de) CS1 Indonesian-language sources (id) CS1 Malay-language sources (ms) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata EngvarB from November 2014 Use dmy dates from November 2014 Articles containing Indonesian-language text Articles containing Malay (macrolanguage)-language text Articles containing Afrikaans-language text Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with J9U identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  This page was last edited on 12 November 2022, at 05:03  (UTC) . 
 Text is available under the  Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0 ;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the  Terms of Use  and  Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the  Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. 
 
 
 Privacy policy 
 About Wikipedia 
 Disclaimers 
 Contact Wikipedia 
 Mobile view 
 Developers 
 Statistics 
 Cookie statement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
