
 
 
 Jump to content 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle sidebar 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Create account Log in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Personal tools 
 
 
 
 
   Create account   Log in 
 
 
 
 
		Pages for logged out editors  learn more 
 
 
 Contributions Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Navigation 
 
 
 Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate 
 
 
 
 
 Contribute 
 
 
 Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file 
 
 
 
 
 Tools 
 
 
 What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item 
 
 
 
 
 Print/export 
 
 
 Download as PDF Printable version 
 
 
 
 
 In other projects 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons Wikivoyage 
 
 
 
 
 Languages 
 
 On this Wikipedia the language links are at the top of the page across from the article title.  Go to top . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CentralNotice  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Contents 
 move to sidebar 
 hide 
 
 
 
 
 (Top) 
 
 
 
 
 
 1 Basic elements 
 
 
				Toggle Basic elements subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 1.1 Maize 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.2 Chile peppers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.3 Beans 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.4 Spanish contributions 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 Food and society 
 
 
				Toggle Food and society subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 2.1 Home cooking 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.2 Food and festivals 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.3 Street food 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 History 
 
 
				Toggle History subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 3.1 Pre-Hispanic period 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.2 Modern period 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4 Beverages 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5 Regional cuisines 
 
 
				Toggle Regional cuisines subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 5.1 Chiapas 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5.2 Mexico City 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5.3 Northern Mexico 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5.4 Oaxaca 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5.5 Veracruz 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5.6 Western Mexico 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5.7 Yucatán 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6 Desserts 
 
 
				Toggle Desserts subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 6.1 Chocolate 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6.2 Fruits 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6.3 Baked goods 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 7 Mexican food outside Mexico 
 
 
				Toggle Mexican food outside Mexico subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 7.1 United States 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8 See also 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 9 References 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 10 Bibliography 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 11 External links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
						Toggle the table of contents
					 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle the table of contents 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mexican cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 44 languages 
 
 
 
 العربية Azərbaycanca Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Jawa ქართული Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Bahasa Melayu Nāhuatl Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk ភាសាខ្មែរ Polski Português Русский Simple English Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 
 Edit links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Article Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 English 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 More 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
 
 
 Culinary traditions of Mexico 
 Not to be confused with  Tex-Mex cuisine , which is often referred to as "Mexican food" in certain regions of the United States and Canada. 
   chile en nogada ,  maize ,  tamales ,  pozole ,  mezcal ,  pan de muerto ,  cóctel de camarón 
 Part of  a series  on the Culture of Mexico 
Society 
 Mexicans 
 Folklore 
 History 
 Immigration 
 Languages 
 Holidays 
 Religion 
 Women 
 
Topics 
 Art 
 Architecture 
 Cuisine 
 Dance 
 Literature 
 Poetry 
 Media 
 Film 
 Internet 
 Magazines 
 Newspapers 
 Radio 
 Television 
 Music 
 Monuments 
 Painting 
 Muralism 
 Sports 
 Mesoamerican ballgame 
 Lucha libre 
 Football 
 Rugby 
 Video gaming 
 
Symbols 
 Flag 
 Coat of arms 
 Anthem 
 Miss Mexico 
 World Heritage Sites 
 
   Mexico portal v t e 
   Mole sauce , which has dozens of varieties across the Republic, is seen as a symbol of  Mexicanidad [1]  and is considered Mexico's  national dish . [1] 
 Mexican cuisine  consists of the cooking cuisines and traditions of the modern country of  Mexico . Its earliest roots lie in  Mesoamerican cuisine . Its ingredients and methods begin with the first agricultural communities such as the  Olmec  and  Maya  who domesticated  maize , created the standard process of  maize   nixtamalization , and established their foodways. [2]  Successive waves of other  Mesoamerican  groups brought with them their own cooking methods. These included: the  Teotihuacanos ,  Toltec ,  Huastec ,  Zapotec ,  Mixtec ,  Otomi ,  Purépecha ,  Totonac ,  Mazatec ,  Mazahua , and  Nahua . With the  Mexica  formation of the multi-ethnic Triple Alliance ( Aztec Empire ), culinary foodways became infused ( Aztec cuisine ).  
 Today's food staples native to the land include corn ( maize ),  turkey ,  beans ,  squash ,  amaranth ,  chia ,  avocados ,  tomatoes ,  tomatillos ,  cacao ,  vanilla ,  agave ,  spirulina ,  sweet potato ,  cactus , and  chili pepper . Its history over the centuries has resulted in regional cuisines based on local conditions, including  Baja Med ,  Chiapas ,  Veracruz ,  Oaxacan , and the  American cuisines  of  New Mexican  and  Tex-Mex .
 After the  Spanish Conquest of the Aztec empire  and the rest of Mesoamerica, Spaniards introduced a number of  other foods , the most important of which were meats from domesticated animals ( beef ,  pork ,  chicken ,  goat , and  sheep ), dairy products (especially cheese and milk),  rice ,  sugar ,  olive oil  and various fruits and vegetables. Various cooking styles and recipes were also introduced from Spain both throughout the colonial period and by Spanish immigrants who continued to arrive following independence. Spanish influence in Mexican cuisine is also noticeable in its sweets such as:  alfajores ,  alfeniques , borrachitos and  churros . 
 Asian  and  African influences  were also introduced during this era as a result of  African slavery in New Spain  and the  Manila-Acapulco Galleons . [3] 
 Mexican cuisine is an important aspect of the culture, social structure and popular traditions of Mexico. The most important example of this connection is the use of  mole  for special occasions and holidays, particularly in the South and Central regions of the country. For this reason and others, traditional Mexican cuisine was inscribed in 2010 on the  Representative List of the Intangible Cultural Heritage of Humanity  by  UNESCO . [4] 
 
 
 Basic elements [ edit ] 
   Still-life with Fruit, Scorpion and Frog (1874) by  Hermenegildo Bustos . 
   Still-life , oil on canvas painting by  José Agustín Arrieta  (Mexican), c. 1870, San Diego Museum of Art 
 Mexican cuisine is a complex and ancient cuisine, with techniques and skills developed over thousands of years of history. [5]  It is created mostly with ingredients native to Mexico, as well as those  brought over  by the  Spanish   conquistadors , with some new influences since then. [6] 
 
 In addition to staples such as corn and chili peppers, native ingredients include  squashes ,  avocados ,  cocoa  and  vanilla , [4]  as well as ingredients not generally used in other cuisines, such as  edible flowers , vegetables like  huauzontle  and  papaloquelite , or small  criollo  avocados, whose skin is edible. [7]   Chocolate  originated in Mexico and was prized by the Aztecs. It remains an important ingredient in Mexican cookery.
 Vegetables play an important role in Mexican cuisine. Common vegetables include  zucchini ,  cauliflower , corn,  potatoes ,  spinach ,  Swiss chard ,  mushrooms , jitomate (red tomato), and green tomato. Other traditional vegetable ingredients include  chili pepper , huitlacoche (corn fungus), huauzontle, and  nopal  (cactus pads).
 European contributions include  pork ,  chicken ,  beef ,  cheese ,  herbs  and  spices , as well as some fruits.
 Tropical fruits , many of which are indigenous to the Americas, such as  guava ,  prickly pear ,  sapote ,  mangoes ,  bananas ,  pineapple  and  cherimoya  (custard apple) are popular, especially in the center and south of the country. [8] 
 Edible insects have been enjoyed in Mexico for millennia.  Entemophagy  or insect-eating is becoming increasingly popular outside of poor and rural areas for its unique flavors, sustainability, and connection to pre-Hispanic heritage. Popular species include  chapulines  (grasshoppers or crickets),  escamoles  (ant larvae), cumiles ( stink bugs ) and  ahuatle  (water bug eggs). [9] 
 
 Maize [ edit ] 
   Ancient  mesoamerican   engraving  of  maize ,  National Museum of Anthropology of Mexico . 
 Despite the introduction of  wheat  and  rice  to Mexico,  maize  is the most commonly consumed starch in almost all areas of the country and serves as the main ingredient in many local recipes (e.g. maize  tortillas ,  atole ,  pozole ,  menudo ,  tamal ). While also eaten fresh, most maize is dried,  nixtamalized  and ground into a dough called  masa . [10] [11]  This dough is used both fresh and fermented to make a wide variety of dishes from drinks (atole, pozole, etc.) to tamales,  sopes , and much more. However, the most common way to eat maize in Mexico is in the form of a tortilla, which accompanies almost every dish. Tortillas are made of maize in most of the country, but other regional versions exist, such as wheat in the north or  plantain ,  yuca  and wild greens in  Oaxaca . [4] [10] 
 
 Chile peppers [ edit ] 
   Chiles rellenos , stuffed chile peppers. 
 The other basic ingredient in all parts of Mexico is the  chile pepper . [12]  Mexican food has a reputation for being very spicy, but it has a wide range of flavors and while many spices are used for cooking, not all are spicy. Many dishes also have subtle flavors. [5] [7]  Chiles are indigenous to Mexico and their use dates back thousands of years. They are used for their flavors and not just their heat, with Mexico using the widest variety. If a savory dish or snack does not contain chile pepper, hot sauce is usually added, and chile pepper is often added to fresh fruit and sweets. [12] 
 
   A  molcajete  and tejolote, the traditional  mortar and pestle  of Mexico. 
 The importance of the chile goes back to the  Mesoamerican  period, where it was considered to be as much of a staple as corn and beans. In the 16th century,  Bartolomé de las Casas  wrote that without chiles, the  indigenous people  did not think they were eating. Even today, most  Mexicans  believe that their national identity would be at a loss without chiles and the many varieties of sauces and salsas created using chiles as their base. [13] 
 Many dishes in Mexico are defined by their sauces and the chiles those sauces contain (which are usually very spicy), rather than the meat or vegetable that the sauce covers. These dishes include  entomatada  (in tomato sauce),  adobo  or adobados, pipians and  moles . A hominy soup called  pozole  is defined as white, green or red depending on the chile sauce used or omitted. Tamales are differentiated by the filling which is again defined by the sauce (red or green chile pepper strips or mole). Dishes without a sauce are rarely eaten without a salsa or without fresh or pickled chiles. This includes street foods, such as  tacos ,  tortas ,  soup ,  sopes ,  tlacoyos ,  tlayudas ,  gorditas  and  sincronizadas . [14]  For most dishes, it is the type of chile used that gives it its main flavor. [13]   Chipotle ,  smoked-dried jalapeño pepper, is very common in Mexican cuisine.
 
 Beans [ edit ] 
 In addition to corn, common beans ( Phaseolus vulgaris ) are a historical component of the Mexican diet. Genetic evidence indicates domestication occurred in Mesoamerica as well as South America  [15]  Common bean varieties and cultivars used in Mexican cuisine include the  pinto bean  and the  black turtle bean . Beans and corn are deficient in different essential amino acids but complement each other. When eaten in combination, they provide a complete protein source.
 
 Spanish contributions [ edit ] 
 See also:  Spanish cuisine 
   Pechuga  adobada , chicken breast in  adobo  with a side of  chayote , mushrooms, corn and  poblano rajas . Adobo, including a key item,  vinegar , arrived with the Spanish. A common characteristic of Mexican adobo is its incorporation of  chile ancho . 
 Together with Mesoamerica, Spain is the second basis of Mexican cuisine, contributing in two fundamental ways: Firstly, they brought with them old world staples and ingredients which did not exist in the Americas such as sugar, wheat, rice, onions, garlic, limes, oil, dairy products, pork, beef and many others.
 Secondly they brought various culinary traditions from the Iberian peninsula which have become prevalent in Mexico. Equally, the discovery of the incorporation of New World ingredients to Spanish cuisine has led to many shared foods such as chorizo which uses paprika. 
 Spanish cuisine was in turn heavily influenced by its Moorish heritage and this created one of the earliest instances of the world's greatest  Fusion cuisines . The Spanish also introduced the technique of frying in  pork fat . Today, the main meats found in Mexico are pork, chicken, beef, goat, and sheep. Seafood and  fish  are also popular, especially along the coasts, and the way of cooking it commonly has Spanish origin such as Huachinango a la vizcaina. [16] 
 Cheesemaking in Mexico  has evolved its own specialties, although Spanish-style cheese such as Manchego is also produced in Mexico. It is an important economic activity, especially in the north, and is frequently done at home. The main cheese-making areas are  Chihuahua ,  Oaxaca ,  Querétaro , and  Chiapas . Goat cheese is still made, but it is not as popular and is harder to find in stores. [17] 
 Churros  are a common snack originating in Spain and because  sugar cane  was brought to the Americas through  Spanish colonization , all of Mexico's sweets have a Hispanic origin, often with a Muslim heritage such as  Alfeñiques .
 
 Food and society [ edit ] 
 See also:  Abuelita  and  Ibarra (chocolate) 
 Home cooking [ edit ] 
   Huevos rancheros 
 In most of Mexico, especially in rural areas, much of the food is consumed in the home. [18]  Cooking for the family is usually considered to be  women's work , and this includes cooking for  celebrations  as well. [19]  Traditionally girls have been considered ready to  marry  when they can cook, and  cooking  is considered a main talent for  housewives . [20] 
 The main meal of the day in Mexico is the "comida", meaning 'meal' in Spanish. The normal meal is, as follows; early morning meal, is called "desayuno", which entails coffee/atole (maize drink) and light meal, in some areas, the "almuerzo", around 11AM, includes a “snack” and drink, then followed by "comida", between noon and 2PM (lunch), which in itself is usually the heaviest meal of the day,  or  supper . It sometimes begins with  soup , often  chicken broth  with  pasta  or a "dry soup", which is pasta or rice flavored with  onions ,  garlic  or vegetables. The main course is  meat  served in a cooked  sauce  with  salsa  on the side, accompanied with beans and tortillas and often with a fruit drink in some areas. The last meal of the day is  cena , dinner, which varies greatly by region, and is usually eaten between 6PM and 9PM. [21] 
 In the evening, it is common to eat leftovers from the comida or sweet  bread  accompanied by  coffee  or  chocolate . Breakfast can consist of meat in broth (such as  pancita ),  tacos ,  enchiladas  or meat with  eggs . This is usually served with beans, tortillas, and coffee or  juice . [21] 
 
 Food and festivals [ edit ] 
   Pan de muerto   traditionally baked in Mexico during the weeks leading up to the  Day of the Dead . [22] 
   Chiles en nogada , due to the dish's incorporation of red, white and green, is popularly consumed during the celebrations of the  Grito de Dolores . [23]  Tied to the independence of the country since it is said they were prepared for the first time to entertain the future emperor  Agustín de Iturbide  when he came to signing of the  Treaty of Córdoba . [24] 
 Mexican cuisine is elaborate and often tied to symbolism and festivals, which is one reason it was named as an example of the  Intangible Cultural Heritage of Humanity by UNESCO . [4]  Many of the foods of Mexico are complicated because of their relation to the social structure of the country. Food preparation, especially for family and social events, is considered to be an investment in order to maintain social relationships. [25]  Even the idea of flavor is considered to be social, with meals prepared for certain dinners and certain occasions when they are considered the most tasty. [26] 
 The ability to cook well, called "sazón" (lit. seasoning) is considered to be a gift generally gained from experience and a sense of commitment to the diners. [27]   For the  Day of the Dead  festival, foods such as tamales and mole are set out on altars and it is believed that the visiting dead relatives eat the essence of the food. If eaten afterwards by the living it is considered to be tasteless. [26]  In central Mexico, the main festival foods are mole,  barbacoa ,  carnitas  and  mixiotes . They are often prepared to feed hundreds of guests, requiring groups of cooks. The cooking is part of the social custom meant to bind families and communities. [28] 
 
   Barbacoa in  Actopan ,  Hidalgo . The barbecue in a ground oven is a typical dish from the Mezquital Valley. 
   Fruit punch  is popular around Christmas time during  Las Posadas . 
 Mexican regional home cooking is completely different from the food served in most Mexican restaurants outside Mexico, which is usually some variety of  Tex-Mex . [7]  The original versions of Mexican dishes are vastly different from their Tex-Mex variation. 
 Some of Mexico's traditional foods involved complex or long cooking processes, including cooking underground (such as  cochinita pibil ). Before industrialization, traditional women spent several hours a day boiling dried corn then grinding it on a  metate  to make the dough for tortillas, cooking them one-by-one on a  comal  griddle. In some areas, tortillas are still made this way. Sauces and salsas were also ground in a mortar called a  molcajete . Today, blenders are more often used, though the texture is a bit different. Most people in Mexico would say that those made with a molcajete taste better, but few do this now. [29] 
 The most important food for festivals and other special occasions is  mole , especially mole poblano in the center of the country. [28] [30]  Mole is served at Christmas, Easter, Day of the Dead and at birthdays, baptisms, weddings and funerals, and tends to be eaten only for special occasions because it is such a complex and time-consuming dish. [28] [31]  While still dominant in this way, other foods have become acceptable for these occasions, such as barbacoa, carnitas and mixiotes, especially since the 1980s. This may have been because of economic crises at that time, allowing for the substitution of these cheaper foods, or the fact that they can be bought ready-made or may already be made as part of the family business. [32] [33] 
 Another important festive food is the  tamale , also known as  tamal  in Spanish. This is a filled cornmeal dumpling, steamed in a wrapping (usually a corn  husk  or banana leaf) and one of the basic staples in most regions of Mexico. It has its origins in the  pre-Hispanic era  and today is found in many varieties in all of Mexico. Like mole, it is complicated to prepare and best done in large amounts. [34]  Tamales are associated with certain celebrations such as  Candlemas . [32]  They are wrapped in corn husks in the highlands and desert areas of Mexico and in banana leaves in the tropics. [35] 
 
 Street food [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Mexican street food 
   Mexican  candy  stand. 
 Mexican street food can include tacos,  quesadillas ,  pambazos , tamales,  huaraches ,  alambres ,  al pastor , and food not suitable to cook at home, including barbacoa, carnitas, and since many homes in Mexico do not make use of ovens,  roasted chicken . [36]  One attraction of street food in Mexico is the satisfaction of hunger or craving without all the social and emotional connotation of eating at home, although longtime customers can have something of a friendship/familial relationship with a chosen vendor. [37] 
 Tacos are the top-rated and most well-known street Mexican food. It is made up of meat or other fillings wrapped in a tortilla often served with cheese added. Vegetarian fillings include mushrooms, potatoes, rice, or beans. [38] 
 
   Remnants of  popcorn  have been found in Mexico that date circa 3600 BC. 
 The best known of Mexico's street foods is the taco, whose origin is based on the pre-Hispanic custom of picking up other foods with tortillas as utensils were not used. [10]  The origin of the word is in dispute, with some saying it is derived from  Nahuatl  and others from various Spanish phrases. [39]  It possible the term taco comes from the term tlaco or tlacatl, which means middle or half in nahuatl. Tacos are not eaten as the main meal; they are generally eaten before midday or late in the evening. Just about any other foodstuff can be wrapped in a tortilla, and in Mexico, it varies from rice, to meat (plain or in sauce), to cream, to vegetables, to cheese, or simply to plain chile peppers or fresh salsa. Preferred fillings vary from region to region with pork generally found more often in the center and south, beef in the north, seafood along the coasts, and chicken and  lamb  in most of the country. [40] 
 Another popular street food, especially in  Mexico City  and the surrounding area is the  torta . It consists of a roll of some type, stuffed with several ingredients. This has its origins in the 19th century, when the French introduced a number of new kinds of bread. The torta began by splitting the roll and adding beans. Today,  refried beans  can still be found on many kinds of tortas. In Mexico City, the most common roll used for tortas is called  telera , a relatively flat roll with two splits on the upper surface. In Puebla, the preferred bread is called a  cemita , as is the sandwich. In both areas, the bread is stuffed with various fillings, especially if it is a hot sandwich, with beans,  cream  ( mayonnaise  is rare) and some kind of hot chile pepper. [41] 
 The influence of American fast food on Mexican street food grew during the late 20th century. One example of this is the invention of the  Sonoran hot dog  in the late 1980s. The  frankfurters  are usually boiled then wrapped in  bacon  and fried. They are served in a  bolillo -style bun, typically topped by a combination of  pinto beans , diced tomatoes, onions and  jalapeño  peppers, and other condiments. [41] 
 Along the US-Mexican border, specifically dense areas like Tijuana, Mexican vendors sell food such as  fruit melanged  with  Tajin  spice to people crossing the border via carts. In recent years, these  food carts  have been threatened by tightened border security at the port of entry. Both the US and the Mexican governments have proposed a project that would widen the streets at the border, allowing for more people to pass through the border, although widening them would decimate neighboring  mercados  that rely on the business of travelers. [42] 
 Besides food, street vendors also sell various kinds of drinks (including  aguas frescas ,  tejuino , and  tepache ) and treats (such as  bionicos ,  tostilocos , and  raspados ). Most tamale stands sell  atole  as a standard accompaniment.
 
 
 
 
 
 Tacos  of  carnitas ,  carne asada  and  al pastor .
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tostada 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mexican-style torta with typical accompaniments
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bean mini- gordita  flavored with avocado leaf Veracruz-style
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Corn 
 
 
 
 
 History [ edit ] 
 Pre-Hispanic period [ edit ] 
 See also:  Aztec cuisine 
 A  Maya  lord sits before an individual with a container of frothed  chocolate . Guacamole  ( Nahuatl   āhuacamolli ), an avocado-based sauce that began in pre-Hispanic Mexico 
   A native American grinder stone tool or " metate " from Central Mexico. 
 Around 7000 BCE, the indigenous peoples of Mexico and Central America hunted  game  and gathered  plants , including wild  chili peppers . Corn was not yet cultivated, so one main source of calories was roasted  agave  hearts. By 1200 BCE, corn was domesticated and a process called  nixtamalization , or treatment with lye, was developed to soften corn for grinding and improve its nutritional value. This allowed the creation of tortillas and other kinds of flat breads. [43]  The indigenous peoples of Mesoamerica have numerous stories about the origin of corn, usually related to being a gift of one or more gods, such as  Quetzalcoatl . [44] 
 The other staple was beans, eaten with corn and some other plants as a complementary protein. Other protein sources included  amaranth ,  domesticated turkey , insects such as  grasshoppers ,  beetles  and  ant  larvae,  iguanas , and  turtle  eggs on the  coastlines . [45]  Vegetables included squash and their seeds;  chilacayote ;  jicama , a kind of sweet potato; and  edible flowers , especially those of squash. The chile pepper was used as food, ritual and as medicine. [45] 
 When the Spanish arrived, the  Aztecs  had sophisticated  agricultural  techniques and an abundance of food, which was the base of their economy. It allowed them to expand an empire, bringing in  tribute  which consisted mostly of foods the Aztecs could not grow themselves. [13]  According to  Bernardino de Sahagún , the  Nahua peoples  of central Mexico ate corn, beans, turkey, fish, small game, insects and a wide variety of fruits, vegetables,  pulses ,  seeds ,  tubers , wild  mushrooms , plants and  herbs  that they collected or cultivated. [46] 
 
 Modern period [ edit ] 
   Las Tortilleras , an 1836  lithograph  after a painting by  Carl Nebel  of women grinding corn and making tortillas. 
 After the  Conquest , the Spanish introduced a variety of foodstuffs and cooking techniques, like  frying , to the  New World . [47]  Regional cuisines remained varied, with native staples more prevalent in the rural southern areas and Spanish foods taking root in the more sparsely populated northern region. [48]  European style wheat bread was initially met unfavorably with Moctezuma's emissaries who reportedly described it as tasting of "dried maize stalks". On the Spanish side,  Bernal Díaz del Castillo  complained about the "maize cake" rations on campaign. [48] 
 
   A reconstructed kitchen at the 16th century former monastery of San Miguel Arcángel,  Huejotzingo , Puebla. 
 The  cuisine of Spain  is a  Mediterranean cuisine  influenced by its  Arab  period, composed of a number of staples such as  olive oil  and rice. [47] [49]  Spanish settlers introduced these staples to the region, although some continued to be imported, such as  wine ,  brandy ,  nuts ,  olives ,  spices , and  capers . [48]  They introduced domesticated animals, such as  pigs ,  cows ,  chickens ,  goats , and  sheep  for  meat  and  milk , raising the consumption of protein.  Cheese  became the most important dairy product. [17] [47] 
 The Spanish brought  rice  to  Mexico , [11]  along with  sugar cane , used extensively creation of many kinds of sweets, especially local  fruits  in  syrup . A  sugar -based candy craft called  alfeñique  was imported and is now used for the  Day of the Dead . [50]  Over time ingredients like  olive oil ,  rice ,  onions ,  garlic ,  oregano ,  coriander ,  cinnamon ,  cloves  became incorporated with native ingredients and cooking techniques. [47]   One of the main avenues for the mixing of the two cuisines was in  convents . [47] 
 
   A typical Mexican supermarket. 
 Despite the influence of Spanish culture, Mexican cuisine has maintained its base of corn, beans and chili peppers. [47]  Natives continued to be reliant on maize; it was less expensive than the  wheat  favored by European settlers, it was easier to cultivate and produced higher yields. European control over the land grew stronger with the founding of wheat farms. In 18th century  Mexico City , wheat was baked into leaved rolls called  pan francés  or  pan español , but only two bakers were allowed to bake this style of bread and they worked on consignment to the viceroy and the archbishop. Large ring loaves of choice flour known as  pan floreado  were available for wealthy "Creoles". Other styles of bread used lower-quality wheat and maize to produce  pan común ,  pambazo  and  cemita . [48] 
 Pozole  is mentioned in the 16th century  Florentine Codex  by  Bernardino de Sahagún . [51] 
 In the eighteenth century, an Italian  Capuchin  friar,  Ilarione da Bergamo , included descriptions of food in his  travelogue . He noted that  tortillas  were eaten not only by the poor, but by the upper class as well.  He described lunch fare as pork products like  chorizo  and  ham  being eaten between tortillas, with a piquant red chili sauce. For drink,  pulque , as well as corn-based  atole , and for those who could afford, it chocolate-based drinks were consumed twice a day. According to de Bergamo's account neither coffee nor wine are consumed, and evening meals ended with a small portion of beans in a thick soup instead, "served to set the stage for drinking water". [52] 
 
   Hot chocolate and  pan dulce  are the quintessential breakfast in Mexico. Many of Mexico's sweet breads were influenced by French immigrants. 
 During the 19th century, Mexico experienced an influx of various immigrants, including  French ,  Lebanese ,  German ,  Chinese  and  Italian , which have had some effect on the food. [47]  During the  French intervention in Mexico ,  French  food became popular with the upper classes. An influence on these new trends came from chef Tudor, who was brought to Mexico by the Emperor  Maximilian  of  Habsburg . [53]  One lasting evidence of this is the variety of breads and sweet breads, such as  bolillos ,  conchas  and much more, which can be found in Mexican bakeries. [54]  The  Germans  brought beer brewing techniques and the  Chinese  added their cuisine to certain areas of the country. [55]  This led to Mexico characterizing its cuisine more by its relation to popular traditions rather than on particular cooking techniques. [56] 
 Since the 20th century, there has been an interchange of food influences between Mexico and the United States. Mexican cooking was of course still practiced in what is now the  Southwest United States  after the  Mexican–American War , but  Diana Kennedy , in her book  The Cuisines of Mexico  (published in 1972), drew a sharp distinction between Mexican food and Tex-Mex. [43] 
 Tex-Mex food was developed from Mexican and Anglo influences, and was traced to the late 19th century in Texas. It still continues to develop with flour tortillas becoming popular north of the border only in the latter 20th century. [43]  From north to south, much of the influence has been related to food industrialization, as well as the greater availability overall of food, especially after the  Mexican Revolution . One other very visible sign of influence from the United States is the appearance of  fast foods , such as  hamburgers ,  hot dogs  and  pizza . [57] 
 
   Pujol  was named by  Wall Street Journal  as the best in  Mexico City . [58] 
   Mexican juice bar 
 In the latter 20th century, international influence in Mexico has led to interest and development of  haute cuisine . In Mexico, many professional chefs are trained in French or international cuisine, but the use of Mexican staples and flavors is still favored, including the simple foods of traditional markets. It is not unusual to see some quesadillas or small tacos among the other  hors d'oeuvres  at fancy dinner parties in Mexico. [7] 
 Professional cookery in Mexico is growing and includes an emphasis on traditional methods and ingredients. In the cities, there is interest in publishing and preserving what is authentic Mexican food. This movement is traceable to 1982 with the Mexican Culinary Circle of Mexico City. It was created by a group of women chefs and other culinary experts as a reaction to the fear of traditions being lost with the increasing introduction of foreign techniques and foods. [7]  In 2010, Mexico's cuisine was recognized by UNESCO as an Intangible Cultural Heritage of Humanity. [4] 
 In contemporary times, various world cuisines have become popular in Mexico, thus adopting a Mexican fusion. For example,  sushi  in Mexico is often made by using a variety of sauces based on  mango  and  tamarind , and very often served with  serrano -chili blended  soy  sauce, or complemented with  vinegar ,  habanero peppers , and chipotle peppers.
 
 Beverages [ edit ] 
 See also:  Mexican wine ,  Jarritos , and  Beer in Mexico 
 Two large jars of aguas frescas. On the left is filled with  jamaica  and on the right is with horchata. Bottles of artisanal mezcal. Tequila is differentiated from mezcal by its complicated production and its protected designation of origin. 
 Corn in Mexico is not only eaten, but also drunk as a beverage. Corn is the base of a hot drink called  atole , which is then flavored with fruit, chocolate, rice or other flavors. Fermented corn is the base of a cold drink, which goes by different names and varieties, such as  tejuino ,  pozol  and others.  Aguas frescas  are flavored drinks usually made from fruit, water and sugar. Beverages also include  hibiscus  iced tea, one made from  tamarind  and one from rice called  horchata . One variant of coffee is  café de olla , which is coffee brewed with cinnamon and raw sugar. [59]  Many of the most popular beverages can be found sold by street vendors and  juice bars  in Mexico.
 
   Champurrado , Mexican chocolate-based drink 
 Chocolate played an important part in the history of Mexican cuisine. The word "chocolate" originated from Mexico's  Aztec  cuisine, derived from the  Nahuatl  word  xocolatl . Chocolate was first drunk rather than eaten. It was also used for religious rituals. The  Maya civilization  grew cacao trees [60]  and used the cacao seeds it produced to make a frothy, bitter drink. [61]   The drink, called  xocoatl , was often flavored with vanilla, chile pepper, and  achiote . [62] 
 Alcoholic beverages from Mexico include  tequila ,  pulque ,  aguardiente ,  mezcal  and  charanda .  Wine ,  rum  and  beer  are also produced. [63]   The most common alcoholic beverage consumed with food in Mexico is beer, followed by tequila. [5]  A classic  margarita , a popular cocktail, is composed of tequila,  cointreau  and  lime  juice.
 Rompope  is believed to have been originally made in the  convents  of the city of  Puebla ,  Mexico . The word  rompope  is a derivation of the word  rompon , which is used to describe the Spanish version of  eggnog  that came to Mexico.
 A popular  Soft drink  from Mexico is  Sangria Señorial  a  sangria -flavored, non-alcoholic beverage. Sangria is a Spanish drink that was introduced by  Spaniards , as was Horchata and Agua de Jamaica.
 
 Regional cuisines [ edit ] 
 See also:  List of Mexican dishes  and  List of edible insects by country 
 Chiapas [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Cuisine of Chiapas 
   Cochito, a dish exclusive to Chiapas. 
 Similar to other regions in Mexico, corn is a dietary staple and other indigenous foods remain strong in the cuisine as well. Along with a chile called simojovel, used nowhere else in the country, the cuisine is also distinguished by the use of herbs, such as  chipilín  and  hierba santa . [64] [65]  Like in Oaxaca, tamales are usually wrapped in  banana leaves  (or sometimes with the leaves of  hoja santa ), but often chipilín is incorporated into the dough. As in the Yucatán Peninsula, boiled corn is drunk as a beverage called  pozol , but here it is usually flavored with all-natural cacao. [66]  Another beverage (which can be served hot or cold) typical from this region is  Tascalate , which is made of powdered maize, cocoa beans, achiote ( annatto ), chilies,  pine nuts  and cinnamon. [66] 
 The favored meats are beef, pork and chicken (introduced by the Spanish), especially in the highlands, which favors the raising of livestock. The livestock industry has also prompted the making of cheese, mostly done on  ranches  and in small  cooperatives , with the best known from  Ocosingo ,  Rayón  and  Pijijiapan . Meat and cheese dishes are frequently accompanied by vegetables, such as squash,  chayote , and  carrots . [65] 
 
 Mexico City [ edit ] 
   A taco stand in the  Tacubaya  neighborhood of Mexico City. 
 The main feature of  Mexico City  cooking is that it has been influenced by those of the other regions of Mexico, as well as a number of foreign influences. [67] [68]  This is because Mexico City has been a center for migration of people from all over Mexico since pre-Hispanic times. Most of the ingredients of this area's cooking are not grown  in situ , but imported from all of the country (such as tropical fruits).
 Street cuisine is very popular, with  taco stands , and lunch counters on every street. Popular foods in the city include  barbacoa  (a specialty of the central highlands),  birria  (from western Mexico),  cabrito  (from the north),  carnitas  (originally from  Michoacán ),  mole  sauces (from  Puebla  and central Mexico), tacos with many different fillings, and large  sub -like sandwiches called  tortas , usually served at specialized shops called 'Torterías'. [69]  This is also the area where most of Mexico's  haute cuisine  can be found. [68]  There are eateries that specialize in pre-Hispanic food, including dishes with  insects .
 
 Northern Mexico [ edit ] 
   A  cabrito  (goat) on a spit in Monterrey, Nuevo León. 
 The foods eaten in what is now the north of Mexico have differed from those in the south since the pre-Hispanic era. Here, the indigenous people were hunter-gatherers with limited agriculture and settlements because of the arid land. [70] [71] 
 
   Grilled  arrachera ,  shrimp ,  sausage , onions, potatoes and  chiles toreados  served on an iron skillet. 
 When the Europeans arrived, they found much of the land in this area suitable for raising cattle, goats and sheep. This led to the dominance of meat, especially beef, in the region, and some of the most popular dishes include  machaca ,  arrachera  and  cabrito . [70] [71]  The region's distinctive cooking technique is grilling, as ranch culture has promoted outdoor cooking done by men. [71] 
 The ranch culture has also prompted cheese production and the north produces the widest varieties of cheese in Mexico. These include  queso fresco  (fresh farmer's cheese), ranchero (similar to Monterey Jack),  cuajada  (a mildly sweet, creamy curd of fresh milk),  requesón  (similar to  cottage cheese  or  ricotta ), Chihuahua's creamy semi-soft queso  menonita , and fifty-six varieties of asadero (smoked cheese). [70] 
 Another important aspect of northern cuisine is the presence of wheat, especially in the use of  flour  tortillas. The area has at least forty different types of  flour tortillas . [70]  The main reason for this is that much of the land supports wheat production, introduced by the Spanish. These large tortillas allowed for the creation of burritos, usually filled with machaca in  Sonora , which eventually gained popularity in the  Southwest United States . [71] 
 
   Carne a la tampiqueña 
 The variety of foodstuffs in the north is not as varied as in the south of Mexico, because of the mostly desert climate. Much of the cuisine of this area is dependent on  food preservation  techniques, namely dehydration and canning. Dried foods include meat, chiles, squash,  peas , corn,  lentils , beans and  dried fruit . A number of these are also canned. Preservation techniques change the flavor of foods; for example, many chiles are less hot after drying. [70] 
 In Northeastern Mexico, during the Spanish colonial period,  Nuevo León  was founded and settled by Spanish families of Jewish origin ( Crypto-Jews ). They contributed to the regional cuisine with dishes, such as Pan de Semita or "Semitic Bread" (a type of bread made without  leavening ), and cabrito or "baby goat", which is the typical food of Monterrey and the state of Nuevo León, as well as some regions of  Coahuila . [72] [73] 
 The north has seen waves of immigration by the  Chinese ,  Mormons , and  Mennonites , who have influenced the cuisines in areas, such as Chihuahua and  Baja California . [71]  Most recently,  Baja Med  cuisine has emerged in  Ensenada  and elsewhere in Baja California, combining Mexican and  Mediterranean  flavors.
 
 Oaxaca [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Oaxacan cuisine 
   Chocolate  being poured at a market at  Villa de Etla , Oaxaca 
   Tlayuda 
 The cooking of  Oaxaca  remained more intact after the conquest, as the Spanish took the area with less fighting and less disruption of the economy and food production systems. However, it was the first area to experience the mixing of foods and cooking styles, while central Mexico was still recuperating. Despite its size, the state has a wide variety of ecosystems and a wide variety of native foods. Vegetables are grown in the central valley, seafood is abundant on the coast and the area bordering Veracruz grows tropical fruits.
 Much of the state's cooking is influenced by that of the  Mixtec  and, to a lesser extent, the  Zapotec . Later in the colonial period, Oaxaca lost its position as a major food supplier and the area's cooking returned to a more indigenous style, keeping only a small number of foodstuffs, such as chicken and pork. It also adapted  mozzarella , brought by the Spanish, and modified it to what is now known as  Oaxaca cheese . [74] [75] 
 
   Enchiladas  with  tasajo  beef. 
 One major feature of Oaxacan cuisine is its seven  mole  varieties, second only to mole poblano in popularity.  The seven are Negro (black), Amarillo (yellow), Coloradito (little red), Mancha Manteles (table cloth stainer), Chichilo (smoky stew), Rojo (red), and Verde (green). [75] 
 Corn is the staple food in the region. Tortillas are called blandas and are a part of every meal. Corn is also used to make empanadas, tamales and more. Black beans are favored, often served in soup or as a sauce for enfrijoladas. Oaxaca's regional chile peppers include  pasilla  oaxaqueña (red, hot and smoky), along with amarillos (yellow),  chilhuacles , chilcostles and costeños. These, along with herbs, such as hoja santa, give the food its unique taste. [75] 
 Another important aspect of Oaxacan cuisine is  chocolate , generally consumed as a beverage. It is frequently hand ground and combined with  almonds , cinnamon and other ingredients. [75] 
 
 Veracruz [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Cuisine of Veracruz 
   Huachinango a la veracruzana , a dish based on  red snapper . 
 The cuisine of  Veracruz  is a mix of indigenous,  Afro-Mexican  and Spanish. The indigenous contribution is in the use of corn as a staple, as well as vanilla (native to the state) and herbs called acuyo and  hoja santa . It is also supplemented by a wide variety of tropical fruits, such as  papaya ,  mamey  and  zapote , along with the introduction of  citrus fruit  and  pineapple  by the Spanish. The Spanish also introduced European herbs, such as  parsley ,  thyme ,  marjoram ,  bay laurel ,  cilantro  and others, which characterize much of the state's cooking. They are found in the best known dish of the region  Huachinango a la veracruzana , a red snapper dish. [ citation needed ] 
 The African influence is from the importation of  slaves  through the  Caribbean , who brought foods with them, which had been introduced earlier to Africa by the  Portuguese . As it borders the Gulf  coast , seafood figures prominently in most of the state. The state's role as a gateway to Mexico has meant that the dietary staple of corn is less evident than in other parts of Mexico, with rice as a heavy favorite. Corn dishes include  garnachas  (a kind of corn cake), which are readily available especially in the mountain areas, where indigenous influence is strongest. [76] 
 Anthropologist and restauranteur  Raquel Torres Cerdán  has worked to preserve and record many of the foods of indigenous peoples of the region. [77] [78] [79] 
 
 Western Mexico [ edit ] 
   Chilaquiles 
 West of Mexico City is the Pacific coast and the states of  Michoacán ,  Jalisco  and  Colima . The cuisine of Michoacan is based on the  Purepecha  culture which still dominates most of the state. The area has a large network of rivers and lakes providing  fish . Its use of corn is perhaps the most varied. While  atole  is drunk in most parts of Mexico, it is made with more different flavors in Michoacán, including  blackberry ,  cascabel chili  and more. Tamales come in different shapes, wrapped in corn husks. These include those folded into polyhedrons called  corundas  and can vary in name if the filling is different. In the  Bajío  area, tamales are often served with a meat  stew  called   churipo , which is flavored with  cactus fruit . [80] [81] 
 The main Spanish contributions to Michoacán cuisine are rice, pork and spices. One of the best-known dishes from the state is  morisquesta , which is a sausage and rice dish, closely followed by carnitas, which is deep-fried (confit technique) pork. The latter can be found in many parts of Mexico, often claimed to be authentically Michoacán. Other important ingredients in the cuisine include wheat (where bread symbolizes fertility) found in breads and  pastries . Another is sugar, giving rise to a wide variety of desserts and sweets, such as  fruit jellies  and  ice cream , mostly associated with the town of  Tocumbo . The town of  Cotija  has a cheese named after it. The local alcoholic beverage is  charanda , which is made with fermented sugar cane. [80] 
 The cuisine of the states of Jalisco and Colima is noted for dishes such as  birria , chilayo,  menudo , and pork dishes. [82]  Jalisco's cuisine is known for tequila, with the liquor produced only in certain areas allowed to use the name. The cultural and gastronomic center of the area is  Guadalajara , an area where both agriculture and cattle raising have thrived. The best-known dish from the area is  birria , a stew of goat, beef, mutton, or pork, with chiles and spices. [83] 
 An important street food is  tortas ahogadas , where the torta (sandwich) is drowned in a chile sauce. Near Guadalajara is the town of  Tonalá , known for its  pozole , a hominy stew, reportedly said in the 16th century, to have been originally created with human flesh for ritual use. [84] [85]  The area which makes tequila surrounds the city. A popular local drink is  tejuino , made from fermented corn.  Bionico  is also a popular dessert in the Guadalajara area. [83] 
 On the Pacific coast, seafood is common, generally cooked with European spices along with chile, and is often served with a spicy salsa. Favored fish varieties include  marlin ,  swordfish , snapper,  tuna , shrimp and  octopus . Tropical fruits are also important. [67] [83]  The cuisine of the  Baja California Peninsula  is especially heavy on seafood, with the widest variety. It also features a mild green chile pepper, as well as  dates , especially in sweets. [86] 
 
 
 
 
 
 Carne en su jugo .
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tamales  wrapped in corn husks.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mojarra  frita (fried) served with various garnishes, including  nopales , at  Isla de Janitzio , Michoacán.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Birria , a common dish in Guadalajara.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Asado de boda  (Wedding stew), typical dish of  Zacatecas .
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Torta ahogada  accompanied by light beer, Jalisco.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The  folklore  belief that menudo will alleviate some of the symptoms of a  hangover  is widely held. [87] 
 
 
 
 
 Yucatán [ edit ] 
 The food of the  Yucatán peninsula  is distinct from the rest of the country. It is based primarily on  Mayan food  with influences from the  Caribbean , Central Mexican, European (especially French) and  Middle Eastern  cultures. [67] [88]  As in other areas of Mexico, corn is the basic staple, as both a liquid and a solid food. One common way of consuming corn, especially by the poor, is a thin drink or gruel of white corn called by such names as  pozol  or keyem. [88] 
 One of the main spices in the region is the annatto seed, called  achiote  in Spanish. It gives food a reddish color and a slightly peppery smell with a hint of nutmeg. [67]  Recados are seasoning pastes, based on achiote ( recado rojo ) or a mixture of  habanero  and chirmole [89]  both used on chicken and pork.
 Recado rojo is used for the area's best-known dish,  cochinita pibil . Pibil refers to the cooking method (from the Mayan word  píib , meaning "buried") in which foods are wrapped, generally in  banana leaves , and cooked in a  pit oven . [90]  Various meats are cooked this way. Habaneros are another distinctive ingredient, but they are generally served as (or part of) condiments on the side rather than integrated into the dishes. [88] 
 A prominent feature of Yucatán cooking is the use of  bitter oranges , which gives Yucatán food the tangy element that characterizes it. Bitter orange is used as a seasoning for broth, to marinate meat and its juice (watered down with sugar) is used as a refreshing beverage. [91] 
 Honey  was used long before the arrival of the Spanish to sweeten foods and to make a ritual alcoholic drink called  balché . Today, a honey liquor called  xtabentun  is still made and consumed in the region. The coastal areas feature several seafood dishes, based on fish like the  Mero , a variety of  grunt  and  Esmedregal , which is fried and served with a spicy salsa based on the x'catic pepper and  achiote paste . [88]  Other dishes include conch fillet (usually served raw, just marinated in lime juice), coconut flavored shrimp and lagoon snails. [92] 
 Traditionally, some dishes are served as  entrées , such as the brazo de reina (a type of tamale made from  chaya ) and papadzules (egg tacos seasoned in a  pumpkin seed  gravy). [88] 
 Street food in the area usually consists of Cochinita Pibil Tacos,  Lebanese -based  kibbeh ,  shawarma  tacos, snacks made from hardened corn dough called piedras, and fruit-flavored ices.
 Lime soup  made of chicken or some other meat such as pork or beef, lime juice and served with tortilla chips. Panucho made with a refried tortilla that is stuffed with refried black beans and topped with chopped cabbage, pulled chicken or turkey, tomato, pickled red onion, avocado, and pickled jalapeño pepper.
 
 
 
 
 
 Cochinita Pibil, a fire pit-smoked pork dish, seasoned with achiote, spices and  Seville orange .
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Panucho 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Frijol con puerco  (beans with pork) prepared with beans, pork,  epazote , onion, cilantro, lemon, radishes and habanero chile.
 
 
 
 
 Desserts [ edit ] 
 See also:  Mexican breads 
   Concha  is a traditional  Mexican sweet bread roll  ( pan dulce ). 
   Mexico is among the countries that produce the most  honey  in the world. 
 Dessert  culture in Mexico did not develop until after the introduction of the Spanish to the area. There were foods which could be considered desserts by modern standards like chocolate, but they were consumed and used differently. With the introduction of Europeans and their food and culture to the region came sugar and with it, sweets. The range of desserts evolved and grew over time to include everything from churros to rice pudding, from cakes to fruit treats. Some of the desserts which historically are made in Mexico are fairly easy to make and can be produced in high quantity. [93] 
 
 Chocolate [ edit ] 
   Mexican chocolate discs 
 Chocolate consumption pre-European influence was drunk in a warm syrupy form mixed with honey. This was done in order to create a pleasant drinking experience. [94]  During this time chocolate was also treated as medicine. [95]  After the arrival of Europeans, Chocolate was brought across the sea to Europe where it would be used in various forms including medicine and confections. In the modern era, chocolate is used as both a topping and a dip, as well as in candies. The traditional form of chocolate consumption lives on in the form of Mexican hot chocolate, the natural evolution of the warm syrup.
 
 Fruits [ edit ] 
 There are a number of fruit related dessert recipes which are popular in Mexico, some using native fruits, such as plantains and others using foreign fruits like oranges. Recipes for these foods can be found dating back to the early 19th century and incorporate both sugar and ice. [96]  Fruit dishes are naturally sweet and juicy which made them popular in the Mexican climate.
 One such dessert is orange and lime ice, a treat similar to snow cones. It is made by freezing strained oranges and lime juice mixed with sugar.
 
 Baked goods [ edit ] 
 Baked dessert items in Mexico are mostly ideas imported from Europe over time. These items came from a variety of different nations before becoming staples of desserts in the region. Baked goods include cookies made with local fruits, churros which originated in the Iberian Peninsula, and macaroons which come from Italy. Churros can be made by mixing flour with boiling water, shaping and frying that mixture then coating it in cinnamon and/or sugar. Churros can be eaten hot or cold and can be molded into any number of different shapes. Macaroons can be made by beating together around 60 eggs, mixing some more eggs with sugar, mixing in flower then baking the whole thing. [97] 
 
 Mexican food outside Mexico [ edit ] 
   Greek  style BBQ taco with  Feta cheese . 
 Mexican cuisine is offered in a few fine restaurants in Europe and the United States. Sometimes  landrace  corn from Mexico is imported and ground on the premises. [98] 
 
 United States [ edit ] 
 See also:  Cuisine of the Southwestern United States 
 Mexican food in the United States  is based on the food of  Native Americans  and  Hispanos  in the  Southwestern United States  and  Northern Mexico . Mexican foods that originate in the United States often come from the Southwestern region,  breakfast burritos  and  red or green chile  come from  New Mexican cuisine , likewise  chili con carne  and  chimichangas  are examples of  Tex-Mex . [6]  With the growing ethnic  Mexican-American  population in the United States, more authentic Mexican food is gradually appearing in the United States.  Most large American cities host a Mexican diaspora due to proximity and immigration, and Mexican restaurants and food trucks are generally easy to find in the continental states. One reason is that Mexican immigrants use food as a means of combating homesickness, and for their descendants, it is a symbol of ethnicity. [34]  Alternatively, with more Americans experiencing Mexican food in Mexico, there is a growing demand for more authentic flavors. [34] [99]   Korean tacos  are a  Korean-Mexican fusion  dish popular in a number of urban areas in the  United States  and  Canada . Korean tacos originated in  Los Angeles . [100]  In 2013, Carlos Gaytán became the first Mexican to obtain a Michelin star for his work at the Mexique restaurant in  Chicago . In 2014,  Daniela Soto-Innes  helped to open Cosme in  New York City , serving there as the Chef de Cuisine. [101] 
 
 See also [ edit ] 
 
 Food portal 
 Tex-Mex 
 Aztec cuisine 
 Diana Kennedy 
 Latin American cuisine 
 List of Mexican dishes 
 List of restaurants in Mexico 
 List of Mexican restaurants 
 Moctezuma's Table 
 Alejandro Ruiz Olmedo 
 Enrique Olvera 
 Gabriela Cámara 
 Carmen Ramírez Degollado 
 Ancient Maya cuisine 
 Mexican cuisine in the United States 
 Indigenous cuisine of the Americas 
 Spanish cuisine 
 Cuisine of California 
 Texan cuisine 
 New Mexican cuisine 
 Mexican tea culture 
 Korean-Mexican fusion 
 References [ edit ] 
 
 
 ^  a   b   "El mole símbolo de la mexicanidad"   (PDF) . CONACULTA . Retrieved  27 September  2016 . 
 
 ^   "Civilization.ca - Mystery of the Maya" .  www.historymuseum.ca . Retrieved  1 February  2021 . 
 
 ^   "La cocina del virreinato" .  CONACULTA . Retrieved  13 January  2015 . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   e   "Traditional Mexican cuisine - ancestral, ongoing community culture, the Michoacán paradigm" . UNESCO . Retrieved  13 January  2015 . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   MacNeil-Fife, Karen (September 2000). "Beyond beer: Wine with Mexican food".  Sunset .  205  (3): 194. 
 
 ^  a   b   Malat, p. 88. 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   e   Adapon, p. 11. 
 
 ^   Malat, p. 89. 
 
 ^   Miroff, Nick (23 July 2013).  "Mexico gets a taste for eating insects as chefs put bugs back on the menu"  – via www.theguardian.com. 
 
 ^  a   b   c   Iturriaga, p. 43. 
 
 ^  a   b   Graber, Karen Hursh (1 January 2003).  "Rice: The Gift Of The Other Gods" . Mexconnect newsletter.  ISSN   1028-9089 . Retrieved  24 October  2012 . 
 
 ^  a   b   Adapon, p. 7. 
 
 ^  a   b   c   Adapon, p. 8. 
 
 ^   Adapon, p. 114. 
 
 ^   Bitocchi, Elena; Nanni, Laura; Bellucci, Elisa; Rossi, Monica; Giardini, Alessandro; Zeuli, Pierluigi Spagnoletti; Logozzo, Giuseppina; Stougaard, Jens; McClean, Phillip; Attene, Giovanna; Papa, Roberto (3 April 2012).  "Mesoamerican origin of the common bean ( Phaseolus vulgaris L.) is revealed by sequence data" .  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences .  109  (14): E788-96.  doi : 10.1073/pnas.1108973109 .  ISSN   0027-8424 .  PMC   3325731 .  PMID   22393017 . 
 
 ^   Malat, pp. 88-89. 
 
 ^  a   b   Graber, Karen Hursh (1 October 2000).  "A guide to Mexican cheese: Los quesos mexicanos" . Mexconnect newsletter.  ISSN   1028-9089 . Retrieved  24 October  2012 . 
 
 ^   Adapon, p. 3. 
 
 ^   Adapon, p. 71. 
 
 ^   Adapon, p. 75. 
 
 ^  a   b   Adapon, p. 93. 
 
 ^   Castella, Krystina (October 2010).  "Pan de Muerto Recipe" .  Epicurious . Retrieved  7 July  2015 . 
 
 ^   "Los chiles en nogada en la cena del 15 de septiembre" . Procuraduría Federal del Consumidor . Retrieved  27 September  2016 . 
 
 ^   Moon, Freda (17 September 2011).  "Delicious patriotism" . The Daily Holdings, Inc. Archived from  the original  on 5 February 2013 . Retrieved  18 September  2011 . 
 
 ^   Adapon, p. 20. 
 
 ^  a   b   Adapon, p. 117. 
 
 ^   Abarca, p. 62. 
 
 ^  a   b   c   Adapon, p. 89. 
 
 ^   Adapon, p. 15. 
 
 ^   Adapon, p. 97. 
 
 ^   Adapon, p. 99. 
 
 ^  a   b   Adapon, p. 101. 
 
 ^   Adapon, p. 107. 
 
 ^  a   b   c   Knepp, Mark Dustin (2010).  Tamaladas and the role of food in Mexican-immigrant and Mexican-American cultures in Texas  (PhD). State University of New York at Albany. Docket 3412031. 
 
 ^   Iturriaga, p. 84-89. 
 
 ^   Adapon, p. 123. 
 
 ^   Adapon, p. 126. 
 
 ^   Barbezat, Suzanne.  "The Top 8 Mexican Street Foods You Need to Try" .  TripSavvy . TripSavvy . Retrieved  27 May  2020 . 
 
 ^   Iturriaga, p. 43-44. 
 
 ^   Iturriaga, p. 44. 
 
 ^  a   b   Iturriaga, p. 130-133. 
 
 ^   Zaragoza, Alex (20 October 2016).  "Tijuana Border Plan Could Oust A Rich Food Culture And Its Cooks" .  NPR.org . Retrieved  3 May  2019 . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   Sharpe, Patricia (December 2004). "More Mexican—It's About Time; Mexican food through the ages".  Texas Monthly .  32  (12): 1. 
 
 ^   Luengas, pp. 27-28. 
 
 ^  a   b   Luengas, p. 30. 
 
 ^   Adapon, p. 9. 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   e   f   g   Adapon, p. 10. 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   Jeffrey M. Pilcher.  Maize and the Making of Mexico . p. 30. 
 
 ^   Food in Medieval Times , p. 225. 
 
 ^   Luengas, p. 37. 
 
 ^   Bernardino de Sahagún,  Florentine Codex: General History of the Things of New Spain  (Translation of and Introduction to Historia General de Las Cosas de La Nueva España; 12 Volumes in 13 Books ), trans. Charles E. Dibble and Arthur J. O Anderson (Salt Lake City: University of Utah Press, 1950–1982). Images are taken from Fray Bernardino de Sahagún,  The Florentine Codex.  Complete digital facsimile edition on 16 DVDs. Tempe, Arizona: Bilingual Press, 2009. Reproduced with permission from Arizona State University Hispanic Research Center. 
 
 ^   Daily Life in Colonial Mexico: The Journey of Friar Ilarione da Bergamo, 1761-1768 ", chap. 8 "Foods and Plants of New Spain. Trans. William J. Orr. Norman: University of Oklahoma Press 2000, pp. 97-112 
 
 ^   Fernández, Adela (1985).  Tradicional cocina mexicana y sus mejores recetas . Panorama Editorial. pp.  33 –.  ISBN   978-968-38-0131-9 . 
 
 ^   Luengas, pp. 47-48. 
 
 ^   Hill, Owen (6 September 2007). "Mexican food".  Caterer & Hotelkeeper .  197  (4492): 13. 
 
 ^   Adapon, p. 12. 
 
 ^   Luengas, pp. 80–85. 
 
 ^   SESSER, STAN (17 January 2009).  "The World's Greatest Food City?" .  Wall Street Journal . Retrieved  17 January  2011 . 
 
 ^   Malat, pp. 89-90. 
 
 ^   "Chocolate: A Mesoamerican Luxury 250–900 C.E. (A.D.) – Obtaining Cacao" .  All About Chocolate: History of Chocolate .  Field Museum of Natural History . Archived from  the original  on 18 March 2009 . Retrieved  2 June  2008 . 
 
 ^   "Chocolate: A Mesoamerican Luxury 250–900 C.E. (A.D.) – Making Chocolate" .  All About Chocolate: History of Chocolate . Field Museum of Natural History. Archived from  the original  on 18 March 2009 . Retrieved  2 June  2008 . 
 
 ^   "Achiote (Annatto) Cooking" . las Culturas. Archived from  the original  on 17 May 2008 . Retrieved  21 May  2008 . 
 
 ^   Malat, p. 90. 
 
 ^   Cocina Estado por estado: Chiapas  [ State by state cuisine: Chiapas ] (in Spanish). Vol. 7. Mexico City: El Universal /Radar Editores. 2007. 
 
 ^  a   b   Graber, Karen Hursh (1 January 2003).  "The cuisine of Chiapas: Dining in Mexico's last frontier" . Mexconnect newsletter.  ISSN   1028-9089 . Retrieved  24 October  2012 . 
 
 ^  a   b   "5 less-known beverages with true Mexican flavor" .  México News Network . 10 October 2015. 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   "Regional Foods of Mexico" . University of Michigan. 10 April 2008. Archived from  the original  on 13 January 2013 . Retrieved  24 October  2012 . 
 
 ^  a   b   Graber, Karen Hursh (1 January 2004).  "Dining in the DF: food and drink in Mexico's capital" . Mexconnect newsletter.  ISSN   1028-9089 . Retrieved  24 October  2012 . 
 
 ^   Tomky, Naomi (March 2012).  "5 Sandwiches You Should Eat in Mexico" .  Serious Eats . Serious Eats Inc. 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   e   Perez, Ramona Lee (2009).  Tasting culture: Food, family and flavor in Greater Mexico  (PhD). New York University. Docket 3365727. 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   e   Graber, Karen Hursh (1 January 2006).  "The cuisines of Northern Mexico: La cocina norteña" . Mexconnect newsletter.  ISSN   1028-9089 . Retrieved  24 October  2012 . 
 
 ^   "Traditional food of Nuevo León" . Gobierno del Estado de Nuevo León . Retrieved  16 March  2012 . 
 
 ^   Jewish Encyclopedia: Carabajal . Accessed 5 March 2011. 
 
 ^   Cocina Estado por estado: Oaxaca  [ State by state cuisine: Oaxaca ] (in Spanish). Vol. 1. Mexico City: El Universal /Radar Editores. 2007. 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   Graber, Karen Hursh (1 January 2006).  "The Cuisine of Oaxaca, Land of the Seven Moles" . Mexconnect newsletter.  ISSN   1028-9089 . Retrieved  24 October  2012 . 
 
 ^   Graber, Karen Hursh (1 January 2006).  "The cuisine of Veracruz: a tasty blend of cultures" . Mexconnect newsletter.  ISSN   1028-9089 . Retrieved  24 October  2012 . 
 
 ^   SABORES A TRADICIÓN.  Experiencias de mujeres de la región cafetalera del Estado de Veracruz Radio Teocelo 2012 
 
 ^   Sabor, Historia y.  "Raquel Torres, sazón con sentimiento" .  Historia y sabor . Retrieved  7 February  2022 . 
 
 ^   Xalapa, Celia Gayosso | Diario de.  "La gastronomía de Raquel Torres Cerdán: "cuando uno come, evoca" " .  Diario de Xalapa | Noticias Locales, Policiacas, sobre México, Veracruz, y el Mundo  (in Spanish) . Retrieved  7 February  2022 . 
 
 ^  a   b   Graber, Karen Hursh (1 January 2004).  "The Cuisine of Michoacán: Mexican Soul Food" . Mexconnect newsletter.  ISSN   1028-9089 . Retrieved  24 October  2012 . 
 
 ^   Cocina Estado por estado: Michoacán  [ State by state cuisine: Michoacán ] (in Spanish). Vol. 5. Mexico City: El Universal /Radar Editores. 2007. 
 
 ^   Cocina Estado por estado: Colima Jalisco  [ State by state cuisine: Colima Jalisco ] (in Spanish). Vol. 12. Mexico City: El Universal /Radar Editores. 2007. 
 
 ^  a   b   c   Graber, Karen Hursh (1 January 2007).  "The cuisine of Jalisco: la cocina tapatia" . Mexconnect newsletter.  ISSN   1028-9089 . Retrieved  24 October  2012 . 
 
 ^   Seler, Edward (1902).  Codex Vaticanus . London: Duke of Loubat. p. 54. 
 
 ^   Booth, Willard C. (December 1966). "Dramatic Aspects of Aztec Rituals".  Educational Theatre Journal .  18  (4): 421–428.  doi : 10.2307/3205269 .  JSTOR   3205269 . 
 
 ^   Cocina Estado por estado: Baja California, Baja California Sur  [ State by state cuisine: Baja California, Baja California Sur ] (in Spanish). Vol. 11. Mexico City: El Universal /Radar Editores. 2007. 
 
 ^   Gonzalez, Ray (1992).  "Hangover Cure" .  Lapham's Quarterly . Retrieved  2013-05-05 . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   e   Graber, Karen Hursh (1 January 2006).  "The cuisine of the Yucatan: a gastronomical tour of the Maya heartland" . Mexconnect newsletter.  ISSN   1028-9089 . Retrieved  24 October  2012 . 
 
 ^   "Yucatan Mayan Food" . Mayan-yucatan-traveler.com. Archived from  the original  on 28 August 2015 . Retrieved  11 September  2015 . 
 
 ^   Bayless, Rick; Brownson, JeanMarie; Bayless, Deann Groen (Fall 2000). "Cochinita Pibil Recipe".  Mexico—One Plate at a Time . Scribner . Retrieved  26 November  2015 . 
 
 ^   Secrets from the Yucatecan Kitchen: red achiote & bitter orange marinade - Mid City Beat  [1] 
 
 ^   Winfree, Laura (12 August 2010).  "Yucatan Seafood: Ceviche de Chivitas" .  Gringation Cancun . Retrieved  11 September  2015 . 
 
 ^   Long-Solis 1, Vargas 2, Janet 1, Luis Alberto 2 (2005).  Food Culture in Mexico . Greenwood press.  ISBN   978-0-313-32431-4 . 
 
 ^   Walters, Dale (5 January 2021),  "Food of the Gods" ,  Chocolate Crisis , University Press of Florida, pp. 1–10,  doi : 10.5744/florida/9781683401674.003.0001 ,  ISBN   9781683401674 ,  S2CID   244331285 , retrieved  1 April  2022 
 
 ^   Norton, Marcy (1 June 2006).  "Tasting Empire: Chocolate and the European Internalization of Mesoamerican Aesthetics" .  The American Historical Review .  111  (3): 660–691.  doi : 10.1086/ahr.111.3.660 .  ISSN   1937-5239 .  S2CID   149060221 . 
 
 ^   Le, Dung (2015).  "Strong positivity of continuous supersolutions to parabolic equations with rough boundary data" .  Discrete & Continuous Dynamical Systems - A .  35  (4): 1521–1530.  doi : 10.3934/dcds.2015.35.1521 .  ISSN   1553-5231 . 
 
 ^   López, Tracy (9 December 2016).  "The Hidden History of Churros" .  Fox News . Retrieved  19 April  2022 . 
 
 ^   Burnett, Victoria (11 February 2016).  "Oaxaca's Native Maize Embraced by Top Chefs in U.S. and Europe" .  The New York Times . Retrieved  13 February  2016 .  In New York, Los Angeles and beyond, a taste for high-quality Mexican food and its earthy centerpiece, the handmade tortilla, has created a small but growing market for the native, or landrace, corn 
 
 ^   Xiong, Mao (2009).  Affective testing on the seven moles of Oaxaca  (PhD). California State University, Fresno.  OCLC   535140266 . Docket 1484546. 
 
 ^   Jane & Michael Stern (15 November 2009).  "In Search of American Food" . 
 
 ^   "Daniela Soto-Innes" .  Forbes . Retrieved  2019-06-26 . 
 
 
 Bibliography [ edit ] 
 Abarca, Meredith E. (2006).  Rio Grande/Río Bravo: Borderlands Culture, 9 : Voices in the Kitchen : Views of Food and the World from Working-Class Mexican and Mexican American Women . College Station, TX, USA: Texas A&M University Press.  ISBN   978-1-58544-531-8 . 
 Adapon, Joy (2008).  Culinary Art and Anthropology . Oxford: Berg Publishers.  ISBN   978-1-84788-213-4 . 
 Iturriaga, José N. (1993).  La Cultura del Antojito  [ The Culture of Snack/Street Food ] (in Spanish). Mexico City: Editorial Diana.  ISBN   968-13-2527-3 . 
 Luengas, Arnulfo (2000).  La Cocina del Banco Nacional de México  [ The Cuisine of the National Bank of Mexico ] (in Spanish). Mexico City: Fomento Cultural Banamex.  ISBN   968-7009-94-2 . 
 Malat, Randy, ed. (2008).  Passport Mexico : Your Pocket Guide to Mexican Business, Customs and Etiquette . Barbara Szerlip. Petaluma, CA, USA: World Trade Press.  ISBN   978-1-885073-91-4 . 
 Pilcher, Jeffrey M.  Planet Taco: A Global History of Mexican Food  (Oxford University Press, 2012)  online review 
 Pilcher, Jeffrey M.  Que Vivan Los Tamales! Food and the Making of Mexican National Identity  (1998) 
 External links [ edit ] 
 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons has media related to  Cuisine of Mexico . 
 
 
 
 
 Wikibooks  Cookbook  has a recipe/module on
 
  Cuisine of Mexico 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wikivoyage has a travel guide for  Mexican food . 
 
 v t e Mexican cuisine List of Mexican dishes Soups and stews 
 Birria 
 Caldo de pollo 
 Caldo de queso 
 Caldo de siete mares 
 Caldo tlalpeño 
 Caldo Xóchitl 
 Chileatole 
 Clemole 
 Cocido 
 Lime soup 
 Manchamanteles 
 Menudo 
 Mole de olla 
 Pozole 
 Sopa de fideo 
 Sopa de nopal 
 Tortilla soup 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rice dishes 
 Arroz a la tumbada 
 Arroz blanco 
 Arroz negro 
 Arroz poblano 
 Arroz rojo 
 Morisqueta 
 Bean dishes 
 Borracho beans 
 Frijoles charros 
 Frijoles negros 
 Frijoles Puercos 
 Refried beans 
 Egg dishes 
 Huevos a la mexicana 
 Huevos divorciados 
 Huevos motuleños 
 Huevos rancheros 
 Machacado con huevo 
 Vegetable dishes 
 Chile relleno 
 Chiles en escabeche 
 Chiles en nogada 
 Chipotle 
 Elote 
 Esquites 
 Guasanas 
 Nopal asado 
 Rajas con crema 
 Romeritos 
 Meat dishes 
 Al pastor 
 Barbacoa 
 Cabrito 
 Discada 
 Entomatada 
 Mixiote 
 Moronga 
 Pastel azteca 
 Relleno negro 
 Tripas 
 Poultry 
 Arroz con pollo 
 Chicken feet 
 Escabeche oriental 
 Mole poblano 
 Pollo motuleño 
 Tinga de pollo 
 Tlatonile 
 Pork 
 Adobada 
 Calabacitas con puerco 
 Carne de chango 
 Carnitas 
 Chicharrón en salsa 
 Chileajo de cerdo 
 Chilorio 
 Chorizo 
 Cochinita pibil 
 Cueritos 
 Poc chuc 
 Beef 
 Alambre 
 Aporreadillo 
 Albóndigas al chipotle 
 Beef brain 
 Beef tongue 
 Cabeza 
 Carne a la tampiqueña 
 Carne asada 
 Carne seca 
 Criadillas 
 Machaca 
 Milanesa 
 Pachola 
 Picadillo 
 Puntas 
 Quesobirria 
 Salpicón 
 Tinga de res 
 Seafood 
 Aguachil 
 Cahuamanta 
 Camarones al ajillo 
 Ceviche 
 Huachinango a la Veracruzana 
 Mixmole de pescado 
 Mojarra frita 
 Pan de cazón 
 Pescadito 
 Pescado al ajillo 
 Pulpo a la campechana 
 Other protein dishes 
 Chahuis 
 Chapulines 
 Escamoles 
 Huitlacoche 
 Jumiles 
 Maguey worm 
 Cheese dishes 
 Chicharrón de queso 
 Quesadilla 
 Queso en salsa 
 Queso flameado 
 Antojitos 
 Empalme 
 Enchilada 
 Guajolota 
 Nachos 
 Quesadilla 
 Taco 
 Taquito 
 Corn dough 
 Cazuelita 
 Chalupa 
 Chilaquiles 
 Chimichanga 
 Chochoyote 
 Corn tortilla 
 Corunda 
 Doblada 
 Duros 
 Gordita 
 Huarache 
 Molote 
 Panucho 
 Papadzules 
 Piedra 
 Salbut 
 Sope  or  Memela 
 Tamale 
 Tlacoyo 
 Tlayuda 
 Tostada 
 Totopo 
 Wheat dough 
 Burrito 
 Cemita 
 Gringas 
 Mollete 
 Pambazo 
 Paste 
 Sincronizada 
 Torta 
 Wheat tortilla 
 Sauces and condiments 
 Adobo 
 Mole 
 Mole blanco 
 Mole poblano 
 Mole verde 
 Recado rojo 
 Salsa 
 Salsa roja 
 Salsa verde 
 Desserts and sweets 
 Agave syrup 
 Alegría 
 Alfajor 
 Arroz con leche 
 Bionico 
 Brazo gitano 
 Cajeta de Celaya 
 Capirotada 
 Chongos zamoranos 
 Churros 
 Cocada 
 Coyotas 
 Flan de leche 
 Dulce de leche 
 Fried ice cream 
 Mango con chile 
 Marquesita 
 Mazapán 
 Nicuatole 
 Orejas 
 Panela 
 Polvorón 
 Tres leches cake 
 Turrón 
 Salads 
 Caesar salad 
 Curtido 
 Nopalitos 
 Guacamole 
 Pico de gallo 
 Breads 
 Bolillo 
 Buñuelo 
 Cemita 
 Cochinito de piloncillo 
 Cocol 
 Concha 
 Pan de muerto 
 Pan dulce 
 Rosca 
 de reyes 
 Beverages 
 Agua de Jamaica 
 Atole 
 Beer 
 Café de olla 
 Chamoyada 
 Champurrado 
 Curado 
 Horchata 
 Licuado 
 Margarita 
 Mexican tea culture 
 Ponche 
 Popo 
 Pozol 
 Tascalate 
 Tejate 
 Variants Regional 
 Aztec 
 Baja Med 
 Chiapas 
 Veracruz 
 Oaxaca 
 American 
 New Mexican 
 Tex-Mex 
 
 Comal 
 Escuela de Gastronomía Mexicana 
 Taco stand 
 Chocolate 
 Vanilla 
 
   Food portal 
   Mexico portal 
   Category 
   Commons 
   Cookbook 
   WikiProject 
 
 v t e Mexico   articles History 
 Pre-Columbian era 
 Colonial era 
 War of Independence 
 First Mexican Empire 
 Control of Central America 
 Supreme Executive Power 
 First Mexican Republic 
 Spanish reconquest attempts 
 Centralist Republic of Mexico 
 Texas Revolution 
 Pastry War 
 Mexican–American War 
 Second Mexican Republic 
 La Reforma 
 Second French intervention 
 Second Mexican Empire 
 Restored Republic 
 Caste War 
 Yaqui Wars 
 Porfiriato 
 Mexican Revolution 
 Second American intervention 
 Cristero War 
 Maximato 
 Institutional Revolutionary Party 
 Mexican miracle 
 Lost Decade 
 Peso crisis 
 Chiapas conflict 
 War on drugs 
 Geography 
 Borders 
 Cities 
 Climate  ( Climate change ) 
 Earthquakes 
 Environmental issues 
 Extreme points 
 Forests 
 Islands 
 Lakes 
 Metropolitan areas 
 Mountains 
 Protected natural areas 
 Rivers 
 States 
 Municipalities 
 Territorial evolution 
 Time 
 Volcanos 
 Water resources 
 Wettest-known tropical cyclones 
 Wildlife 
 Politics 
 Administrative divisions 
 Congress 
 Senate 
 Chamber of Deputies 
 Constitution 
 Elections 
 Federal government 
 Foreign relations 
 Human rights 
 Intersex 
 LGBT 
 Law 
 Law enforcement 
 Military 
 Political parties 
 President 
 Cabinet 
 State legislatures 
 Supreme Court 
 Economy 
 Agriculture 
 Automotive industry 
 Central bank 
 Companies 
 Economic history 
 Energy 
 Renewable energy 
 Institutional stock exchange 
 Irrigation 
 Labor law 
 Land reform 
 Manufacturing 
 National stock exchange 
 North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) 
 Oil 
 Pension system 
 Peso  (currency) 
 Petroleum 
 Science and technology 
 States by GDP 
 States by unemployment 
 Telecommunications 
 Tourism 
 Transportation 
 Water scarcity 
 Society 
 Corruption 
 Crime 
 Demographics 
 Education 
 Flags 
 Healthcare 
 Immigration 
 Nationality law 
 People 
 Indigenous peoples 
 Women 
 Poverty 
 Public holidays 
 States by HDI 
 Water supply and sanitation 
 Welfare 
 Prostitution 
 Culture 
 Architecture 
 Art 
 Cinema 
 Cuisine 
 Folklore 
 Handcrafts and folk art 
 Languages 
 Literature 
 Monuments 
 Music 
 National symbols 
 Radio 
 Religion 
 Our Lady of Guadalupe 
 Sports 
 Television 
 World Heritage Sites 
 Outline Index 
 Category 
 Portal 
 v t e North American cuisine Sovereign states 
 Antigua and Barbuda 
 Bahamas 
 Barbados 
 Belize 
 Canada 
 Costa Rica 
 Cuba 
 Dominica 
 Dominican Republic 
 El Salvador 
 Grenada 
 Guatemala 
 Haiti 
 Honduras 
 Jamaica 
 Mexico 
 Nicaragua 
 Panama 
 Saint Kitts and Nevis 
 Saint Lucia 
 Saint Vincent and the Grenadines 
 Trinidad and Tobago 
 United States 
 Dependencies and other territories 
 Anguilla 
 Aruba 
 Bermuda 
 Bonaire 
 British Virgin Islands 
 Cayman Islands 
 Curaçao 
 Greenland 
 Guadeloupe 
 Martinique 
 Montserrat 
 Puerto Rico 
 Saint Barthélemy 
 Saint Martin 
 Saint Pierre and Miquelon 
 Saba 
 Sint Eustatius 
 Sint Maarten 
 Turks and Caicos Islands 
 United States Virgin Islands 
 
   Food portal 
   Category: North American cuisine 
 
 v t e Latin America and the Caribbean Caribbean 
 Antigua and Barbuda 
 Aruba 
 Bahamas 
 Barbados 
 Cuba 
 Curaçao 
 Dominica 
 Dominican Republic 
 Grenada 
 Haiti 
 Jamaica 
 Puerto Rico 
 Saint Kitts and Nevis 
 Saint Lucia 
 Saint Vincent and the Grenadines 
 Sint Maarten 
 Trinidad and Tobago 
 Central America 
 Costa Rica 
 El Salvador 
 Guatemala 
 Honduras 
 Nicaragua 
 Panama 
 Middle America 
 Mexico 
 South America 
 Argentina 
 Bolivia 
 Brazil 
 Chile 
 Colombia 
 Ecuador 
 Paraguay 
 Peru 
 Uruguay 
 Venezuela 
 Dependencies  not included.      Semi-autonomous territories are in italics. 
 v t e Cuisines Continental 
 African 
 North 
 West 
 list 
 Americas 
 Caribbean 
 North 
 South 
 list 
 Asian 
 Caucasian 
 Central 
 Indian subcontinent 
 Levantine 
 list 
 European 
 Balkan 
 Central 
 Eastern 
 list 
 Oceanic 
 Intercontinental
 Global 
 Latin American 
 Mediterranean 
 Middle Eastern 
 National  and regional 
 Afghan 
 Albanian 
 Algerian 
 American 
 Californian 
 Floribbean 
 Hawaiian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Lowcountry (South Carolina) 
 New England 
 New Mexico 
 Pacific Northwest 
 Pennsylvania Dutch 
 Puerto Rican 
 Southern US 
 Southwest US 
 Texas 
 Angolan 
 Argentine 
 Armenian 
 Australian 
 Austrian 
 Azerbaijani 
 Bahraini 
 Bangladeshi 
 Barbadian 
 Belarusian 
 Belgian 
 Belizean 
 Beninese 
 Bhutanese 
 Bolivian 
 Bosnian-Herzegovinian 
 Botswana 
 Brazilian 
 British 
 Channel Islands 
 English 
 Gibraltarian 
 Northern Irish 
 Saint Helena 
 Scottish 
 Welsh 
 Bruneian 
 Bulgarian 
 Burkinabé 
 Burmese 
 Burundian 
 Cambodian 
 Cameroonian 
 Canadian 
 Acadian 
 Québécois 
 Central African Republic 
 Chadian 
 Chilean 
 Chinese 
 Cantonese 
 Hong Kong 
 Macanese 
 Tibetan 
 Xinjiang 
 Colombian 
 Congolese 
 Corsican 
 Croatian 
 Cuban 
 Cypriot 
 Czech 
 Danish 
 Faroese 
 Greenlandic 
 Djiboutian 
 Dominican 
 Dominican Republic 
 Dutch 
 East Timorese 
 Ecuadorian 
 Egyptian 
 Emirati 
 Equatorial Guinean 
 Eritrean 
 Estonian 
 Ethiopian 
 Fijian 
 Filipino 
 Finnish 
 French 
 Occitan 
 French Guianan 
 Gabonese 
 Gambian 
 Georgian 
 German 
 Ghanaian 
 Greek 
 Cretan 
 Epirotic 
 Greek Macedonian 
 Heptanesean 
 Guatemalan 
 Guinea-Bissauan 
 Guinean 
 Haitian 
 Honduran 
 Hungarian 
 Icelandic 
 Indian 
 Arunachalese 
 Assamese 
 Bengali 
 Bihari 
 Goan 
 Gujarati 
 Himachal Pradesh 
 Kashmiri 
 Jharkhandi 
 Karnataka 
 Kerala 
 Maharashtrian 
 Manipuri 
 Meghalayan 
 Mizo 
 Naga 
 Odia 
 Punjabi 
 Rajasthani 
 Sikkimese 
 Sindhi 
 Tamil 
 Telangana 
 Telugu 
 Indonesian 
 Acehnese 
 Balinese 
 Banjar 
 Batak 
 Betawi 
 Indo 
 Javanese 
 Madurese 
 Makassar 
 Minahasan 
 Minangkabau 
 Palembangese 
 Sundanese 
 Iranian 
 Iraqi 
 Irish 
 Israeli 
 Italian 
 Abruzzese 
 Ligurian 
 Lombard 
 Lucanian 
 Neapolitan 
 Roman 
 Sardinian 
 Sicilian 
 Venetian 
 Ivorian 
 Jamaican 
 Japanese 
 Okinawan 
 Jordanian 
 Kazakh 
 Kenyan 
 Korean 
 North Korean 
 South Korean 
 Kosovan 
 Kuwaiti 
 Kyrgyz 
 Lao 
 Latvian 
 Lebanese 
 Lesotho 
 Liberian 
 Libyan 
 Liechtensteiner 
 Lithuanian 
 Luxembourg 
 Macedonian 
 Malagasy 
 Malawian 
 Malaysian 
 Sabahan 
 Sarawakian 
 Maldivian 
 Malian 
 Maltese 
 Mauritanian 
 Mauritian 
 Mexican 
 Moldovan 
 Monégasque 
 Mongolian 
 Montenegrin 
 Moroccan 
 Mozambican 
 Namibian 
 Nauruan 
 Nepalese 
 New Zealand 
 Nicaraguan 
 Niger 
 Nigerian 
 Niuean 
 Norwegian 
 Omani 
 Pakistani 
 Palestinian 
 Panamanian 
 Peruvian 
 Polish 
 Portuguese 
 Qatari 
 Romanian  (incl.  Transylvanian Saxon ) 
 Russian 
 Bashkir 
 Chechen 
 Circassian 
 Komi 
 Mordovian 
 Sakha 
 Tatar 
 Udmurt 
 Yamal 
 Rwandan 
 Saint Lucian 
 Salvadoran 
 Sammarinese 
 São Tomé and Príncipe 
 Saudi Arabian 
 Senegalese 
 Serbian 
 Seychellois 
 Sierra Leonean 
 Singaporean 
 Slovak 
 Slovenian 
 Somali 
 South African 
 Spanish 
 Andalusian 
 Asturian 
 Balearic 
 Basque 
 Canarian 
 Cantabrian 
 Catalan 
 Extremaduran 
 Galician 
 Manchegan 
 Valencian 
 Sri Lankan 
 Sudanese 
 Swazi 
 Swedish 
 Swiss 
 Syrian 
 Taiwanese 
 Tajik 
 Tanzanian 
 Zanzibari 
 Thai 
 Togolese 
 Tunisian 
 Turkish 
 Turkmen 
 Trinidadian and Tobagonian 
 Ugandan 
 Ukrainian 
 Uruguayan 
 Uzbek 
 Venezuelan 
 Vietnamese 
 Western Saharan 
 Yemeni 
 Zambian 
 Zimbabwean 
 Ethnic 
 Ainu 
 Arab 
 Indonesian 
 Aromanian 
 Assyrian 
 Balochi 
 Berber 
 Cajun 
 Chinese 
 American 
 Canadian 
 Chifa 
 Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Crimean Tatar 
 Greek American 
 Hazaragi 
 Indian 
 Anglo-Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Indigenous American 
 Inuit 
 Italian American 
 Kurdish 
 Livonian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Malay 
 Ossetian 
 Parsi 
 Pashtun 
 Peranakan 
 Romani 
 Sámi 
 Soul food 
 Sylheti 
 Transylvanian Saxon 
 Yup'ik 
 Religious 
 Buddhist 
 Christian 
 Goan Catholic 
 Mangalorean Catholic 
 Mennonite 
 Hindu 
 Islamic 
 Chinese 
 Ital 
 Jain 
 Jewish 
 American 
 Ashkenazi 
 Bukharan 
 Ethiopian 
 Mizrahi 
 Sephardic 
 Syrian 
 Ritual slaughter 
 Sikh 
 Historical 
 Ancient Egyptian 
 Ancient Greek 
 Ancient Israelite 
 Ancient Roman 
 Antebellum America 
 Aztec 
 Byzantine 
 Early modern European 
 Historical Chinese 
 Historical Indian subcontinent 
 Historical North Indian and Pakistani 
 History of agriculture 
 History of alcoholic drinks 
 History of bread 
 History of seafood 
 History of vegetarianism 
 Historical Argentine 
 Historical Japanese 
 Inca 
 Mayan 
 Muisca 
 Mughal 
 Medieval 
 Ottoman 
 Peasant 
 Soviet 
 Thirteen Colonies 
 Styles 
 Classique 
 Fast food 
 Fusion 
 New American 
 Eurasian 
 Haute 
 Molecular gastronomy 
 Note by Note 
 Nouvelle 
 Lists 
 List of cuisines 
 List of historical cuisines 
 Lists of prepared foods 
 Related 
 Cookbook 
 Cooking 
 Culinary arts 
 Drink 
 Food 
 history 
 Diet 
 Meal preparation 
 
   Food portal 
   Drink portal 
   Category 
   Commons 
   Cookbook 
   WikiProject 
   Outline 
 
 Authority control   National libraries 
 France 
 BnF data 
 Israel 
 United States 
 Japan 
 Other 
 FAST 
 IdRef 
 
  
NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw2305
Cached time: 20230310194207
Cache expiry: 1814400
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc, no‐toc‐conversion]
CPU time usage: 1.276 seconds
Real time usage: 1.604 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 6472/1000000
Post‐expand include size: 310650/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 14773/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 44/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 272607/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.658/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 24474517/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/400
 
 
Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1123.458      1 -total
 33.17%  372.630      1 Template:Reflist
 17.47%  196.217     32 Template:Cite_web
  9.39%  105.471      1 Template:Transl
  8.61%   96.685      1 Template:Culture_of_Mexico
  8.44%   94.765      1 Template:Sidebar
  6.50%   72.987      7 Template:Navbox
  6.34%   71.231      1 Template:Mexico_topics
  6.17%   69.359      1 Template:Country_topics
  5.64%   63.366     15 Template:Cite_book
 
  Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:idhash:20167-0!canonical and timestamp 20230310194205 and revision id 1143661985. Rendering was triggered because: page-view
  
 esi <esi:include src="/esitest-fa8a495983347898/content" />  
 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Mexican_cuisine&oldid=1143661985 " 
 Categories :  Mexican cuisine Latin American cuisine Mesoamerican cuisine North American cuisine Hidden categories:  CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Spanish-language text Pages using multiple image with manual scaled images All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2022 Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with BNF identifiers Articles with J9U identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers Articles with NDL identifiers Articles with FAST identifiers Articles with SUDOC identifiers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  This page was last edited on 9 March 2023, at 03:38  (UTC) . 
 Text is available under the  Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0 ;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the  Terms of Use  and  Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the  Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. 
 
 
 Privacy policy 
 About Wikipedia 
 Disclaimers 
 Contact Wikipedia 
 Mobile view 
 Developers 
 Statistics 
 Cookie statement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
