
 
 
 Jump to content 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle sidebar 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Create account Log in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Personal tools 
 
 
 
 
   Create account   Log in 
 
 
 
 
		Pages for logged out editors  learn more 
 
 
 Contributions Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Navigation 
 
 
 Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate 
 
 
 
 
 Contribute 
 
 
 Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file 
 
 
 
 
 Tools 
 
 
 What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item 
 
 
 
 
 Print/export 
 
 
 Download as PDF Printable version 
 
 
 
 
 In other projects 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons Wikibooks Wikivoyage 
 
 
 
 
 Languages 
 
 On this Wikipedia the language links are at the top of the page across from the article title.  Go to top . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CentralNotice  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Contents 
 move to sidebar 
 hide 
 
 
 
 
 (Top) 
 
 
 
 
 
 1 Geography 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 Varieties 
 
 
				Toggle Varieties subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 2.1 Fertile Crescent cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.2 Arab cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.3 Southern Caucasian 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.4 Rest 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 History and influences 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4 Elements 
 
 
				Toggle Elements subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 4.1 Grains 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.2 Flavorings 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.3 Religious influence 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.4 Vegetables 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.5 Dishes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5 Beverages 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6 Dining etiquette 
 
 
				Toggle Dining etiquette subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 6.1 Arab countries 
 
 
 
 
 
 6.1.1 Ramadan 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6.2 Turkey 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6.3 Iran 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 7 Globalization 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8 See also 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 9 References 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 10 External links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
						Toggle the table of contents
					 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle the table of contents 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Middle Eastern cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 16 languages 
 
 
 
 العربية Deutsch Español Esperanto فارسی Français Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Jawa Lietuvių Bahasa Melayu Nederlands Português ไทย Türkçe 
 Edit links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Article Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 English 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 More 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
 
 
 Regional cuisine 
 This article  needs additional citations for  verification .  Please help  improve this article  by  adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources:   "Middle Eastern cuisine"  –  news   ·   newspapers   ·   books   ·   scholar   ·   JSTOR   ( October 2009 )  ( Learn how and when to remove this template message ) 
   Hummus , a  Levantine  and  Egyptian  dip made from mashed chickpeas 
   Serving in Jerusalem restaurant including  falafel ,  hummus , and salad 
 Middle Eastern cuisine  or  West Asian cuisine  includes  Arab ,  Armenian ,  Assyrian ,  Azerbaijani ,  Cypriot ,  Egyptian ,  Georgian ,  Iranian ,  Iraqi ,  Israeli ,  Kurdish ,  Lebanese ,  Palestinian  and  Turkish  cuisines. Common ingredients include  olives  and  olive oil ,  pitas ,  honey ,  sesame seeds ,  dates , [1]   sumac ,  chickpeas ,  mint ,  rice  and  parsley , and popular dishes include  kebabs ,  dolmas ,  falafel ,  baklava ,  yogurt ,  doner kebab ,  shawarma  and  mulukhiyah .
 
 
 Geography [ edit ] 
   Core countries considered to be part of the Middle East 
 The exact countries considered to be part of the  Middle East  are difficult to determine as the definition has changed over time and from source to source. [2]  Currently the countries that are considered to comprise the Middle East are:  Bahrain ,  Cyprus ,  Egypt ,  Iran ,  Iraq ,  Israel ,  Jordan ,  Kuwait ,  Palestine ,  Lebanon ,  Oman ,  Qatar ,  Saudi Arabia ,  Syria ,  Turkey ,  United Arab Emirates , and  Yemen . However, Middle Eastern cuisine includes dishes from  Arab ,  Armenian ,  Assyrian ,  Azerbaijani ,  Cypriot ,  Georgian ,  Iranian ,  Israeli ,  Kurdish ,  Levantine , and  Turkish  cultures. [1] 
 
 Varieties [ edit ] 
 Fertile Crescent cuisine [ edit ] 
 
 Lebanese cuisine 
 Cypriot cuisine 
 Israeli cuisine 
 Mesopotamian cuisine 
 Assyrian cuisine 
 Egyptian cuisine 
 Palestinian cuisine 
 Syrian cuisine 
 
 Arab cuisine [ edit ] 
 
 Bahraini cuisine 
 Emirati cuisine 
 Jordanian cuisine 
 Kuwaiti cuisine 
 Omani cuisine 
 Qatari cuisine 
 Saudi Arabian cuisine 
 Yemeni cuisine 
 
 Southern Caucasian [ edit ] 
 
 Armenian cuisine 
 Azerbaijani cuisine 
 Georgian cuisine 
 Ossetian cuisine 
 
 Rest [ edit ] 
 
 Kurdish cuisine 
 Iranian cuisine 
 Turkish cuisine 
 
 History and influences [ edit ] 
   Shawarma 
 The Middle East incorporates the  Fertile Crescent , including  Mesopotamia  ( Sumer ,  Akkad ,  Assyria  and  Babylonia ) where  wheat  was first cultivated, followed by  rye ,  barley ,  lentils ,  beans ,  pistachios ,  figs ,  pomegranates ,  dates  and other regional staples. [3]  The domestication of  sheep ,  goats  and  cattle  took place in the region as well.  Fermentation  was also discovered there, in order to leaven bread and make beer in  Ancient Egypt [4]  and  Mesopotamia . [5]  Additionally, the earliest written recipes come from that region.
 As a crossroad between  Europe ,  Asia ,  the Caucasus  and  North Africa , it has been a hub of food and recipe exchange. During the  first Persian Empire  (ca. 550–330 BCE), the foundation was laid for modern Middle-Eastern food when  rice ,  poultry  and  fruits  were incorporated into the local diet. Figs, dates and  nuts  were brought by merchants to conquered lands, and spices were brought from the  Orient . [6] [1] 
 The region was also influenced by  dumplings  from  Mongol invaders ;  turmeric  and other spices from India;  cloves ,  peppercorns  and  allspice  from the  Spice Islands ;  okra  from Africa, and  tomatoes  from the New World.
 Religion has impacted the cuisine by making  lamb  the primary meat since both Jews and Muslims do not eat  pork . [7] 
 The  Qur'an  forbids alcohol consumption, which is why non-Islamic countries produce and export alcohol. Prime example would be  wine  made in  Lebanon , in vineyards such as  Château Ksara , Chateau Kefraya [8]  and Chateau Masaya [9]  which have gained international recognition. Château Ksara is also known for its  arak ksarak .  Al-Maza  is Lebanon's primary brewery, and once it was the Middle East's only beer producer.
 Before the 1979 change of regime,  Iran  was noted for its  wine production . [1] [10] 
 Under the  Ottoman Empire , sweet pastries of paper-thin  phyllo  dough and thick  coffee  were brought and introduced to the region. [11] [12] [13] 
 
 Elements [ edit ] 
 Grains [ edit ] 
 Grains are the basis of the Middle Eastern diet, where  wheat  and  rice  are considered staple foods.  Barley  is also widely used in the region, and  maize  in addition has become common in some areas.  Bread  is a universal food eaten in some form by all classes at nearly every meal.
 In addition to bread, wheat is also used in  burghul  and  couscous .  Burghul  is cracked wheat made by partially cooking wheat grains in water, drying them in an oven (or in the sun), and breaking them into pieces. It is typically cooked in water with flavorings, much like rice.
 Burghul  is also used in meat pies and as an ingredient in salads (notably in  tabbouleh  with chopped parsley, tomato, lemon, and oil).  Freekeh  is another common grain, made from immature green wheat.
 Many types of rice are produced and consumed in the region. Plain rice is served under grilled meats or in meat and vegetable stews. More complex rice dishes have layers of meat, vegetables, sauces, nuts, or dried fruits.
 
 Flavorings [ edit ] 
 Butter  and  clarified butter  (also known as  smen ), also ghee, are traditionally the preferred oil to cook in. Also,  olive oil  is prevalent in Mediterranean coastal areas, where  Christians  use it during the  Lenten  and other  fasts  which disallow meat and dairy products. [14]  and  Jews  use it instead of animal fats (such as butter) to avoid combining meat and dairy products.
 Most regions in the Middle East use spices. A typical stew will include a small amount of  cinnamon ,  nutmeg ,  cloves ,  cumin , and  coriander .  Black pepper  is popular and  chili peppers  are used occasionally, especially as a sauce or as pickles. Parsley and mint are widely used in cooking and in salads.
 Thyme and thyme blends  ( za'atar ) are common among Syria, Lebanon, Jordan, Palestine and Israel, in addition to a mixture of dried thyme and  sumac  (crushed sour berries) which is prevalent at breakfast with oil and bread. Sumac is also sprinkled over grilled meat and  garlic  is frequently used in many dishes and salads.
 
 Religious influence [ edit ] 
   Kebab koobideh 
 Lamb and mutton  are favored meats, since  pork  is prohibited by both  Islamic  and  Jewish   dietary laws .
 Grilled meats ( kebabs ) are popular, with many regional varieties. The most popular is cubed lamb on skewers ( shish kebab ), and chicken that may also be grilled in the same fashion. Another extensive variety is  kofta kebab , made from  ground meat  mixed with onions and spices, shaped around the skewer like a sausage and grilled.  Kebabs  are typically street or restaurant food, served with bread, salad and pickles, and are not usually prepared at home.
 Meat and vegetable stews are served with rice,  bulgur , or bread.  Kibbeh  is a pie (or dumpling) made with meat and cereal.
 The most popular  kibbeh  is made with ground meat (typically lamb) and  burghul , worked together into a dough and stuffed with minced meat fried with onion, herbs and sometimes pine nuts, or almonds and raisins, prepared as individual small dumplings (shaped like a torpedo) or sliced like a cake and baked on an oven tray with two layers of stuffed dough.
 Another variation of  kibbeh  is  kibbeh naye , made by pounding raw meat and  burghul  with seasonings,  served with lemon juice and chili sauce for dipping.
 
   Kibbeh nayyeh 
 Vegetables [ edit ] 
   Tursu  are pickled vegetables served in many  Balkan  and Middle East countries 
 Vegetables and  pulses  are staple foods, and are boiled, stewed, grilled, stuffed, and cooked with meat and rice.  Leaf vegetables  include many varieties of  cabbage ,  spinach , and  chard .  Root vegetables , such as  onions ,  garlic ,  carrots ,  turnips , and  beets , are also popular in the region.
 Squash ,  tomato ,  eggplant , and  okra  are distinctive elements of the region's cuisine. Eggplant is often sliced, fried and dressed with yogurt and garlic.  Baba ghanoush  is eggplant roasted over an open fire, mashed and dressed with  tahini  (sesame paste), lemon juice, garlic, and cumin.
 Tomato is the most ubiquitous ingredient in Middle-Eastern cookery, used fresh in salads, cooked in stews and broth, and grilled with  kebab .
 Beans and pulses are crucial to the regional diet, second only to cereals.  Fava beans  are eaten both green and dried. Dried fava beans are boiled into  ful medames , one of the most popular Egyptian domestic and street foods. As for mashed fava beans, they are dressed with oil, lemon, and chili. Similar dishes are found throughout the region. 
 
   Ful medames  served with sliced hard-boiled  eggs 
 Falafel , which is popular in Europe and the United States, was originally made from dried fava beans formed into a  rissole  with herbs and spices and then fried. It is also made from  chickpeas , or a blend of the two. Green fava are cooked like other green beans, boiled and dressed with oil or  stewed  with meat.  Haricots  and  black-eyed peas  are also well-known.
 Lentils ,  split peas  and chickpeas are widely used in soups and salads, with rice or meat.  Hummus , made from chickpeas and  tahini , originated in Syria and Lebanon.
 
 Dishes [ edit ] 
   Meze  is a selection of small dishes served with alcoholic drinks, as a  course  or as  appetizers  in  Arab countries ,  Turkic countries , and  Iran . 
 Stuffed vegetables, a dish associated with the Middle East cuisine, is commonly called  dolma  ( Turkish  for "stuffed") or  mahshi . Grape leaves, chard, and cabbage are stuffed with rice, ground meat, pine nuts and spices, and stewed in oil and tomatoes. Many vegetables, such as squash, onion, tomato, eggplant, peppers and carrots, are similarly stuffed and stewed (or baked).
 Meze  is popular throughout the Middle East. It consists of a number of small dishes (cheese, melon, nuts, salads and dips such as  tabbouleh ,  hummus  and  mutabbal , and pickles) and more substantial items, such as grilled meat,  kibbeh , and  sausage . [ citation needed ] 
 Middle Easterners frequently consume milk, fresh or  soured .  Yogurt  is commonly consumed plain, also used in cooking and in salad dressing, or diluted as a drink. Greek  feta  and  halloumi  are the region's most popular cheeses.
 
 Beverages [ edit ] 
   Turkish coffee 
 Turkish coffee  is a beverage well known internationally. [15]  Thicker than other coffee, it is made by boiling finely-ground coffee in water and letting the grounds settle. During the 1980s, instant coffee became popular.
 Arak  is a distilled,  anise-flavored  alcoholic drink, usually diluted with water and ice, and served in social gatherings with  meze . [16] 
 Some  Christians , such as the  Assyrians ,  Armenians ,  Cypriots , and  Maronites  make their own  beer  and  wine . [17] 
 Qamar al-Din , a thick, sweet apricot beverage, is drunk by  Muslims  during  Ramadan . Apricots are boiled with sugar and water until they are thick, and sun-dried on wooden planks. The  dried fruit  is then mixed with water and sugar. [18] 
 Jallab  is a fruit syrup made from grape molasses, dates and  rose water  served over crushed ice, sometimes with raisins or pine nuts. [19] 
 Doogh  (or  ayran ) is a salted, yogurt-based beverage which is popular in Turkey and Iran.
 
 Dining etiquette [ edit ] 
 See also:  Etiquette in the Middle East 
 Arab countries [ edit ] 
 In some Arab countries, especially in the  Persian Gulf region , it is common for diners to take their food from a communal plate in the center of the table. They traditionally do not use forks or spoons; instead they scoop up the food with  pita  or a thumb and two fingers.
 In  Arabic culture , the left hand is considered unclean and even left-handed people eat with the right hand. A common exception, however, is that the left hand may hold a drinking glass when eating greasy food with the right. [20] 
 It is proper etiquette to compliment the host on their food and hospitality, and to try every plate on the table. If a guest does not leave food on his plate, the host generally fills it immediately.
 
 Ramadan [ edit ] 
 During  Ramadan , food consumption increases dramatically in Muslim communities. Breaking the daily sunrise-to-sunset fast is a banquet with family and friends whereas public banquets are held by charities and other associations.
 Cafes and pastry shops are open at night, and the streets have a carnival atmosphere. Many Muslims, following  Muhammad 's reported example, break their fast with a date followed by a variety of dishes. Sweet pastries and puddings are always present on Ramadan nights.
 The end of Ramadan is marked by  Eid al-Fitr , featuring a great quantity and variety of sweets and pastries.
 The other major Muslim feast is the four-day  Eid al-Adha , the Feast of the Sacrifice, which occurs during  Dhu al-Hijjah  (the  pilgrimage  month). An animal (usually a sheep or goat) is slaughtered in every household that can afford it, great banquets are prepared, and food is given to the poor. [7] 
 
 Turkey [ edit ] 
 Tea is usually served in curved glasses which are held by the lip to which water may be added. A cup of tea may be refilled if it is less than half full. An honored guest is expected to make a  toast , usually soon after the host does or at the end of the meal.
 Forks, spoons and knives are used. Sometimes, the knife is held in the right hand and the fork in the left, presenting the British-style. Smoking may be acceptable between courses of a dinner. [12] [1] 
 In formal situations and with more traditionalist company, the hosts sit at the head of the table, with the honored guest next to them on the side of the table which is farthest from the door.
 The honored guest is served first, and then it's customary to serve from elder guests to younger, with a bias in favour of men. Diners do not begin eating until the oldest person at the table begins eating.
 In some informal restaurants, dishes are ordered when desired (not all at once at the beginning of a meal). At informal restaurants a table may be shared, but diners are not required to converse.
 Guests may be required to remove their shoes. It is customary to say  Afiyet olsun  ("May what you eat bring well-being") before or after eating, and to say  Elinize sağlik  ("Bless your hand", a compliment for the manual, i.e. "hand" labour involved in cooking) to whoever prepared the meal after a meal. [12] 
 
 Iran [ edit ] 
 Iranian dishes and foods are known for being rice-based and Iran has been popular for its wide rice production. [21]  Dishes are typically served as savory or sweet, rather than in courses.
 In traditional Iranian restaurants, a large, low table lined with Persian rugs and with cushions around the sides is the setting for a meal. Diners sit cross-legged in a circle and food is served in the center (eaten with  cutlery  on separate plates). Tea is served in  kamar baareek  ("narrow-waist") glasses with sugar and Persian sweets.
 When entertaining dinner guests at home, it is seen as discourteous to serve just enough food, so food is prepared in large quantities. An important Persian practice is  taarof  (ritual politeness) where if a person is offered food or drink, they will initially politely decline. Only after the host has offered repeatedly, it is accepted and that is to avoid appearing greedy. [22] 
 
 Globalization [ edit ] 
 In 2017, Middle-Eastern cuisine was reportedly one of the most popular and fastest-growing ethnic cuisines in the  US . [23]  Dishes such as  hummus  and  falafel  are becoming increasingly common in restaurants across the United States. [24] 
 Middle-Eastern cuisine is often misrepresented as simply interchangeable with  Mediterranean food  in Western markets. [25] 
 
 See also [ edit ] 
 
 Food portal 
 
 List of Middle Eastern dishes 
 North African cuisine :  Berber cuisine ,  Moroccan cuisine ,  Algerian cuisine ,  Tunisian cuisine  and  Libyan cuisine 
 Arab cuisine 
 Ottoman cuisine 
 Levantine cuisine 
 Mediterranean cuisine 
 Mizrahi Jewish cuisine 
 Jewish cuisine 
 Islamic dietary laws 
 Jewish dietary laws 
 
 References [ edit ] 
 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   e   "The Middle East: Background & History" . Archived from  the original  on 26 May 2017 . Retrieved  20 November  2014 . 
 
 ^   "Where Is the Middle East? | Center for Middle East and Islamic Studies" . Retrieved  2020-10-13 . 
 
 ^   "Middle Eastern Cuisine Makes its Move" .  QSR magazine . Retrieved  2020-08-11 . 
 
 ^   Beer in Ancient Egypt 
 
 ^   Brewing up ancient beer 
 
 ^   Hennessy, April 2018 Maggie.  "Middle Eastern Cuisine is Ready for its Moment" .  FSR magazine . Retrieved  2020-08-11 . 
 
 ^  a   b   McLoughlin, Paul (28 November 2018).  "The Culinary Crescent: Taking a trip through the history of Middle Eastern cuisine" .  alaraby . Retrieved  2020-08-11 . 
 
 ^   "Château Kefraya: A terroir, a soul, a great wine" .  www.chateaukefraya.com . Retrieved  2021-04-25 . 
 
 ^   "Home" .  Massaya . Retrieved  2021-04-25 . 
 
 ^   Middle Eastern cuisines: gain ground . Bnet UK. January 2003 
 
 ^   "Reviving the forgotten flavours of the Ottoman palace kitchen" .  Middle East Eye . Retrieved  2020-06-30 . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   Hale, William Harlan (1968).  The Horizon Cookbook and Illustrated History of Eating and Drinking though the Ages . American Heritage Publishing. 
 
 ^   Davidson, Alan (2006).  Oxford Companion to Food . Oxford University Press. 
 
 ^   "Chicago Tribune" .  Chicago Tribune . 
 
 ^   Bila, Sibel Utku (2015-08-20).  "After 500 years, Turkish coffee percolates in popularity" .  Al-Monitor . Retrieved  2021-03-10 . 
 
 ^   Arak: Middle Eastern Alcoholic Beverage ,  About.com , 
 
 ^   "In pictures: Turkey's Assyrian wine-makers" . BBC News. 
 
 ^   "Devour Blog: Qamar El Deen" . Retrieved  20 November  2014 . 
 
 ^   Mayssam Samaha.  "Jallab – A Refreshingly Sweet Summer Drink – Honest Cooking" . Honest Cooking. Archived from  the original  on 1 May 2013 . Retrieved  20 November  2014 . 
 
 ^   Getcustoms.com   Archived  September 22, 2010, at the  Wayback Machine 
 
 ^   Karizaki, Vahid Mohammadpour (2016-06-01).  "Ethnic and traditional Iranian rice-based foods" .  Journal of Ethnic Foods .  3  (2): 124–134.  doi : 10.1016/j.jef.2016.05.002 .  ISSN   2352-6181 . 
 
 ^   Slackman, Michael (2006-08-06).  "The Fine Art of Hiding What You Mean to Say (Published 2006)" .  The New York Times .  ISSN   0362-4331 . Retrieved  2021-03-10 . 
 
 ^   "How Middle Eastern Cuisine Became The 'It' Food Of 2017" .  The RushOrder Blog . 2017-12-05. Archived from  the original  on 2017-12-14 . Retrieved  2017-12-14 . 
 
 ^   "Middle East Meets Middle America" .  www.ift.org . Retrieved  2021-03-10 . 
 
 ^   "Middle Eastern Cuisine Makes its Move" .  QSR magazine . Retrieved  2021-03-10 . 
 
 
 External links [ edit ] 
   Middle Eastern cuisine  travel guide from Wikivoyage 
 
 v t e Cuisines Continental 
 African 
 North 
 West 
 list 
 Americas 
 Caribbean 
 North 
 South 
 list 
 Asian 
 Caucasian 
 Central 
 Indian subcontinent 
 Levantine 
 list 
 European 
 Balkan 
 Central 
 Eastern 
 list 
 Oceanic 
 Intercontinental
 Global 
 Latin American 
 Mediterranean 
 Middle Eastern 
 National  and regional 
 Afghan 
 Albanian 
 Algerian 
 American 
 Californian 
 Floribbean 
 Hawaiian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Lowcountry (South Carolina) 
 New England 
 New Mexico 
 Pacific Northwest 
 Pennsylvania Dutch 
 Puerto Rican 
 Southern US 
 Southwest US 
 Texas 
 Angolan 
 Argentine 
 Armenian 
 Australian 
 Austrian 
 Azerbaijani 
 Bahraini 
 Bangladeshi 
 Barbadian 
 Belarusian 
 Belgian 
 Belizean 
 Beninese 
 Bhutanese 
 Bolivian 
 Bosnian-Herzegovinian 
 Botswana 
 Brazilian 
 British 
 Channel Islands 
 English 
 Gibraltarian 
 Northern Irish 
 Saint Helena 
 Scottish 
 Welsh 
 Bruneian 
 Bulgarian 
 Burkinabé 
 Burmese 
 Burundian 
 Cambodian 
 Cameroonian 
 Canadian 
 Acadian 
 Québécois 
 Central African Republic 
 Chadian 
 Chilean 
 Chinese 
 Cantonese 
 Hong Kong 
 Macanese 
 Tibetan 
 Xinjiang 
 Colombian 
 Congolese 
 Corsican 
 Croatian 
 Cuban 
 Cypriot 
 Czech 
 Danish 
 Faroese 
 Greenlandic 
 Djiboutian 
 Dominican 
 Dominican Republic 
 Dutch 
 East Timorese 
 Ecuadorian 
 Egyptian 
 Emirati 
 Equatorial Guinean 
 Eritrean 
 Estonian 
 Ethiopian 
 Fijian 
 Filipino 
 Finnish 
 French 
 Occitan 
 French Guianan 
 Gabonese 
 Gambian 
 Georgian 
 German 
 Ghanaian 
 Greek 
 Cretan 
 Epirotic 
 Greek Macedonian 
 Heptanesean 
 Guatemalan 
 Guinea-Bissauan 
 Guinean 
 Haitian 
 Honduran 
 Hungarian 
 Icelandic 
 Indian 
 Arunachalese 
 Assamese 
 Bengali 
 Bihari 
 Goan 
 Gujarati 
 Himachal Pradesh 
 Kashmiri 
 Jharkhandi 
 Karnataka 
 Kerala 
 Maharashtrian 
 Manipuri 
 Meghalayan 
 Mizo 
 Naga 
 Odia 
 Punjabi 
 Rajasthani 
 Sikkimese 
 Sindhi 
 Tamil 
 Telangana 
 Telugu 
 Indonesian 
 Acehnese 
 Balinese 
 Banjar 
 Batak 
 Betawi 
 Indo 
 Javanese 
 Madurese 
 Makassar 
 Minahasan 
 Minangkabau 
 Palembangese 
 Sundanese 
 Iranian 
 Iraqi 
 Irish 
 Israeli 
 Italian 
 Abruzzese 
 Ligurian 
 Lombard 
 Lucanian 
 Neapolitan 
 Roman 
 Sardinian 
 Sicilian 
 Venetian 
 Ivorian 
 Jamaican 
 Japanese 
 Okinawan 
 Jordanian 
 Kazakh 
 Kenyan 
 Korean 
 North Korean 
 South Korean 
 Kosovan 
 Kuwaiti 
 Kyrgyz 
 Lao 
 Latvian 
 Lebanese 
 Lesotho 
 Liberian 
 Libyan 
 Liechtensteiner 
 Lithuanian 
 Luxembourg 
 Macedonian 
 Malagasy 
 Malawian 
 Malaysian 
 Sabahan 
 Sarawakian 
 Maldivian 
 Malian 
 Maltese 
 Mauritanian 
 Mauritian 
 Mexican 
 Moldovan 
 Monégasque 
 Mongolian 
 Montenegrin 
 Moroccan 
 Mozambican 
 Namibian 
 Nauruan 
 Nepalese 
 New Zealand 
 Nicaraguan 
 Niger 
 Nigerian 
 Niuean 
 Norwegian 
 Omani 
 Pakistani 
 Palestinian 
 Panamanian 
 Peruvian 
 Polish 
 Portuguese 
 Qatari 
 Romanian  (incl.  Transylvanian Saxon ) 
 Russian 
 Bashkir 
 Chechen 
 Circassian 
 Komi 
 Mordovian 
 Sakha 
 Tatar 
 Udmurt 
 Yamal 
 Rwandan 
 Saint Lucian 
 Salvadoran 
 Sammarinese 
 São Tomé and Príncipe 
 Saudi Arabian 
 Senegalese 
 Serbian 
 Seychellois 
 Sierra Leonean 
 Singaporean 
 Slovak 
 Slovenian 
 Somali 
 South African 
 Spanish 
 Andalusian 
 Asturian 
 Balearic 
 Basque 
 Canarian 
 Cantabrian 
 Catalan 
 Extremaduran 
 Galician 
 Manchegan 
 Valencian 
 Sri Lankan 
 Sudanese 
 Swazi 
 Swedish 
 Swiss 
 Syrian 
 Taiwanese 
 Tajik 
 Tanzanian 
 Zanzibari 
 Thai 
 Togolese 
 Tunisian 
 Turkish 
 Turkmen 
 Trinidadian and Tobagonian 
 Ugandan 
 Ukrainian 
 Uruguayan 
 Uzbek 
 Venezuelan 
 Vietnamese 
 Western Saharan 
 Yemeni 
 Zambian 
 Zimbabwean 
 Ethnic 
 Ainu 
 Arab 
 Indonesian 
 Aromanian 
 Assyrian 
 Balochi 
 Berber 
 Cajun 
 Chinese 
 American 
 Canadian 
 Chifa 
 Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Crimean Tatar 
 Greek American 
 Hazaragi 
 Indian 
 Anglo-Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Indigenous American 
 Inuit 
 Italian American 
 Kurdish 
 Livonian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Malay 
 Ossetian 
 Parsi 
 Pashtun 
 Peranakan 
 Romani 
 Sámi 
 Soul food 
 Sylheti 
 Transylvanian Saxon 
 Yup'ik 
 Religious 
 Buddhist 
 Christian 
 Goan Catholic 
 Mangalorean Catholic 
 Mennonite 
 Hindu 
 Islamic 
 Chinese 
 Ital 
 Jain 
 Jewish 
 American 
 Ashkenazi 
 Bukharan 
 Ethiopian 
 Mizrahi 
 Sephardic 
 Syrian 
 Ritual slaughter 
 Sikh 
 Historical 
 Ancient Egyptian 
 Ancient Greek 
 Ancient Israelite 
 Ancient Roman 
 Antebellum America 
 Aztec 
 Byzantine 
 Early modern European 
 Historical Chinese 
 Historical Indian subcontinent 
 Historical North Indian and Pakistani 
 History of agriculture 
 History of alcoholic drinks 
 History of bread 
 History of seafood 
 History of vegetarianism 
 Historical Argentine 
 Historical Japanese 
 Inca 
 Mayan 
 Muisca 
 Mughal 
 Medieval 
 Ottoman 
 Peasant 
 Soviet 
 Thirteen Colonies 
 Styles 
 Classique 
 Fast food 
 Fusion 
 New American 
 Eurasian 
 Haute 
 Molecular gastronomy 
 Note by Note 
 Nouvelle 
 Lists 
 List of cuisines 
 List of historical cuisines 
 Lists of prepared foods 
 Related 
 Cookbook 
 Cooking 
 Culinary arts 
 Drink 
 Food 
 history 
 Diet 
 Meal preparation 
 
   Food portal 
   Drink portal 
   Category 
   Commons 
   Cookbook 
   WikiProject 
   Outline 
 
 v t e Middle Eastern cuisine Arab 
 Bahraini 
 Egyptian 
 Iraqi 
 Jordanian 
 Kuwaiti 
 Lebanese 
 Omani 
 Palestinian 
 Qatar 
 Saudi Arabian 
 Syrian 
 United Arab Emirates 
 Yemeni 
 Non-Arab 
 Cypriot 
 Iranian 
 Israeli 
 Turkish 
 Ethnic and religious 
 Assyrian 
 Azerbaijani 
 Baloch 
 Caspian cuisine 
 Jewish 
 Kurdish 
 Levantine 
 Related cuisines 
 Afghanistan 
 Armenian 
 Balkan 
 Caucasian 
 Circassian 
 Georgian 
 Greek 
 Indian 
 Pakistani 
 Pashtun 
 
 v t e Middle East Countries 
 Bahrain 
 Cyprus 
 Egypt 
 Iran 
 Iraq 
 Iraqi Kurdistan 
 Israel 
 Jordan 
 Kuwait 
 Lebanon 
 Northern Cyprus 
 Oman 
 Palestine 
 Gaza 
 Qatar 
 Saudi Arabia 
 Syria 
 North Syria Federation 
 Turkish occupation of northern Syria 
 Turkey 
 United Arab Emirates 
 Yemen 
 Society 
 Climate change 
 Democracy 
 Economy 
 Energy 
 History 
 Timeline 
 Modern conflicts 
 Human rights 
 Water politics 
 Demographics 
 Ethnic groups 
 Genetics 
 Metropolitan areas 
 Religion 
 Irreligion 
 Culture 
 Archaeology 
 Cinema 
 Cuisine 
 Etiquette 
 Music 
 Dance 
 Studies 
 
 Authority control : National libraries  
 Israel 
 United States 
 
  
NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw2392
Cached time: 20230310194247
Cache expiry: 1814400
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc, no‐toc‐conversion]
CPU time usage: 0.704 seconds
Real time usage: 0.875 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2537/1000000
Post‐expand include size: 128249/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1570/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 7/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 95253/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.381/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 8994071/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/400
 
 
Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  642.429      1 -total
 36.21%  232.645      1 Template:Reflist
 24.98%  160.496     15 Template:Cite_web
 19.49%  125.210      3 Template:Navbox
 18.58%  119.349      1 Template:Cuisine
 10.92%   70.155      1 Template:More_citations_needed
 10.28%   66.016      1 Template:Ambox
  7.77%   49.890      1 Template:Short_description
  4.92%   31.639      1 Template:Authority_control
  4.62%   29.678      2 Template:Pagetype
 
  Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:idhash:47863605-0!canonical and timestamp 20230310194246 and revision id 1142970972. Rendering was triggered because: page-view
  
 esi <esi:include src="/esitest-fa8a495983347898/content" />  
 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Middle_Eastern_cuisine&oldid=1142970972 " 
 Categories :  Middle Eastern cuisine Mediterranean cuisine Cuisine by region Hidden categories:  Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from October 2009 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2020 Articles with J9U identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  This page was last edited on 5 March 2023, at 07:25  (UTC) . 
 Text is available under the  Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0 ;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the  Terms of Use  and  Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the  Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. 
 
 
 Privacy policy 
 About Wikipedia 
 Disclaimers 
 Contact Wikipedia 
 Mobile view 
 Developers 
 Statistics 
 Cookie statement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
