
 
 
 Jump to content 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle sidebar 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Create account Log in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Personal tools 
 
 
 
 
   Create account   Log in 
 
 
 
 
		Pages for logged out editors  learn more 
 
 
 Contributions Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Navigation 
 
 
 Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate 
 
 
 
 
 Contribute 
 
 
 Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file 
 
 
 
 
 Tools 
 
 
 What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item 
 
 
 
 
 Print/export 
 
 
 Download as PDF Printable version 
 
 
 
 
 Languages 
 
 On this Wikipedia the language links are at the top of the page across from the article title.  Go to top . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CentralNotice  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Contents 
 move to sidebar 
 hide 
 
 
 
 
 (Top) 
 
 
 
 
 
 1 Historical background 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 Typical ingredients 
 
 
				Toggle Typical ingredients subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 2.1 Pasta 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.2 Tomatoes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.3 Vegetables 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.4 Cheese 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.5 Seafood 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.6 Meat 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 Bread 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4 Pasta dishes 
 
 
				Toggle Pasta dishes subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 4.1 Pasta dishes of the poor 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.2 Frittata with spaghetti 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.3 Richer pasta dishes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.4 Seafood pasta dishes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5 Rice dishes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6 Pizza 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 7 Fish and seafood dishes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8 Vegetable dishes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 9 Fried food 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 10 Side dishes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 11 Savory pies 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 12 Cakes and desserts 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 13 Holiday food 
 
 
				Toggle Holiday food subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 13.1 Christmas 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 13.2 Easter food 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 13.3 Other holidays 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 14 Fruit 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 15 Wine 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 16 Liqueurs 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 17 Neapolitan street food 
 
 
				Toggle Neapolitan street food subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 17.1 Fusion cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 18 Notes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 19 References 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
						Toggle the table of contents
					 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle the table of contents 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Neapolitan cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 9 languages 
 
 
 
 العربية Čeština Deutsch Español Français Italiano 日本語 Napulitano Tagalog 
 Edit links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Article Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 English 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 More 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
 
 
 Traditional food of Naples, Italy 
 This article has multiple issues.  Please help  improve it  or discuss these issues on the  talk page .  ( Learn how and when to remove these template messages ) 
 
 This article  possibly contains  original research .  Please  improve it  by  verifying  the claims made and adding  inline citations . Statements consisting only of original research should be removed.   ( September 2017 )  ( Learn how and when to remove this template message ) 
 This article  needs additional citations for  verification .  Please help  improve this article  by  adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources:   "Neapolitan cuisine"  –  news   ·   newspapers   ·   books   ·   scholar   ·   JSTOR   ( September 2017 )  ( Learn how and when to remove this template message ) 
 
  ( Learn how and when to remove this template message ) 
 Italian cuisine 
 History 
 Ancient Roman cuisine 
 Medieval cuisine 
 Early modern cuisine 
 Contemporary cuisine 
 
 Regional cuisines 
 Abruzzese cuisine 
 Apulian cuisine 
 Arbëreshë cuisine 
 Corsican cuisine 
 Ligurian cuisine 
 Lombard cuisine 
 Mantuan cuisine 
 Lucanian cuisine 
 Neapolitan cuisine 
 Roman cuisine 
 Sardinian cuisine 
 Sicilian cuisine 
 Venetian cuisine 
 
 Lists 
 Chefs 
 Dishes 
 Pasta 
 Cheeses 
 PDO 
 Desserts and pastries 
 Restaurants 
 Wine 
 IGT 
 DOCG 
 DOC 
 Beer 
 
 See also 
 Italian-American cuisine 
 Sammarinese cuisine 
 Osteria 
 Trattoria 
 Enoteca 
 Sagra 
 List of Italian chefs 
 Meal structure 
 
   Italy portal     Food portal v t e 
 Neapolitan cuisine  has ancient historical roots that date back to the  Greco-Roman  period, which was enriched over the centuries by the influence of the different cultures that controlled  Naples  and its  kingdoms , such as that of  Aragon  and  France .
 Since Naples was the capital of the  Kingdom of Naples , its cuisine took much from the culinary traditions of all the  Campania  region, reaching a balance between dishes based on rural ingredients ( pasta , vegetables,  cheese ) and seafood dishes ( fish ,  crustaceans ,  mollusks ). A vast variety of recipes is influenced by the local aristocratic cuisine, such as  timballo  and the  sartù di riso , pasta or rice dishes with very elaborate preparation, and dishes from popular traditions prepared with inexpensive but nutritionally healthy ingredients, like  pasta e fagioli  (pasta with beans) and other pasta dishes with vegetables.
 
 
 Historical background [ edit ] 
   Apulian  red-figure fish plate, ca. 340 BC 
 Naples has a history that goes back many centuries: the city itself predates many others in that area of the world, including  Rome . It has endured the  Greeks ,  Romans , the  Goths , the  Byzantines , and dozens of successions of kings from  France  and  Spain . Each culture left a mark on the way food is prepared in Naples and Campania itself.
 
   Fish in a  mosaic  found in  Pompeii L  Naples National Archaeological Museum 
   Fresco from  Pompeii  with fruit 
 Finding the connections between modern and Greco-Roman culinary traditions is not always easy. Among the traces of classical culinary tastes, plates from the period of Greek rule found in  Magna Graecia  ( southern Italy ) depict fishes and mollusks, an indication that seafood was appreciated during that period. Frescoes from  Pompeii  depict fruit baskets filled with  figs  and  pomegranates . An excavation at  Oplontis  in the  Villa Poppaea  shows a fresco of a cake, the ingredients of which are not yet known.
 
   Carbonized bread found in  Pompeii 
   The Neapolitan painter  Massimo Stanzione  poses a woman in festive local costume (ca 1635) with a market chicken: only the rich ate chicken on an ordinary occasion 
   Lithography  from an original drawing by  Teodoro Duclère  (1816–1869), titled "Il tavernaio" 
 The Roman  garum  is the ancient sauce most similar to that used for the modern  Colatura di Alici , typical of  Cetara . It can be traced back to the sweet-sour taste typical of the Roman cooking described by  Apicius , along with the use of  raisins  in salty dishes, like the  pizza di scarola  ( endive  pie), or the  braciole  al ragù  (meat rolls in  ragù  sauce). The use of  wheat  in the modern  pastiera  cake, typical of  Easter , could have had originally a symbolic meaning, related to cults of  Artemis ,  Cybele  and  Ceres  and pagan rituals of fertility, celebrated around the  Spring equinox . The name  struffoli , a Christmas cake, comes from the Greek word στρόγγυλος ( stróngylos , meaning "round-shaped").
 The Spanish and French sovereignty in Naples initiated the difference between the cuisine of the aristocrats and that of the poorer classes. The former was characterized by elaborate, more cosmopolitan, dishes, and a greater number of expensive ingredients, including meat. The poor used foods that were cheaper and could be grown locally (that is, cereals and vegetables). These were embellished over the centuries and came into contact with the influence of the aristocratic cuisine, so that today traditional recipes of the poorer classes have often acquired great quality and taste, while preserving the original simple ingredients.
 One of the most famous chefs from the nobles' courts in Naples was  Vincenzo Corrado  [ it ] .
 
 Typical ingredients [ edit ] 
 Pasta [ edit ] 
   Giorgio Sommer  (1834-1914), "Napoli - Fabbrica di maccheroni". Hand-colored photo. Catalog number: 6204 
 There is a great variety of Neapolitan  pastas . Pasta was not invented in Naples, but one of the best grades available is found quite close by, in  Gragnano , a few kilometers from the capital. It was here also that the industrial production of pasta started, with the techniques to dry and preserve it. The main ingredient is  durum wheat , harder to manipulate than  soft wheat , so the industrial production had greater success than in  northern Italy , where home-made pasta is more popular. Traditionally in Naples pasta must be cooked  " al dente " , while soft pasta is not tolerated.
 The most popular variety of pasta, besides the classic  spaghetti  and  linguine , are the  paccheri  and the  ziti , long pipe-shaped pasta, broken by hand before cooking and usually topped with  Neapolitan ragù . Pasta with vegetables is usually also prepared with  pasta mista  ( pasta ammescata  in  Neapolitan language ), which is now produced industrially as a distinct variety of pasta, but which was once sold cheaply, made up of broken pieces of different kinds of pasta.
 Hand-made  gnocchi , prepared with  flour  and potatoes, have become a popular method of overcoming the Neapolitan disdain for potatoes. In 1949  W. H. Auden  wrote  Igor Stravinsky  from Forio in Ischia, "Forio thinks us crazy because we eat potatoes, which are to them a mark of abject poverty." In reporting this,  Francis Steegmuller , a longtime resident of Naples, remarks on the French-inspired  gattò , in which "the potato complement is nearly overwhelmed by cheese, ham and other ingredients". [1]   
Some of the more modern varieties of pasta, like  scialatelli , are also becoming popular.
 
 Tomatoes [ edit ] 
   Tomato  variety used for the  piennolo 
 Tomatoes  entered the Neapolitan cuisine during the 18th century.
The industry of preserving tomatoes originated in 19th-century Naples, resulting in the export to all parts of the world of the famous  "pelati"  (peeled tomatoes) and the  "concentrato"  ( tomato paste ). There are traditionally several ways of preparing home-made tomato preserves, either bottled tomato juice, or chopped into pieces. The famous  "conserva"  (sun dried concentrated juice) tomato is cooked for a long time and becomes a dark red cream with a velvety texture.
 
 Vegetables [ edit ] 
 Some Campanian dishes using vegetables, like the  parmigiana di melanzane  ( aubergine  pie) or  peperoni ripieni  (stuffed  peppers ) can become real stars of the table. Some of the most typical products are  friarielli  (a local variety of  Brassica rapa ),  Cichorium endivia , smooth or curly (two varieties of  endive ), several types of  broccoli , verza ( Savoy cabbage , a variety of  Brassica oleracea sabauda ) and others, used to prepare the  minestra maritata . Different types of  beans ,  chickpeas  and other  legumes  are very popular.
 Zucchini  are widely used; the largest ones are fried with  vinegar  and fresh  mint  ( a scapece ). The male flowers of zucchini can be fried in a salty dough ( sciurilli  [ it ] ). [2] 
 Regular red and yellow peppers are widely used, and a local variety of small green peppers (not spicy),  peperoncini verdi , are usually fried.
 Salad  is a side dish of many dishes, especially seafood ones.  Lettuce , and more often the  incappucciata  (a local variety of the  iceberg lettuce ), more crispy, is mixed with  carrots ,  fennel ,  rucola  (some time ago it spontaneously grew in landfields, and was sold in the streets together with the less noble  pucchiacchella ),  radishes , traditionally the long and spicy ones, which today are more and more rare, almost completely replaced by the round and sweeter ones.
 Black  olives  used in Neapolitan cooking are always the ones from  Gaeta .
 During the  Second World War , it was not rare, in the poorest families, to use less appealing ingredients. Recipes have been reported of pasta cooked with empty pods of  fava beans  or  peas . [3] 
 
 Cheese [ edit ] 
   Mozzarella di bufala 
 Cheeses, both soft and aged, are an important part of the Italian diet and also have their place in Neapolitan cooking: some recipes are descended from very old Roman traditions.
Starting from the freshest ones, the most used are:
 
 the  ricotta di fuscella , very fresh and light, was originally sold in hand-made baskets. Commonly found now as a filling for certain pastas. 
 the  ricotta  fresca , eaten both fresh, and as side ingredient (for instance, on top of  pasta  with Neapolitan ragù). 
 the  Ricotta secca  [ it ] , salty, slightly aged, typical of the Easter period. 
 the  caciottella fresca , of  Sorrento 's peninsula, with very delicate taste. 
 the  mozzarella di bufala , fresh cheese made with buffalo's milk, produced mostly on the region of  Aversa  and in the plain of  Sele  river. 
 the  fiordilatte , similar to mozzarella, but made with cow's milk; it is best produced in the region of  Agerola . 
 the  provola  affumicata , a  fiordilatte  with scent of oak wood smoke, light brown on the exterior, more yellowish inside. 
 the  bocconcini del cardinale , or  burrielli , small mozzarellas, preserved in clay pots, flooded into cream or milk. 
 the  scamorze , white or smoked. 
 the  burrini di Sorrento , small provolone cheese with a  butter  hart. 
 the  provoloni , the  caciocavalli  of different aging. 
 Seafood [ edit ] 
   Cicenielli 
 Neapolitan cooking has always used an abundance of all kinds of seafood from the  Tyrrhenian sea . Dr Johnson's friend  Hester Thrale  was enthusiastic for "the most excellent, the most incomparable fish I ever ate;  red mullets  large as our mackerel, and of singularly high flavour; beside  calamaro  or ink-fish, a dainty worth of imperial luxury". [4]  In 1759, when  Ferdinando Galiani  was sent as secretary to the Neapolitan ambassador in Paris, he pined for familiar foods; he found "no fruit, no cheese, no good seafood— everything here does violence to the Neapolitan temperament". [5] 
Recipes use either less expensive fishes, in particular  anchovies , and other fishes, like the ones used to prepare the  zuppa :  scorfano  ( Scorpaena   scrofa ),  tracina  ( Trachinus draco ),  cuoccio  ( Triglia lanterna ), or fishes of medium and large size, like  spigola  ( European seabass ) and  orate  ( gilt-head bream ), presently sold mainly from fish farms, or like  dentice  ( Dentex dentex ),  sarago  ( Diplodus   sargus sargus ) and  pezzogna  ( Pagellus bogaraveo ). Fishes of very small size are also used:
 
 The  cicinielli , baby fishes, very small and transparent, prepared either steamed or fried in a dough. 
 The  fravaglio , few centimeter long, mainly of  triglia  ( Mullus surmuletus ) or  retunni  ( Spicara smaris ), typically fried. 
 The  baccalà  (cod) and  stockfish , imported from  northern Europe  seas, are either fried or cooked with potatoes and tomatoes.
 Most  cephalopods  are employed ( octopus ,  squid ,  cuttlefish ), as well as  crustacea  (mainly  shrimp ).
 Shellfish  cozze  ( mussels ),  vongole  (clams),  cannolicchi  ( Ensis   siliqua ,  taratufi ,  telline  ( Donax trunculus ),  sconcigli  ( Haustellum brandaris )) are employed in many seafood meals, and sometimes are eaten raw, but this happens more and more seldom nowadays. Clams require a special note. The  vongola verace  is  Venerupis   decussata , not to be confused with the Philippines clam ( Venerupis philippinarum ), very frequently found on the markets, and often called  verace  in northern Italy's markets), and the  lupino  ( Dosinia   exoleta ).
 It is now forbidden by law to sell and eat the  sea dates  ( datteri di mare ,  Lithophaga   lithophaga ), as their fishing seriously damages coastline rocks, mainly in the  Sorrento  peninsula.
 
 Meat [ edit ] 
 Meat is not used as frequently in Neapolitan cooking as in the cuisine of Northern Italy. The most common kinds of meat used in Neapolitan cooking are:
 
 sausage :  salsicce  and  cervellatine  [ it ] , with not finely hand-cut meat ( a ponta 'e curtiello ). 
 
 pork  liver , rounded in a net of pork's fat and a  bay leaf . 
 trippa  (tripe) and other more humble cuts of  pork  or  beef , like the typical  'O pere e 'o musso  (pork's foot and cow's nose), and the  zuppa di soffritto  [ it ] , a spicy soup with tomato and hot  chili pepper . 
 braciole , pork rolls stuffed with  raisins ,  pine nuts  and  parsley , fixed with  toothpicks  and cooked in  ragù . 
 lamb  and  goat  are  roasted , usually with potatoes and peas, typically around  Easter . 
 rabbit  and  chicken , often cooked  alla cacciatora ,  pan fried  with  tomatoes . 
 beef  or other red meat with  tomatoes , cooked for a long time to tenderise an inexpensive piece of meat as in  Carne alla pizzaiola . 
 Bread [ edit ] 
   Carlo Brogi (1850-1925) - "Naples - Maccheroni shop" 
 The most popular  bread  is  pane cafone  prepared with natural  yeast , cooked in a  wood-fired oven  with hard crust and large holes inside. Also used are  sfilatini , somewhat similar to a French  baguette , but shorter and thicker.  Rosetta  rolls and other varieties are also present.
 
   Spaghetti alla puttanesca 
 Pasta dishes [ edit ] 
 From the classic  "pummarola"  (tomato sauce) to the simplest  aglio e uoglio  ( garlic  and  oil ), down to a wide variety of sauces, with vegetables or seafood, up to the  ragù , southern Italy's creativity enhances its  pasta  dishes.
 
 Pasta dishes of the poor [ edit ] 
 Cuisine traditionally attributed to the poor often mixes pasta with  legumes . The most popular are:  pasta e fagioli  (pasta with  beans ), sometimes enriched with  pork rind  ( cotiche ),  pasta e ceci  (pasta with  chickpeas ),  pasta e lenticchie  (pasta with  lentils ),  pasta e piselli  (pasta with  peas ). Nowadays  cicerchie  ( Lathyrus sativus ) have become very rare. Similarly to  legumes , other vegetables are associated with pasta, like  pasta e patate  (pasta with  potatoes ),  pasta e cavolfiore  (pasta with  cauliflower ),  pasta e zucca  (pasta with  pumpkin ). The most traditional cooking method consists in cooking the condiments first, for instance,  pan fry   garlic  with  oil , then add steamed beans, or fry  onion  and  celery , then add potatoes cut into little dices; then, after frying, water is added, brought to boiling temperature, salted, and pasta is added and stirred frequently. While cooking with all the other ingredients, pasta does not lose its  starch , which would have been lost if cooked separately in salty water and then drained. Cooking pasta together with vegetables makes the sauce creamier ( "azzeccato" ), and is a way of preparing pasta distinct from the tradition of "noble" cuisine, which prepares similar dishes in a way more similar to broth or soups, adding pasta after cooking it separately. One more hearty dish in the cuisine of the poor is pasta simply cooked with cheese and eggs  stracciatella  ( pasta caso e ova ).
 Spaghetti , dressed with tomato sauce, black olives from  Gaeta  and  capers  are called  spaghetti alla puttanesca . An imaginative recipe was created on the tables of the poor, where the expensive shellfishes were missing: spaghetti, dressed with  cherry tomatoes  sauce, garlic, oil and parsley are called  spaghetti alle vongole fujute  (spaghetti with  escaped  clams), where clams are present only in the imagination of the people eating the dish.
 
 Frittata with spaghetti [ edit ] 
 The  frittata  can be prepared with pasta leftovers, either with tomato sauce or white. Pasta, cooked  al dente  is mixed with raw scrambled egg and cheese, then pan fried. It can be enriched with many different ingredients. Must be cooked on both sides, flipped with the help of a plate. If well cooked, it is compact, and can be cut into slices. It can be eaten during outdoor lunches.
 
 Richer pasta dishes [ edit ] 
 The aristocratic cuisine used pasta for elaborate recipes, like the  timballi , rarely used in everyday food.
 Richer sauces, more elaborate than the vegetable pasta dishes mentioned above, that are frequently used to dress pasta include:
 
 The  Bolognese  sauce, vaguely inspired by the  ragù emiliano , prepared with minced  carrot ,  celery ,  onion , ground beef and tomato. 
 The  Genovese sauce , not inspired by  Genoa  in spite of the name, but prepared with meat browned with abundant onions and other aromatics. 
 With the Neapolitan ragù the most traditionally used pasta are the  ziti , long macaroni, that are broken into shorter pieces by hand before cooking. The  Neapolitan ragù  is also used, together with  fiordilatte , to dress the  gnocchi alla sorrentina  [ it ] , then cooked in oven in a small single-portion clay pot ( pignatiello ).
 
 Seafood pasta dishes [ edit ] 
 
 
 
 Wikibooks  Cookbook  has a recipe/module on
 
  Spaghetti alle vongole 
 
 
   Spaghetti alle vongole 
   Spaghetti alle cozze - with mussels 
 Spaghetti ,  linguine  and  paccheri  match very well with fish and seafood. From this union come the dishes typical of important lunches or dinners (weddings, in particular). The most typical ones are:
 
 Spaghetti alle vongole  or other shellfishes ( clams ,  mussels , and other). 
 Paccheri con la zuppa di pesce  ( scorfani ,  cuocci ,  tracine  and more). 
 Pasta con i calamari , with  squid  sauce, cooked with  white wine . 
 There are many more varieties, for instance spaghetti with a white sauce of Mediterranean  cod .
 Sometimes the traditional dishes of pasta with legumes can be mixed with seafood, so there are, for instance,  pasta e fagioli con le cozze  (pasta with beans and mussels), or other more modern variations, like pasta with zucchini and  clams , that lose any traditional connotation.
 
 
 Rice dishes [ edit ] 
 The most famous rice dish is the  sartù di riso , a sort of  timballo  made with rice, stuffed with chicken livers,  sausage , little  meatballs ,  fior di latte  or  provola ,  peas ,  mushrooms , and with Neapolitan ragù, or, in the white version ( "in bianco" ) with  béchamel sauce .
 In the cuisine of the poor, rice is also cooked as  riso e verza  (rice with  cabbage ), flavored with little pieces of  Parmigiano–Reggiano  cheese crusts that slightly melt while cooking.
 A seafood rice dish is the  risotto alla pescatora  ("fisherman's  risotto "), prepared with various mollusks (different types of clams, squid and cuttlefish), shrimps and a broth made from the boiling of seafood shells.
 Arancini  ( palle 'e riso ), more typical of  Sicilian cuisine , are also frequently eaten in Naples.
 
 
 Pizza [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Neapolitan pizza 
   Pizza Margherita 
 Pizza  is the most popular and best known creation of all Neapolitan cuisine. It soon became very popular among the people as well as barons or princes: it was present in the  Bourbon  court.  King Ferdinand I  experienced cooking pizza in  Capodimonte 's porcelain ovens. After  Italian unification , the new kings were also attracted by this southern food. The  pizzaiolo   Raffaele Esposito  is often credited with popularising a particular variety of Neapolitan pizza. In 1889 he prepared in honor of queen  Margherita of Savoy   a nationalistic pizza, where the colours of the  Italian flag  were represented by the mozzarella (white), tomato (red) and basil (green). Since then this pizza is called the  pizza Margherita . [6]  Pizza can be cheap and nutritious, so it had great success very quickly. Sometimes pizza is made in home ovens, but the real Neapolitan pizza must be cooked in a  wood-fired oven , hand-made by an able  pizzaiolo  who makes the dough disk thinner in the center and thicker in the outer part; the ingredients and olive oil are rapidly spread on the disk, and with a quick movement the pizza is put on the shovel and then slid in the oven where it is turned around a few times for uniform cooking.
 
 Fish and seafood dishes [ edit ] 
 One of the most famous main courses is a seafood dish recipe coming from the quarter 'Santa Lucia':  polpi alla luciana ,  octopus  cooked with  chili pepper  and tomato.  Octopus  is also simply steamed, and prepared as salad with lemon juice,  parsley  and green olives. A richer seafood salad can be prepared also mixing  squid ,  cuttlefish  and  prawns .
 Medium size fishes are cooked  all'acqua pazza , with tomato, garlic and parsley; the larger ones are simply grilled, accompanied, in the most important meals, with king size  prawns .
 Mussels  are prepared in different ways: rapidly steamed with  black pepper  ( all'impepata ), and dressed with a few drops of lemon juice each; also cooked  al  gratin . Clams and other shellfishes are also cooked  sauté , rapidly passed in a large pan with olive oil, garlic, and served on crust breads.
 Cheap fish can also produce very tasty recipes. The most popular one is  anchovy .
The best recipes are:
 
 Alici dorate e fritte , boneless anchovies, passed in  flour , egg and deep-fried. 
 Alici marinate  [ it ] , raw anchovies marinated in lemon juice or vinegar, then dressed with olive oil, garlic and parsley. 
 Alici arreganate , boneless anchovies, rapidly cooked in a large pan with olive oil, lemon juice and  origanum . 
 Cicenielli , the tiny baby fishes, are either steamed and dressed with oil and lemon, or deep-fried in a light dough, which is also used to deep-fry little pieces of some sea algae.
 The  frittura di paranza  (deep-fried fishes) is usually done with small-sized local fishes, like  cod ,  goatfish ,  anchovies  and others. It should be eaten very hot, right after being fried ( frijenno magnanno ). Baby shrimps, sold alive, are fried with no flour, unlike the  paranza .
 
 Vegetable dishes [ edit ] 
   Parmigiana di melanzane 
 Vegetable dishes can become very rich and elaborated. The most famous are:
 
 The  parmigiana di melanzane ,  aubergine  pie with tomato sauce and  fiordilatte . 
 The  Gatò di patate  [ it ] , potato pie stuffed with cheese and salami. 
 The  peperoni ripieni , stuffed whole peppers. 
 The  melanzane a barchetta ,  aubergines  cut in half, the center scooped out and filled with different types of stuffing. 
 Fried food [ edit ] 
 Fried fish was already mentioned above in the text; many vegetables are deep-fried with flour and egg ( dorate e fritte ):  artichoke , zucchini,  cauliflower . The richest version add pieces of liver,  ricotta  and, in the past, cow's brain.  Mozzarella  can be prepared  dorata e fritta  as well and also  in carrozza , passed in flour and egg together with two bread slices softened in  milk , to form a small sandwich. Typical Neapolitan fried food are also the  crocchè , stuffed potato balls passed in  breadcrumbs  and deep fried, or also the  Sciurilli  [ it ] , zucchini's male flowers fried in a dough, that can also be bought on the streets of Naples historical center in typical fried food shops, called  friggitoria , together with  scagliozzi  [ it ]  (fried slices of  polenta ),  pastacresciute  [ it ]  (fried bread dough balls) and  aubergine  slices.
 Onions, fried up to a golden color, are the base for the famous  frittata  di cipolle  (onion  omelette ).
 
 Side dishes [ edit ] 
 After pasta, the main second-course meals are frequently accompanied by side dishes.
The most popular ones are:
 
 Zucchine alla scapece , deep fried sliced zucchini dressed with  vinegar  and fresh  mint . 
 Melanzane a funghetti  [ it ] , fried  aubergines , in two versions: stick-shaped and fried, then dressed with cherry tomato sauce, or dice-fried, with no tomato. 
 Peperoni in padella , sliced peppers pan-fried with black  Gaeta  olives and  capers . 
 
 Peperoncini verdi fritti , local small non-spicy green peppers, dressed with cherry tomato sauce. 
 Friarielli , local vegetable leaves, pan-fried with oil, garlic and chili pepper. They often are side dishes of fried  sausages  and  cervellatine  [ it ] , which are sometimes also accompanied by potato fries, typically cut as small dice. 
 Savory pies [ edit ] 
 Savory pies are convenient for outdoor food. The most popular savory pies are:
 
 The  Pizza di scarola  [ it ]  (endive pie), prepared with fried  scarole  with garlic,  pine nuts ,  raisins , black Gaeta olives and  capers . Those vegetables are the stuffing for the pie, which is made with a simple dough of flour, water and  yeast . 
 The  casatiello , or  tortano , typical of Easter holidays, usually prepared for the day after Easter, usually spent outdoor. 
 Cakes and desserts [ edit ] 
   Sfogliatella 
 Neapolitan cuisine has a large variety of cakes and desserts. The most famous ones are:
 
 babà , small cake saturated in syrup made with hard liquor. 
 sfogliatella , in two varieties: frolla (smooth) or riccia (curly). Two variation are the  santa Rosa , larger and with an additional stuffing of cream and black cherry, and the  coda d'aragosta  (lobster tail), with a  bignè  inside and stuffed with various types of cream. 
 Zeppole , deep fried or baked. 
 Pastiera , prepared for Easter holidays. 
 Struffoli  typical  Christmas  cake. 
 Delizia al limone  [ it ] 
 Ice creams are famous as well. The most traditional are the  coviglie  [ it ]  and the  spumoni .
 
 Holiday food [ edit ] 
   Struffoli 
 Holiday recipes deserve a dedicated section because of their variety and richness.
 
 Christmas [ edit ] 
 Christmas Eve dinner is usually the time when all family members
join. It is typically done with  spaghetti alle vongole  followed by  capitone fritto  and  baccalà  fritto  (deep fried  eel  and  stockfish ); as a side-dish there is the  Insalata di rinforzo  [ it ] , a salad made with steamed  cauliflower ,  giardiniera , spicy and sweet peppers ( pupaccelle ), olives and  anchovies , all dressed with oil and  vinegar .
 Christmas cakes are:
 
 Struffoli 
 Roccocò  [ it ] 
 Mustacciuoli 
 Susamielli  [ it ] 
 Christmas Eve dinner is completed with the  ciociole , which are dried fruits ( walnuts ,  hazelnuts  and  almonds ), dried  figs  and the  castagne del prete , baked  chestnuts .
 Christmas lunch has typically the  minestra maritata  or hand-made pasta with chicken broth.
 
 Easter food [ edit ] 
   Pastiera 
 The main  Easter  dishes are the  Casatiello  or  tortano , a salty pie made with bread dough stuffed with various types of salami and cheese, also used the day after Easter for outdoor lunches. Typical of Easter lunches and dinners is the  fellata , a banquet of  salami  and  capocollo  and salty  ricotta . Typical dishes are also  lamb  or  goat  baked with potatoes and peas. Easter cake is the  pastiera .
 
 Other holidays [ edit ] 
 Carnival  has the Neapolitan version of  lasagna , that has no  béchamel sauce , unlike other Italian versions. As dessert, there is the  Sanguinaccio dolce  with  savoiardi  biscuits, or also the  chiacchiere , diffused all over Italy with different names.
 2 November ( All Souls Day ) cake is the  torrone dei morti , which, unlike the usual  torrone  is not made with  honey  and  almonds , but with  cocoa  and a variety of stuffings, like  hazelnuts , dried and candy fruits or also  coffee  and more.
 
 Fruit [ edit ] 
 Fruit is often present at the end of a meal. Local production is abundant, one of the most popular local products is the  annurca  apple, a local type of  apple  whose origins are old indeed: it is believed to have first been planted by the Romans. Slices of  watermelon  (  'o mellone ) were in old times sold in little street shops ( mellunari ), nowadays disappeared. The sweet and tasty yellow  peach  (' o percuoco c' 'o pizzo , in  Neapolitan ) is also sometimes used, chopped in pieces to add flavor to red wine coming from  Monte di Procida , cold and somewhat similar to Spanish  sangria .
 
 Wine [ edit ] 
 Many  wines  from  Campania  match very well to the local cuisine. Among white wines the most famous are  Greco di Tufo ,  Falanghina ,  Fiano di Avellino  and Asprinio di Aversa, while the most famous red wines are  Aglianico ,  Taurasi DOCG ,  Campi Flegrei Piedirosso  [ it ]  also known as  pere 'e palummo ,  Solopaca ,  Lacryma Christi  from  Vesuvius , that is produced both white and red.
 
 Liqueurs [ edit ] 
 The most abundant lunches or dinners end with  coffee  and  liqueur .  Limoncello  is now world-famous, but once upon a time the most preferred one was the  liquore ai quattro frutti , with  lemon ,  orange ,  tangerine  e  limo  (not to be confused with  lime ),
which is a local variation of  bergamot orange , now very rare.
 Nocillo  is also very popular all over Italy, and is the most appreciated bitter liqueur.
 
 Neapolitan street food [ edit ] 
 In Naples, the use of buying and eating food in the streets dates to very ancient times. The origins probably date back to Roman  thermopolia  or maybe earlier. Typical fried food can still today be bought in little shops, like  Pastacresciute  [ it ]  (deep fried bread dough balls),  Scagliozzi  [ it ]  (deep fried  polenta  slices) and  sciurilli  [ it ]  (deep fried male  zucchini  flowers), or deep fried  aubergines .
 Pizza  is also prepared in small sizes to be eaten in the street, the so-called  pizza a libretto , still found in Naples pizzerias in via dei Tribunali, port'Alba and piazza Cavour. In via Pignasecca, in the historical center, there are still some  carnacuttari  shops, selling various types of  tripe ,  'O pere e 'o musso  (pork's foot and cow's nose) or the old  zuppa 'e carnacotta  ( tripe  soup).
 From  Mergellina  to via Caracciolo there are still several little shops selling  taralli  nzogna e pepe  (salty biscuits with pork's fat and black pepper). Nowadays the old typical   'o broro 'e purpo  ( octopus  broth) has become extremely rare to find.
A few decades ago, street shops sold ' o spassatiempo , a mix of baked  hazelnuts ,  pumpkin  seeds, toasted  chickpeas  and  lupins  under  brine .
 
 Fusion cuisine [ edit ] 
 Many Neapolitan cookery books report classic recipes, but also re-interpretations in Neapolitan style of other recipes. So, it is not unusual to find recipes like  cotoletta  alla milanese ,  carne alla genovese ,  sugo alla bolognese , and other. Books with both classic and revisited recipes are:
 
 Jeanne Caròla Francesconi,  La vera cucina di Napoli , edit. Newton, 1995, ( ISBN   88-8183-021-3 ) 
 Frijenno Magnanno, Salvatore di Fraia, Editore,  Pozzuoli  (NA): Contains a large variety of recipes and creative Neapolitan dishes. 
 Notes [ edit ] 
 
 
 ^   Steegmuller 1991:79 
 
 ^   Zucchini have separate male and female flowers. The female flowers are found on newly grown zucchini, but only the male ones are optimal to be fried as  sciurilli 
 
 ^   See  Frijenno Magnanno  in the bibliography. 
 
 ^   Roger Hudson, ed.  The Grand Tour  1993:189. 
 
 ^   Galiani to  Bernardo Tanucci , 1759, quoted in Francis Steegmuller,  A Woman, A Man, and Two Kingdoms: The Story of Madame d'Épinay and the Abbé Galiani , 1991:66f. 
 
 ^   foodlocate.com/blog/introducing-neapolitan-cuisine 
 
 
 References [ edit ] 
 The oldest Neapolitan cuisine is reported in the books of classic authors, including:
 
 Vincenzo Corrado ,  Il cuoco galante , in Napoletan language, III edition, 1786, editby Forni,  Sala Bolognese  (BO), 1990. 
 Vincenzo Corrado ,  Pranzi giornalieri variati ed imbanditi in 672 vivande secondo i prodotti della stagione , in Napoletan language, III edition, 1832, re-edit by Grimaldi,  Naples , 2001. 
 Ippolito Cavalcanti   Cucina casareccia , in Napoletan language, 1839, re-edited by Il Polifilo,  Milan , 2005 ( ISBN   88-7050-324-0 ) 
 Ippolito Cavalcanti   Cucina teorico - pratica , in lingua napoletana, 1852, re-edited by Grimaldi,  Naples , 2002 
 v t e   Naples Geography 
 Quarters 
 Metropolitan City 
 Municipalities 
 Metropolitan area 
 Naples Metro 
 Underground geothermal zone 
 Port 
 History  ( timeline ) 
 Napoleonic Kingdom of Naples 
 Army 
 Neapolitan Republic (1647) 
 Kingdom of Naples 
 Consorts 
 Monarchs 
 Viceroys 
 Dukes 
 Duchy of Naples 
 Four Days of Naples 
 Jews in Naples 
 Bishops 
 Bombings in WWII 
 Politics and government 
 Elections in Naples 
 2016 
 2021 
 Mayors 
 Culture 
 Cinema 
 Music 
 Conservatories 
 Canzone Napoletana 
 Flag 
 Coat of arms 
 Historic Centre 
 Museums 
 Cuisine 
 Architecture 
 Tallest buildings ,  Villas 
 Economy 
 Theaters 
 Language 
 State Archives of Naples 
 Radio stations 
 Patron saints 
   Outline 
   Category v t e   Cuisine of Italy History 
 Ancient Roman cuisine 
 Medieval cuisine 
 Early modern cuisine 
 Contemporary cuisine 
 Regional cuisines 
 Abruzzese 
 Apulian 
 Arbëreshë 
 Ligurian 
 Lombard 
 Lucanian 
 Neapolitan 
 Roman 
 Sardinian 
 Sicilian 
 Venetian 
 Pasta and sauces 
 Pasta  ( List ) 
 Carbonara 
 Pesto 
 Ragù 
 Neapolitan ragù 
 Arrabbiata sauce 
 Amatriciana sauce 
 Marinara sauce 
 Genovese sauce 
 Bolognese sauce 
 Checca sauce 
 Fettuccine Alfredo 
 Pasta alla Norma 
 Pasta con i peperoni cruschi 
 Pasta con le sarde 
 Pasta e fagioli 
 Pasta al pomodoro 
 Pasta all'Ortolana 
 Rigatoni con la Pajata 
 Cacio e pepe 
 Spaghetti aglio e olio 
 Spaghetti alla puttanesca 
 Spaghetti alle vongole 
 Tumact me tulez 
 Soups 
 Soup alla canavese 
 Soup alla modenese 
 Acquacotta 
 Bagnun 
 Minestrone 
 Ribollita 
 Other dishes ( List ) 
 Bagna càuda 
 Braciola 
 Bruschetta 
 Cotoletta 
 Cotoletta alla milanese 
 Crostino 
 Bollito misto 
 Baccalà alla lucana 
 Baccalà alla vicentina 
 Cacciatore 
 Cacciucco 
 Caponata 
 Cappon magro 
 Caprese salad 
 Carciofi alla romana 
 Carpaccio 
 Carne pizzaiola 
 Cassoeula 
 Ciambotta 
 Ciccioli 
 Coda alla vaccinara 
 Fiorentina 
 Fondue 
 Frico 
 Frittata 
 Frìttuli 
 Istrian stew 
 Lampredotto 
 Polenta 
 Porchetta 
 Panzanella 
 Parmigiana 
 Ossobuco 
 Orzotto 
 Rafanata 
 Risotto 
 Rollatini 
 Saltimbocca 
 Scaloppine 
 Timballo 
 Vitello tonnato 
 Pizza and street food 
 Pizza 
 al taglio 
 Neapolitan pizza 
 Sicilian pizza 
 Focaccia 
 Piscialandrea 
 Calzone 
 Panzerotti 
 Crocchè 
 Arancini 
 Supplì 
 Frittula 
 Panelle 
 Pani câ meusa 
 Panino 
 Piadina 
 Arrosticini 
 Farinata 
 Tramezzino 
 Zippuli 
 Sardenara 
 Scaccia 
 U' pastizz 'rtunnar 
 Cheeses and charcuterie 
 Cheeses 
 PDO 
 Salumi 
 Pastry and desserts ( List ) 
 Bocconotto 
 Bombolone 
 Bruttiboni 
 Buccellato 
 Budino 
 Cannoli 
 Cantuccini 
 Cassata 
 Cassatella di sant'Agata 
 Castagnaccio 
 Cavallucci 
 Colomba di Pasqua 
 Crostata 
 Crocetta of Caltanissetta 
 Gelato 
 Granita 
 Grattachecca 
 Marzipan 
 Mustacciuoli 
 Neapolitan ice cream 
 Neccio 
 Pandoro 
 Panettone 
 Panforte 
 Panna cotta 
 Panpepato 
 Parrozzo 
 Pastiera 
 Pignolata 
 Pizzelle 
 Ricciarelli 
 Seada 
 Semifreddo 
 Sfogliatelle 
 Sorbetto 
 Sponge cake 
 Spumoni 
 Struffoli 
 Tartufo 
 Tiramisu 
 Torrone 
 Torta caprese 
 Zabaione 
 Zeppole 
 Zuccotto 
 Zuppa Inglese 
 Breads 
 Borlengo 
 Breadstick 
 Ciabatta 
 Coppia Ferrarese 
 Filone 
 Michetta 
 Pane carasau 
 Pane di Altamura 
 Pane sciocco 
 Sgabeo 
 Taralli 
 Vastedda 
 Wines 
 Varieties 
 IGT 
 DOCG 
 DOC 
 Abruzzo 
 Calabrian 
 Friulan 
 Lombardy 
 Piedmont 
 Tuscan 
 Veneto 
 Alcoholic beverages 
 Beer 
 Grappa 
 Sambuca 
 Mirto 
 Vermouth 
 Spritz 
 Limoncello 
 Fernet 
 Campari 
 Aperol 
 Cynar 
 Amaro 
 Amaretto 
 Nocino 
 Centerbe 
 Bargnolino 
 Maraschino 
 Sassolino 
 Strega 
 Rosolio 
 Galliano 
 Frangelico 
 Alchermes 
 Aurum 
 Coffee 
 Caffè 
 Espresso 
 Lungo 
 Ristretto 
 Doppio 
 Espressino 
 Cappuccino 
 Caffelatte 
 Latte macchiato 
 Caffè macchiato 
 Caffè corretto 
 Affogato 
 Mocaccino 
 Marocchino 
 Bicerin 
 Barbajada 
 Bombardino 
 See also 
 Sammarinese cuisine 
 Italian-American cuisine 
 Italian food products 
 Osteria 
 Trattoria 
 Enoteca 
 Sagra 
 List of Italian chefs 
 List of Italian dishes 
 Meal structure 
 Italian Sounding 
 
   Italy portal 
   Food portal 
 
 v t e Cuisines Continental 
 African 
 North 
 West 
 list 
 Americas 
 Caribbean 
 North 
 South 
 list 
 Asian 
 Caucasian 
 Central 
 Indian subcontinent 
 Levantine 
 list 
 European 
 Balkan 
 Central 
 Eastern 
 list 
 Oceanic 
 Intercontinental
 Global 
 Latin American 
 Mediterranean 
 Middle Eastern 
 National  and regional 
 Afghan 
 Albanian 
 Algerian 
 American 
 Californian 
 Floribbean 
 Hawaiian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Lowcountry (South Carolina) 
 New England 
 New Mexico 
 Pacific Northwest 
 Pennsylvania Dutch 
 Puerto Rican 
 Southern US 
 Southwest US 
 Texas 
 Angolan 
 Argentine 
 Armenian 
 Australian 
 Austrian 
 Azerbaijani 
 Bahraini 
 Bangladeshi 
 Barbadian 
 Belarusian 
 Belgian 
 Belizean 
 Beninese 
 Bhutanese 
 Bolivian 
 Bosnian-Herzegovinian 
 Botswana 
 Brazilian 
 British 
 Channel Islands 
 English 
 Gibraltarian 
 Northern Irish 
 Saint Helena 
 Scottish 
 Welsh 
 Bruneian 
 Bulgarian 
 Burkinabé 
 Burmese 
 Burundian 
 Cambodian 
 Cameroonian 
 Canadian 
 Acadian 
 Québécois 
 Central African Republic 
 Chadian 
 Chilean 
 Chinese 
 Cantonese 
 Hong Kong 
 Macanese 
 Tibetan 
 Xinjiang 
 Colombian 
 Congolese 
 Corsican 
 Croatian 
 Cuban 
 Cypriot 
 Czech 
 Danish 
 Faroese 
 Greenlandic 
 Djiboutian 
 Dominican 
 Dominican Republic 
 Dutch 
 East Timorese 
 Ecuadorian 
 Egyptian 
 Emirati 
 Equatorial Guinean 
 Eritrean 
 Estonian 
 Ethiopian 
 Fijian 
 Filipino 
 Finnish 
 French 
 Occitan 
 French Guianan 
 Gabonese 
 Gambian 
 Georgian 
 German 
 Ghanaian 
 Greek 
 Cretan 
 Epirotic 
 Greek Macedonian 
 Heptanesean 
 Guatemalan 
 Guinea-Bissauan 
 Guinean 
 Haitian 
 Honduran 
 Hungarian 
 Icelandic 
 Indian 
 Arunachalese 
 Assamese 
 Bengali 
 Bihari 
 Goan 
 Gujarati 
 Himachal Pradesh 
 Kashmiri 
 Jharkhandi 
 Karnataka 
 Kerala 
 Maharashtrian 
 Manipuri 
 Meghalayan 
 Mizo 
 Naga 
 Odia 
 Punjabi 
 Rajasthani 
 Sikkimese 
 Sindhi 
 Tamil 
 Telangana 
 Telugu 
 Indonesian 
 Acehnese 
 Balinese 
 Banjar 
 Batak 
 Betawi 
 Indo 
 Javanese 
 Madurese 
 Makassar 
 Minahasan 
 Minangkabau 
 Palembangese 
 Sundanese 
 Iranian 
 Iraqi 
 Irish 
 Israeli 
 Italian 
 Abruzzese 
 Ligurian 
 Lombard 
 Lucanian 
 Neapolitan 
 Roman 
 Sardinian 
 Sicilian 
 Venetian 
 Ivorian 
 Jamaican 
 Japanese 
 Okinawan 
 Jordanian 
 Kazakh 
 Kenyan 
 Korean 
 North Korean 
 South Korean 
 Kosovan 
 Kuwaiti 
 Kyrgyz 
 Lao 
 Latvian 
 Lebanese 
 Lesotho 
 Liberian 
 Libyan 
 Liechtensteiner 
 Lithuanian 
 Luxembourg 
 Macedonian 
 Malagasy 
 Malawian 
 Malaysian 
 Sabahan 
 Sarawakian 
 Maldivian 
 Malian 
 Maltese 
 Mauritanian 
 Mauritian 
 Mexican 
 Moldovan 
 Monégasque 
 Mongolian 
 Montenegrin 
 Moroccan 
 Mozambican 
 Namibian 
 Nauruan 
 Nepalese 
 New Zealand 
 Nicaraguan 
 Niger 
 Nigerian 
 Niuean 
 Norwegian 
 Omani 
 Pakistani 
 Palestinian 
 Panamanian 
 Peruvian 
 Polish 
 Portuguese 
 Qatari 
 Romanian  (incl.  Transylvanian Saxon ) 
 Russian 
 Bashkir 
 Chechen 
 Circassian 
 Komi 
 Mordovian 
 Sakha 
 Tatar 
 Udmurt 
 Yamal 
 Rwandan 
 Saint Lucian 
 Salvadoran 
 Sammarinese 
 São Tomé and Príncipe 
 Saudi Arabian 
 Senegalese 
 Serbian 
 Seychellois 
 Sierra Leonean 
 Singaporean 
 Slovak 
 Slovenian 
 Somali 
 South African 
 Spanish 
 Andalusian 
 Asturian 
 Balearic 
 Basque 
 Canarian 
 Cantabrian 
 Catalan 
 Extremaduran 
 Galician 
 Manchegan 
 Valencian 
 Sri Lankan 
 Sudanese 
 Swazi 
 Swedish 
 Swiss 
 Syrian 
 Taiwanese 
 Tajik 
 Tanzanian 
 Zanzibari 
 Thai 
 Togolese 
 Tunisian 
 Turkish 
 Turkmen 
 Trinidadian and Tobagonian 
 Ugandan 
 Ukrainian 
 Uruguayan 
 Uzbek 
 Venezuelan 
 Vietnamese 
 Western Saharan 
 Yemeni 
 Zambian 
 Zimbabwean 
 Ethnic 
 Ainu 
 Arab 
 Indonesian 
 Aromanian 
 Assyrian 
 Balochi 
 Berber 
 Cajun 
 Chinese 
 American 
 Canadian 
 Chifa 
 Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Crimean Tatar 
 Greek American 
 Hazaragi 
 Indian 
 Anglo-Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Indigenous American 
 Inuit 
 Italian American 
 Kurdish 
 Livonian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Malay 
 Ossetian 
 Parsi 
 Pashtun 
 Peranakan 
 Romani 
 Sámi 
 Soul food 
 Sylheti 
 Transylvanian Saxon 
 Yup'ik 
 Religious 
 Buddhist 
 Christian 
 Goan Catholic 
 Mangalorean Catholic 
 Mennonite 
 Hindu 
 Islamic 
 Chinese 
 Ital 
 Jain 
 Jewish 
 American 
 Ashkenazi 
 Bukharan 
 Ethiopian 
 Mizrahi 
 Sephardic 
 Syrian 
 Ritual slaughter 
 Sikh 
 Historical 
 Ancient Egyptian 
 Ancient Greek 
 Ancient Israelite 
 Ancient Roman 
 Antebellum America 
 Aztec 
 Byzantine 
 Early modern European 
 Historical Chinese 
 Historical Indian subcontinent 
 Historical North Indian and Pakistani 
 History of agriculture 
 History of alcoholic drinks 
 History of bread 
 History of seafood 
 History of vegetarianism 
 Historical Argentine 
 Historical Japanese 
 Inca 
 Mayan 
 Muisca 
 Mughal 
 Medieval 
 Ottoman 
 Peasant 
 Soviet 
 Thirteen Colonies 
 Styles 
 Classique 
 Fast food 
 Fusion 
 New American 
 Eurasian 
 Haute 
 Molecular gastronomy 
 Note by Note 
 Nouvelle 
 Lists 
 List of cuisines 
 List of historical cuisines 
 Lists of prepared foods 
 Related 
 Cookbook 
 Cooking 
 Culinary arts 
 Drink 
 Food 
 history 
 Diet 
 Meal preparation 
 
   Food portal 
   Drink portal 
   Category 
   Commons 
   Cookbook 
   WikiProject 
   Outline 
 
 Portals :   Society   Food   Italy 
 Authority control : National libraries  
 Israel 
 United States 
 
  
NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw2392
Cached time: 20230311165618
Cache expiry: 1814400
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [show‐toc, no‐toc‐conversion]
CPU time usage: 0.821 seconds
Real time usage: 1.030 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 5591/1000000
Post‐expand include size: 181929/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 11368/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 15/100
Expensive parser function count: 27/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 0/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 51706/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.392/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 24728628/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/400
 
 
Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  673.732      1 -total
 22.22%  149.709     55 Template:Lang
 19.02%  128.125      3 Template:Ambox
 12.42%   83.645      1 Template:Multiple_issues
 12.01%   80.915      1 Template:Italian_cuisine
 11.67%   78.616      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 11.58%   78.027      3 Template:Navbox
 11.27%   75.926     23 Template:Interlanguage_link_multi
  7.40%   49.873      1 Template:Naples
  6.86%   46.247      1 Template:Short_description
 
  Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:idhash:16591942-0!canonical and timestamp 20230311165617 and revision id 1104724860. Rendering was triggered because: page-view
  
 esi <esi:include src="/esitest-fa8a495983347898/content" />  
 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Neapolitan_cuisine&oldid=1104724860 " 
 Categories :  Neapolitan cuisine Culture in Naples Cuisine of Campania Hidden categories:  Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles that may contain original research from September 2017 All articles that may contain original research Articles needing additional references from September 2017 All articles needing additional references Articles with multiple maintenance issues Articles containing Italian-language text Articles containing Latin-language text Articles with J9U identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  This page was last edited on 16 August 2022, at 15:04  (UTC) . 
 Text is available under the  Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0 ;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the  Terms of Use  and  Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the  Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. 
 
 
 Privacy policy 
 About Wikipedia 
 Disclaimers 
 Contact Wikipedia 
 Mobile view 
 Developers 
 Statistics 
 Cookie statement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
