
 
 
 Jump to content 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle sidebar 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Create account Log in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Personal tools 
 
 
 
 
   Create account   Log in 
 
 
 
 
		Pages for logged out editors  learn more 
 
 
 Contributions Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Navigation 
 
 
 Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate 
 
 
 
 
 Contribute 
 
 
 Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file 
 
 
 
 
 Tools 
 
 
 What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item 
 
 
 
 
 Print/export 
 
 
 Download as PDF Printable version 
 
 
 
 
 In other projects 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons Wikibooks 
 
 
 
 
 Languages 
 
 On this Wikipedia the language links are at the top of the page across from the article title.  Go to top . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CentralNotice  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Contents 
 move to sidebar 
 hide 
 
 
 
 
 (Top) 
 
 
 
 
 
 1 Types 
 
 
				Toggle Types subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 1.1 Khas cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.2 Himalayan cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.2.1 Tibetan-influenced cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.2.2 Thakali cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.3 Newars 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.4 Lohorung cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.5 Limbu cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.6 Terai  cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.7 Sweets 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.8 Snacks 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.9 Drinks 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 Western influence 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 Etiquette 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4 Gallery 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5 See also 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6 References 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 7 Further reading 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8 External links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
						Toggle the table of contents
					 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle the table of contents 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Nepalese cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 25 languages 
 
 
 
 العربية বাংলা Čeština Deutsch Español فارسی Français 한국어 हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Jawa ქართული मैथिली Nederlands नेपाली Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Português Русский Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 
 Edit links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Article Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 English 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 More 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
 
 
 Culinary traditions of Nepal 
 
 
 This article  needs additional citations for  verification .  Please help  improve this article  by  adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources:   "Nepalese cuisine"  –  news   ·   newspapers   ·   books   ·   scholar   ·   JSTOR   ( May 2015 )  ( Learn how and when to remove this template message ) 
   Nepali dal-bhat-tarkari 
   Nepali-style  momo  with chili 
   Nepali-style hot chicken  chow mein 
 Nepali cuisine  comprises a variety of cuisines based upon  ethnicity , alluvial soil and  climate  relating to  Nepal 's  cultural diversity  and  geography .  Dal-bhat-tarkari  ( Nepali :  दाल भात तरकारी ) is eaten throughout Nepal.  Dal  is a soup made of  lentils  and spices,  bhat  — usually  rice  but sometimes another grain — and a vegetable curry,  tarkari . Condiments are usually small amounts of spicy  pickle  ( achaar , अचार) which can be fresh or fermented, mainly of dried mustard greens (called  gundruk ko achar ) and radish ( mula ko achar ) and of which there are many varieties. [1]  Other accompaniments may be sliced  lemon  ( nibuwa ) or  lime  ( kagati ) with fresh green chilli ( hariyo khursani ) and a fried  papad  and also Islamic food items like rice pudding, sewai, biryani etc.  Dhindo  (ढिंडो) is a traditional food of Nepal.
 Momo  is a Nepalese style dumpling, an adaptation of Tibetan dumplings, filled with minced meat in a flour dough, given different shapes and then cooked by steaming. [2]  It is one of the most popular foods in Nepal and the regions of Sikkim, Darjeeling and Kalimpong in India where Nepali-speaking Indians have a presence. Momo were originally filled with  buffalo  meat but are now commonly filled with goat or chicken, as well as vegetarian preparations.Special foods such as  sel roti ,  finni roti  and  patre  are eaten during festivals such as  Tihar .  Sel roti  is a traditional Nepali homemade ring-shaped rice bread which is sweet to taste. Other foods have hybrid  Tibetan  and  Indian  influence.
 Chow mein  is a Nepali favorite in modern times based on Chinese-style stir-fried noodles. It is one of the most beloved everyday staple lunches in Nepali households.
 
 
 Types [ edit ] 
 Khas cuisine [ edit ] 
   Dhindo  thali  in a Thakali restaurant of  Nepal 
 Dal-bhat-tarkari is the standard meal eaten twice daily traditionally by the Khas people. However, with land suitable for irrigated rice paddies in short supply, other grains supplement or even dominate. Wheat becomes unleavened flat bread ( roti  or  chapati ).  Maize  ( makai ),  buckwheat  ( fapar ),  barley  ( jau ), or  millet  ( kodo ) become  porridge -like ( dhido  or  ato ).  Tarkari  can be spinach and fresh greens ( sag ), fermented and dried greens ( gundruk  or  sinki ), white  radish  ( mula ),  potatoes  ( alu ),  green beans  ( simi ),  tomatoes  ( golbeda ),  cauliflower  ( kauli ),  cabbage  ( bandakopi ),  pumpkin  ( farsi ), etc.
The climate of the hilly region remains moderate throughout the year. This kind of climate is perfect for horticulture. [3]  Fruits traditionally grown in the hills include  mandarin orange  ( suntala ),  kaffir lime  ( kagati ),  lemon  ( nibuwa ),  Asian pear  ( nashpati ), and  bayberry  ( kaphal ),  mangoes  ( aanp ),  apples  ( syauu ), peach ( aaru ), plum ( aalcha or aarubakhara ), apricot ( kurpani ) . [4]  In some seasons there is an excess amount of these fruits produced. These excess fruits are often preserved or otherwise made use of in the form of  Alcohol ,  pickles ,  dried fruits  and  fruit juice .
 Dahi  (yogurt) and  curried  meat ( masu ) or  fish  ( machha ) are served as side dishes when available.  Chicken  ( kukhura ) and fish are usually acceptable to all including the Khas  Brahmin  ( Bahun ) caste. Observant Hindus never eat  beef  ( gai ko masu ). They also eschew  buffalo  and  yak  meat as being too cow-like. Domestic  pork  ( sungur ko masu ) was traditionally only eaten by aadibasi, however  wild boar  ( bangur ko masu ) was traditionally hunted and eaten by  magars . A strain derived from wild boar is now raised in captivity and used for meat that is increasingly popular with Pahari ethnicities and castes that did not traditionally eat pork. They however eat bandel (wild boar) as it is considered clean due to its forest habitat though they do not eat pork meat.
 
 Himalayan cuisine [ edit ] 
 Tibetan-influenced cuisine [ edit ] 
   Nepalese  thukpa 
 Himalayan cuisine is influenced culturally by  Tibetan  and closely related ethnic groups in the  Himalaya and Trans-Himalaya . The  Himalayan region  is not fertile as compared to other  regions . Moreover, the climate is cold throughout the year with heavy snowfalls. [5]  The  food crops  grown in this region are  buckwheat ,  millet ,  naked barley ,  common beans , and  high-altitude rice . [6]   Potatoes  are another important staple crop and food. Substantial amounts of rice are imported from the lowlands.
 Because of the cold temperature, people often prefer warm foods like  soup ,  thukpa ,  tea  and strong  alcohols . Grains are made into alcoholic beverages (see below).  Butter tea  is made by mixing butter or ghyu (घ्यु)/ ghee  and salt into a strong brew of  tea . This tea preparation is also commonly mixed with tsampa flour to make a kind of fast food, which is especially eaten while traveling.
 The cattle raised in this region are  yak ,  chauries  (yak and cow crossed),  Himalayan goats , and  sheep . [7]  People raise these animals for  meat ,  milk ,  cheese , and  dahi  (yogurt).
 Most of the Himalayan regions are hard to reach. There is no proper means of transportation because of higher altitudes and it is a considerable challenge to build good road transportation. Hence only rice and some condiments  such as salt are imported from other regions by air transport or by using animals as their means of transportation.
 People in this region eat  dhido  (millet or barley cooked dough), potato  curry ,  momo (dumplings) , yak or goat or sheep meat, milk,  thukpa ,  laping  or strong alcohol like  tongba  (millet juice) for their regular diet. This region also imports rice from other regions and consumes  daal-bhat-tarkari  from time to time.
 
 Thakali cuisine [ edit ] 
 Thakali cuisine—transitional between Himalayan and lowland cuisines—is eaten by  Thakali  people living in  Thak-Khola  Valley , an ancient and relatively easy trade route through the high Himalaya. This cuisine is also served in inns ( bhattis ) run by Thakalis alongside other trade routes and in  Pokhara  and other towns in the hills of central Nepal, that were said to offer the best food and accommodations before the great proliferation of facilities catering to foreign trekkers.
 
   Hard  chhurpi  cheese made from  yak  milk 
 Very few Thakali own their own  yaks , so butter made from the yak milk is usually purchased at the market, along with other staples like rice, tea, lentils, sugar and spices. After butter is produced, a hard cheese called  chhurpi  is made with the buttermilk. [8] 
 Thakali cuisine is less vegetarian than Pahari cuisine.
 Yak  and yak-cow hybrids locally known as  Jhopa  were consumed by the lower castes. All castes eat the meat of local  sheep  called  Bheda  and  Chyangra  or  Chiru  imported from Tibet. Meat is sliced into thin slices and dried on thin poles near the cooking fire. Blood sausage is also prepared and dried. Dried meat is added to vegetable curries or sauteed in ghee and dipped into  timur-ko-choup  which is a mixture of red chili powder,  Sichuan pepper , salt and local herbs. This spice mixture also seasons new potatoes, or eggs which may be boiled, fried or made into omelets.
 Thakali cuisine uses locally grown buckwheat, barley, millet and dal, as well as rice, maize and dal imported from lower regions to the south. Grain may be ground and boiled into a thick porridge that is eaten in place of rice with dal. A kind of dal is even made from dried, ground buckwheat leaves. Grain can be roasted or popped in hot sand (which is then sieved off) as a snack food. Thakalis also follow the Tibetan customs of preparing tsampa and tea with butter and salt.  Ghee  is used in this tea preparation and as a cooking oil otherwise.
 Since most Thakali people were engaged in trade, they could import vegetables, fruits and eggs from lower regions. A large variety of vegetables were consumed daily, some—especially  daikon radish  and  beetroot —dried and often prepared with mutton. Soup prepared from  spinach  known as  gyang-to  was served with a pinch of  timur-ko-choup .  Apples  were introduced following the arrival of foreign horticulturists [9]  and are now widely enjoyed.
 
 Newars [ edit ] 
 See also:  Newa cuisine 
   An elaborate Newa meal in Kathmandu 
 Newars  are an  urbanized  ethnic group originally living in the Kathmandu Valley, but now also in bazaar towns elsewhere in the world and  Middle Hills . In the fertile Kathmandu and Pokhara valleys, local market farmers find growing produce more profitable than grain, especially now that cheap rice and other staples can be trucked in. Furthermore, Newar households have relatively high incomes and their culture emphasizes food and feasting.
 Although daily Newar food practices consist mostly of components from the generic hill cuisine, during ritual, ceremonial and festive eating, Newar dishes can be much more varied than the generic Pahade/Pahari ones. Newari cuisine makes wide use of  buffalo  meat. For vegetarians, meat and dried fish can be replaced by fried tofu or cottage cheese. The cuisine has a wide range of fermented preparations, whereas Pahade/Pahari cuisine has beyond a few  aachar  condiments.
 Kwāti  (क्वाति soup of different beans),  kachilā  (कचिला spiced minced meat),  chhoylā  (छोयला water buffalo meat marinated in spices and grilled over the flames of dried wheat stalks),  pukālā  (पुकाला fried meat),  wo  (व: lentil cake),  paun kwā  (पाउँक्वा sour soup),  swan pukā  (स्वँपुका stuffed lungs),  syen  (स्येँ fried liver),  mye  (म्ये boiled and fried tongue),  sapu mhichā  (सःपू म्हिचा leaf tripe stuffed with bone marrow) and  sanyā khunā  (सन्या खुना jellied fish soup) are some of the popular festival foods.
 Dessert consists of  dhau  (धौ yogurt),  sisābusā  (सिसाबुसा fruits) and  mari  (मरि sweets). There are  achaars  made with  aamli  fruit.  Thwon  (थ्वँ rice beer) and  aylā  (अयला local alcohol) are the common alcoholic liquors that Newars make at home.
 There is great importance of food in Newari culture. [10]  Newari cuisine is one of the most delicious food with intense flavorings. [11]  There are dishes for every edible part of  buffalo meat  (cooked and uncooked) that includes  intestine ,  stomach  and  brain . [12]  That's another reason why they are famous.
 
 Lohorung cuisine [ edit ] 
   Fried chicken, Lohorung food 
 Lohorung  are indigenous to eastern  Nepal . They have a variety of food in their cuisine made from local ingredients. Some of them are  Wachipa ,  Wamik ,  Masikdaam ,  Sibring ,  Sel roti ,  Bawari ,  Dhule Achar ,  Saruwa ,  Chamre ,  Dibu , and so on.
 
 Limbu cuisine [ edit ] 
   Limbu  women's with traditional drink  Tongba 
 Limbu  have unique ethnic foods including   kinema  (fermented soybeans),  yangben  ( Reindeer Moss ), preparations of bamboo shoots, bread made from millet or buckwheat, and traditional Limbu drink  Tongba  (millet beer). Pork, Beef is eaten in some Eastern regions like Dharan.
 
 Terai  cuisine [ edit ] 
 Food in the  Terai  south of  Sivalik Hills  refers to mirror cuisines such as  Maithili  cuisine [13]  in the east, Tharu cuisine in the west, and  Bhojpuri cuisine  in the center and near west of  Madhesh  region of  Nepal . Further west, there is  Mughlai -influenced  Awadhi cuisine —particularly eaten by the substantial Muslim population around  Nepalganj .
 Terai diets can be more varied than in the Middle Hills because of greater variety of crops grown locally plus cash crops imported from cooler microclimates in nearby hill regions, as well as from other parts of  Greater Nepal . Fruit commonly grown in the  Terai  include  mango  ( aap ),  litchi ,  papaya  ( armewa/mewa ),  banana  ( kera/kela/kola ) and  jackfruit  ( katahar/katahal ).
 A typical terai set includes basmati rice with ghee, pigeon pea daal, tarkari (cooked variety of vegetable),  tarua  (battered raw vegetables known as taruwa/baruwa such as potato, brinjal/aubergine, chili, cauliflower etc. deep fried in the oil), papad/papadum, mango/lemon pickles and yogurt. For non-vegetable items, they consume mostly fish or goat curry. Traditionally there never used to be poultry items but nowadays, due to urbanization, poultry items are common, too.
 Nepal  has seven low elevation  Inner Terai valleys  enclosed by the  Sivalik  and  Mahabharat  ranges. Historically these valleys were extremely  malarial  and populated mainly by the  Tharu  and  Maithil peoples  who had genetic resistance. Since the valleys were isolated from one another, Tharu enclaves spoke different dialects and had different customs. They may have had different cuisines, although this has not been very well studied. Nevertheless, most Tharu historically obtained a varied diet through hunting and gathering as well as shifting agriculture and animal husbandry.
 This contrasted with diets of Pahade/Pahari Hindus that were predominantly agricultural and used only a few sources of animal protein because of  religious or caste prohibitions . In the 1950s, when Nepal opened its borders to foreigners and foreign aid missions, malaria suppression programs in the Inner Madhesh made it possible for people without genetic resistance to survive there. The Tharu and Maithil faced an influx of people fleeing land  and food deficits in the hills . Conversion of forest and grassland to cropland and prohibitions on hunting shifted the Tharu and Maithil in the east and west away from land-based hunting and gathering, toward greater use of fish, [14]   freshwater crab ,  prawns  and  snails  from rivers and ponds.
 Tharu raise chickens and are reported to employ dogs to hunt rats in rice paddies and then roast them whole on sticks. Mutton may be obtained from  nomadic   hill people  such as  Kham Magar  who take herds of sheep and goats up to sub-alpine pastures bordering the high Himalaya in summer, and down to Inner Madhesh valleys in winter. Increasing competition for land forces the Tharu and Maithil people away from  shifting cultivation  toward sedentary agriculture, so the national custom of eating rice with lentils gains headway. The Tharu or Maithil have unique ways of preparing these staples, such as rice and lentil dumplings called  bagiya  or  dhikri [15] [16]  and immature rice is used to make a kind of gruel,  maar .
 Taro  root is an important crop in the region. The leaves and roots are eaten.  Sidhara [17]  is a mixture of  taro  root, dried fish and  turmeric  that is formed into cakes and dried for preservation. The cakes are broken up and cooked with radish, chili, garlic and other spices to accompany boiled rice. Snails are cleansed, boiled and spiced to make  ghonghi . [18]  Another short compendium of Tharu and Maithil recipes [19]  includes roasted crab, wheat flatbread fried in mustard oil, and fried taro leaf cakes.
 
 Sweets [ edit ] 
   Simple  barfi  made with milk and sugar 
 Nepal produces a variety of fruits (persimmons, apples, mangoes, tangerines, kiwis) and nuts that are featured in locally prepared sweets. Dessert is not a well-established concept in the Nepali cuisine and sweets made with milk, yogurt and cheese are often eaten for breakfast as standalone meals. Sometimes grated carrots are used instead of flour, or semolina, rice, corn or puffed  lotus seeds .  Barfi  is made with some combination of  lentils , fruits, flour and thickened milk. [20] 
 
   Semolina  halva 
 Halwa  is a sweetened  semolina  pudding with green cardamom,  cashews , raisins and shredded  coconut . Like other Nepalese sweets, Nepalese puddings are prepared using  ghee . Dumplings called  lal mohan  are deep fried like  fritters  and soaked in cardamom-flavored sweet syrup. [20] 
 At the festival of  Yomari Purnima  celebrated in December, to thank the goddess of grains  Annapurna  after the harvest, the  Newar  make sweet dumplings ( yomari ) with rice flour filled with sesame seeds, and brown sugar or molasses. In the predominately  Hindu  country, sweet  peda  made with thickened milk ( khuwaa ) are offered to the Hindu gods. [20] 
 
 Snacks [ edit ] 
 Snacks  include maize popped or parched called  khaja  (literally "eat and run");  beaten rice  ( baji  or  chiura ), dry-roasted  soybeans  ( bhatmas , Nepali: भटमास), dried fruit candy ( lapsi ), and South Asian foods like the  samosa  and  South Asian sweets . International snacks like  biscuits  (packaged cookies),  potato chips  and  wai wai  (Nepali: वाइ वाइ,  instant noodles ) are all coming into widespread use. Whereas, some youths in Nepal prefer western snacks as they are easy to get and less time-consuming.
 
 Drinks [ edit ] 
   Tongba :  Limbu  style, hot millet beer 
 Tea  ( chiya ) usually taken with milk and sugar, juice of  sugarcane  ( sarbat ), and  buttermilk  ( mahi ) are common non-alcoholic drinks. Alcoholic drinks include  raksi , spirits made in rustic distilleries, and jaand/ jard , homemade beer made from rice. At higher elevations there is millet beer  Tongba , nigaar  and  chhyaang .
 
 Western influence [ edit ] 
 Western culture has influence in Nepali/Nepalese cuisine. Western food like  bread ,  cereals ,  bagels ,  pizzas ,  sandwiches ,  burgers , and  pasta  and drinks like  Coke ,  Fanta , and  Sprite  are common in cities and places where there are a reasonable number of tourists. Middle-class families residing in cities consume these foods on a daily basis. One can find them in almost all the restaurants around cities. [21] 
 
 Etiquette [ edit ] 
 This section has multiple issues.  Please help  improve it  or discuss these issues on the  talk page .  ( Learn how and when to remove these template messages ) 
 
 The  neutrality  of this section is  disputed .  Relevant discussion may be found on the  talk page . Please do not remove this message until  conditions to do so are met .   ( December 2013 )  ( Learn how and when to remove this template message ) 
 This section  does not  cite  any  sources .  Please help  improve this section  by  adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and  removed .   ( May 2015 )  ( Learn how and when to remove this template message ) 
 
  ( Learn how and when to remove this template message ) 
 Although most homes and restaurants in cities have dining tables, meals in villages are often eaten seated on a tiny wooden seat (pira) or on chairs or benches. A large mound of  bhat ,  dhindo  or a pile of  rotis  is served on a  jharke thal  (a large brass plate) or a  khande thal  (a compartment plate). On the  jharke thal , the rice is surrounded by smaller mounds of prepared vegetables, fresh chutney or preserved pickles, and sometimes curd/yogurt, fish or meat. Separate glasses and bowls are instead used for different dishes, while serving on smaller plates or when serving to honoured guest or elders of the family. The most notable of this is the separate thals and bowls that are given to elders and honoured guests that are made of a separate metal alloy ( jharke ). Although it is vague on the specifics to what  jharke  can be quantified to be due to the change in the actual metallic composition of  jharke  for the past few generations and there being no one standard. Thus,  jharke thals , bowls etc. can all vary in appearance from locality, era, craftsmanship, and more, however the sentiment still remains.  On a  khande thal , there are separate small compartments for chutney and  tarkari  and other dishes.
 Food is traditionally eaten with the right hand. Touching or eating food with the left hand, which is traditionally used for washing off after stool, is considered unhygienic, and taboo. The hands should be washed before eating, and the hand and mouth should be rinsed after. It is customary to wash one's lips after eating. The use of spoons, and more recently forks, is also increasing, and inquiring if one is available is acceptable. The washing of hands and mouth is not necessary, before or after, when eating with a spoon.
 In Nepal, especially among the Brahmin and chetry castes, the purity of food and drinks is taken very seriously. Contact with saliva is almost universally considered to make food impure, which is considered to be  jutho  and may be seen as a sign of insult or grave ignorance. Acceptability of  jutho  food follows the traditional hierarchy of respect, where parents'  jutho  is acceptable to children but not vice-versa and so on. People of equal standing, like friends and spouses may also share  jutho , except among highly religious (where  jutho  is impure) or traditional people (where  jutho  is thought to transfer diseases, or husbands may be held superior to wives). In a similar vein, food touched by pets and other animals, or where an insect drops, are discarded and the containers thoroughly washed. Some exceptions may be made for animals traditionally thought pure, such as cows.
 
 Gallery [ edit ] 
 
 
 
 
 Dried fish dish; Tharu cuisine
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rice wine; Tharu cuisine
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dhikari; Tharu cuisine
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Chhwela; Newa cuisine
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gwarcha; Newa cuisine
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lapte bhoye; Newa cuisine
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Boiled corn with chilli pickle
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Plateful of momo in Nepal
 
 
 
 
 See also [ edit ] 
 
 Nepal portal Food portal 
 
 Culture of Nepal 
 Newari cuisine 
 Chaat 
 Sel roti 
 Dal bhat 
 List of Nepalese dishes 
 Momo (dumpling) 
 South Asian cuisine 
 Jimbu 
 
 References [ edit ] 
 
 
 ^   "Pickle - Achar - Chutney" . Food-nepal.com . Retrieved  12 September  2010 . 
 
 ^   "Is momo a Nepali thing? Here's all you need to know about momo's history in Nepal - OnlineKhabar English News" .  Online Khabar . 27 August 2021 . Retrieved  7 September  2022 . 
 
 ^   Hill Agriculture: Challenges and Opportunities 
 
 ^   Deciduous Fruit Production in Nepal 
 
 ^   Farming in Nepalese Mountains 
 
 ^   Himalayan foods 
 
 ^   Animal Life 
 
 ^   Vinding, Michael.  The Thakali: A Himalayan Ethnography . p. 102. 
 
 ^   Lok Nath Devkota.  "Deciduous Fruit in Nepal" . FAO . Retrieved  14 October  2013 . 
 
 ^   "CHAPTER IV: CASTE AND FOOD" . Archived from  the original  on 3 February 2019 . Retrieved  13 December  2017 . 
 
 ^   Nepali Newari Food – Introduction to the Stimulating Flavors of Samay Baji 
 
 ^   Kathmandu's hidden diners offer the real deal 
 
 ^   "Nepali Mithila Cuisine" . Mithilacuisine.blogspot.com . Retrieved  12 September  2010 . 
 
 ^   VOICE OF THARUS: Fishing and the Tharus including Maithil 
 
 ^   Voice of Tharus: Bagiya – the rice flour dumplings made the Tharu way 
 
 ^   "Tharu Cuisines and Delicacies (in Pictures) - The Nepali Food Blog | theGundruk.com" .  The Nepali Food Blog | theGundruk.com . 16 January 2016 . Retrieved  15 September  2018 . 
 
 ^   VOICE OF THARUS: Sidhara – the colocasia concoction 
 
 ^   VOICE OF THARUS: Excuse me, it’s escargot! 
 
 ^   VOICE OF THARUS: Three mouth-watering Tharu dishes 
 
 ^  a   b   c   Roufs, Timothy G.; Roufs, Kathleen Smyth.  Sweet Treats Around the World . pp. 179–183. 
 
 ^   American Restaurants in Kathmandu 
 
 
 Further reading [ edit ] 
 Löwdin, Per (2002) [1986].  "Food, Ritual and Society: A Study of Social Structure and Food Symbolism among the Newars" . Archived from the original on 30 June 2012 . Retrieved  17 November  2013 . {{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown ( link ) 
 External links [ edit ] 
 Nepalese Food 
 Guide to Nepali food 
 v t e Asian cuisine Sovereign states 
 Afghanistan 
 Armenia 
 Azerbaijan 
 Bahrain 
 Bangladesh 
 Bhutan 
 Brunei 
 Burma (Myanmar) 
 Cambodia 
 China 
 Cyprus 
 East Timor (Timor-Leste) 
 Egypt 
 Georgia 
 India 
 Indonesia 
 Iran 
 Iraq 
 Israel 
 Japan 
 Jordan 
 Kazakhstan 
 North Korea 
 South Korea 
 Kuwait 
 Kyrgyzstan 
 Laos 
 Lebanon 
 Malaysia 
 Maldives 
 Mongolia 
 Nepal 
 Oman 
 Pakistan 
 Philippines 
 Qatar 
 Russia 
 Saudi Arabia 
 Singapore 
 Sri Lanka 
 Syria 
 Tajikistan 
 Thailand 
 Turkey 
 Turkmenistan 
 United Arab Emirates 
 Uzbekistan 
 Vietnam 
 Yemen 
 States with limited recognition 
 Abkhazia 
 Artsakh 
 Northern Cyprus 
 Palestine 
 South Ossetia 
 Taiwan 
 Dependencies and other territories 
 British Indian Ocean Territory 
 Christmas Island 
 Cocos (Keeling) Islands 
 Hong Kong 
 Macau 
 
 v t e Cuisines Continental 
 African 
 North 
 West 
 list 
 Americas 
 Caribbean 
 North 
 South 
 list 
 Asian 
 Caucasian 
 Central 
 Indian subcontinent 
 Levantine 
 list 
 European 
 Balkan 
 Central 
 Eastern 
 list 
 Oceanic 
 Intercontinental
 Global 
 Latin American 
 Mediterranean 
 Middle Eastern 
 National  and regional 
 Afghan 
 Albanian 
 Algerian 
 American 
 Californian 
 Floribbean 
 Hawaiian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Lowcountry (South Carolina) 
 New England 
 New Mexico 
 Pacific Northwest 
 Pennsylvania Dutch 
 Puerto Rican 
 Southern US 
 Southwest US 
 Texas 
 Angolan 
 Argentine 
 Armenian 
 Australian 
 Austrian 
 Azerbaijani 
 Bahraini 
 Bangladeshi 
 Barbadian 
 Belarusian 
 Belgian 
 Belizean 
 Beninese 
 Bhutanese 
 Bolivian 
 Bosnian-Herzegovinian 
 Botswana 
 Brazilian 
 British 
 Channel Islands 
 English 
 Gibraltarian 
 Northern Irish 
 Saint Helena 
 Scottish 
 Welsh 
 Bruneian 
 Bulgarian 
 Burkinabé 
 Burmese 
 Burundian 
 Cambodian 
 Cameroonian 
 Canadian 
 Acadian 
 Québécois 
 Central African Republic 
 Chadian 
 Chilean 
 Chinese 
 Cantonese 
 Hong Kong 
 Macanese 
 Tibetan 
 Xinjiang 
 Colombian 
 Congolese 
 Corsican 
 Croatian 
 Cuban 
 Cypriot 
 Czech 
 Danish 
 Faroese 
 Greenlandic 
 Djiboutian 
 Dominican 
 Dominican Republic 
 Dutch 
 East Timorese 
 Ecuadorian 
 Egyptian 
 Emirati 
 Equatorial Guinean 
 Eritrean 
 Estonian 
 Ethiopian 
 Fijian 
 Filipino 
 Finnish 
 French 
 Occitan 
 French Guianan 
 Gabonese 
 Gambian 
 Georgian 
 German 
 Ghanaian 
 Greek 
 Cretan 
 Epirotic 
 Greek Macedonian 
 Heptanesean 
 Guatemalan 
 Guinea-Bissauan 
 Guinean 
 Haitian 
 Honduran 
 Hungarian 
 Icelandic 
 Indian 
 Arunachalese 
 Assamese 
 Bengali 
 Bihari 
 Goan 
 Gujarati 
 Himachal Pradesh 
 Kashmiri 
 Jharkhandi 
 Karnataka 
 Kerala 
 Maharashtrian 
 Manipuri 
 Meghalayan 
 Mizo 
 Naga 
 Odia 
 Punjabi 
 Rajasthani 
 Sikkimese 
 Sindhi 
 Tamil 
 Telangana 
 Telugu 
 Indonesian 
 Acehnese 
 Balinese 
 Banjar 
 Batak 
 Betawi 
 Indo 
 Javanese 
 Madurese 
 Makassar 
 Minahasan 
 Minangkabau 
 Palembangese 
 Sundanese 
 Iranian 
 Iraqi 
 Irish 
 Israeli 
 Italian 
 Abruzzese 
 Ligurian 
 Lombard 
 Lucanian 
 Neapolitan 
 Roman 
 Sardinian 
 Sicilian 
 Venetian 
 Ivorian 
 Jamaican 
 Japanese 
 Okinawan 
 Jordanian 
 Kazakh 
 Kenyan 
 Korean 
 North Korean 
 South Korean 
 Kosovan 
 Kuwaiti 
 Kyrgyz 
 Lao 
 Latvian 
 Lebanese 
 Lesotho 
 Liberian 
 Libyan 
 Liechtensteiner 
 Lithuanian 
 Luxembourg 
 Macedonian 
 Malagasy 
 Malawian 
 Malaysian 
 Sabahan 
 Sarawakian 
 Maldivian 
 Malian 
 Maltese 
 Mauritanian 
 Mauritian 
 Mexican 
 Moldovan 
 Monégasque 
 Mongolian 
 Montenegrin 
 Moroccan 
 Mozambican 
 Namibian 
 Nauruan 
 Nepalese 
 New Zealand 
 Nicaraguan 
 Niger 
 Nigerian 
 Niuean 
 Norwegian 
 Omani 
 Pakistani 
 Palestinian 
 Panamanian 
 Peruvian 
 Polish 
 Portuguese 
 Qatari 
 Romanian  (incl.  Transylvanian Saxon ) 
 Russian 
 Bashkir 
 Chechen 
 Circassian 
 Komi 
 Mordovian 
 Sakha 
 Tatar 
 Udmurt 
 Yamal 
 Rwandan 
 Saint Lucian 
 Salvadoran 
 Sammarinese 
 São Tomé and Príncipe 
 Saudi Arabian 
 Senegalese 
 Serbian 
 Seychellois 
 Sierra Leonean 
 Singaporean 
 Slovak 
 Slovenian 
 Somali 
 South African 
 Spanish 
 Andalusian 
 Asturian 
 Balearic 
 Basque 
 Canarian 
 Cantabrian 
 Catalan 
 Extremaduran 
 Galician 
 Manchegan 
 Valencian 
 Sri Lankan 
 Sudanese 
 Swazi 
 Swedish 
 Swiss 
 Syrian 
 Taiwanese 
 Tajik 
 Tanzanian 
 Zanzibari 
 Thai 
 Togolese 
 Tunisian 
 Turkish 
 Turkmen 
 Trinidadian and Tobagonian 
 Ugandan 
 Ukrainian 
 Uruguayan 
 Uzbek 
 Venezuelan 
 Vietnamese 
 Western Saharan 
 Yemeni 
 Zambian 
 Zimbabwean 
 Ethnic 
 Ainu 
 Arab 
 Indonesian 
 Aromanian 
 Assyrian 
 Balochi 
 Berber 
 Cajun 
 Chinese 
 American 
 Canadian 
 Chifa 
 Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Crimean Tatar 
 Greek American 
 Hazaragi 
 Indian 
 Anglo-Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Indigenous American 
 Inuit 
 Italian American 
 Kurdish 
 Livonian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Malay 
 Ossetian 
 Parsi 
 Pashtun 
 Peranakan 
 Romani 
 Sámi 
 Soul food 
 Sylheti 
 Transylvanian Saxon 
 Yup'ik 
 Religious 
 Buddhist 
 Christian 
 Goan Catholic 
 Mangalorean Catholic 
 Mennonite 
 Hindu 
 Islamic 
 Chinese 
 Ital 
 Jain 
 Jewish 
 American 
 Ashkenazi 
 Bukharan 
 Ethiopian 
 Mizrahi 
 Sephardic 
 Syrian 
 Ritual slaughter 
 Sikh 
 Historical 
 Ancient Egyptian 
 Ancient Greek 
 Ancient Israelite 
 Ancient Roman 
 Antebellum America 
 Aztec 
 Byzantine 
 Early modern European 
 Historical Chinese 
 Historical Indian subcontinent 
 Historical North Indian and Pakistani 
 History of agriculture 
 History of alcoholic drinks 
 History of bread 
 History of seafood 
 History of vegetarianism 
 Historical Argentine 
 Historical Japanese 
 Inca 
 Mayan 
 Muisca 
 Mughal 
 Medieval 
 Ottoman 
 Peasant 
 Soviet 
 Thirteen Colonies 
 Styles 
 Classique 
 Fast food 
 Fusion 
 New American 
 Eurasian 
 Haute 
 Molecular gastronomy 
 Note by Note 
 Nouvelle 
 Lists 
 List of cuisines 
 List of historical cuisines 
 Lists of prepared foods 
 Related 
 Cookbook 
 Cooking 
 Culinary arts 
 Drink 
 Food 
 history 
 Diet 
 Meal preparation 
 
   Food portal 
   Drink portal 
   Category 
   Commons 
   Cookbook 
   WikiProject 
   Outline 
 
 Authority control : National libraries  
 Israel 
 United States 
 Czech Republic 
 
  
NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw2403
Cached time: 20230310194444
Cache expiry: 1814400
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc, no‐toc‐conversion]
CPU time usage: 0.764 seconds
Real time usage: 0.953 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 18521/1000000
Post‐expand include size: 144903/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 13108/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 18/100
Expensive parser function count: 12/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 64298/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.388/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 25172801/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/400
 
 
Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  764.279      1 -total
 33.25%  254.159      2 Template:Navbox
 30.40%  232.309      1 Template:Asian_topic
 13.40%  102.390      1 Template:Reflist
 13.33%  101.896     52 Template:Iso2country
 13.10%  100.156      1 Template:Lang-ne
 11.56%   88.372      4 Template:Ambox
  9.94%   75.984      6 Template:Cite_web
  7.63%   58.342      1 Template:Short_description
  6.78%   51.791      1 Template:More_citations_needed
 
  Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:idhash:6931621-0!canonical and timestamp 20230310194443 and revision id 1142016626. Rendering was triggered because: api-parse
  
 esi <esi:include src="/esitest-fa8a495983347898/content" />  
 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Nepalese_cuisine&oldid=1142016626 " 
 Categories :  Nepalese cuisine South Asian cuisine Hidden categories:  Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from September 2014 Articles needing additional references from May 2015 All articles needing additional references Articles containing Nepali (macrolanguage)-language text Wikipedia neutral point of view disputes from December 2013 All Wikipedia neutral point of view disputes Articles with multiple maintenance issues CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown Region topic template using suffix Articles with J9U identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers Articles with NKC identifiers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  This page was last edited on 28 February 2023, at 02:19  (UTC) . 
 Text is available under the  Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0 ;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the  Terms of Use  and  Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the  Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. 
 
 
 Privacy policy 
 About Wikipedia 
 Disclaimers 
 Contact Wikipedia 
 Mobile view 
 Developers 
 Statistics 
 Cookie statement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
