
 
 
 Jump to content 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle sidebar 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Create account Log in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Personal tools 
 
 
 
 
   Create account   Log in 
 
 
 
 
		Pages for logged out editors  learn more 
 
 
 Contributions Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Navigation 
 
 
 Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate 
 
 
 
 
 Contribute 
 
 
 Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file 
 
 
 
 
 Tools 
 
 
 What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item 
 
 
 
 
 Print/export 
 
 
 Download as PDF Printable version 
 
 
 
 
 In other projects 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons 
 
 
 
 
 Languages 
 
 On this Wikipedia the language links are at the top of the page across from the article title.  Go to top . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CentralNotice  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Contents 
 move to sidebar 
 hide 
 
 
 
 
 (Top) 
 
 
 
 
 
 1 Māori cuisine 
 
 
				Toggle Māori cuisine subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 1.1 Food and religion 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.2 European influences 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.3 Māori cuisine today 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 New Zealand European cuisine 
 
 
				Toggle New Zealand European cuisine subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 2.1 British Isles settler food 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.2 From Antipodean British fare to Asia-Pacific fusion 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 Other cuisines in New Zealand 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4 Contemporary cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5 New Zealand cuisine in other countries 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6 Alcoholic beverages 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 7 Patterns of eating 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8 New Zealand foods 
 
 
				Toggle New Zealand foods subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 8.1 Developed in New Zealand 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8.2 Imported foods, now significant in New Zealand 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 9 See also 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 10 Notes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 11 References 
 
 
				Toggle References subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 11.1 Bibliography 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 12 External links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
						Toggle the table of contents
					 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle the table of contents 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 New Zealand cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 16 languages 
 
 
 
 العربية Čeština Deutsch Español Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Jawa ქართული Polski Português Русский Svenska Türkçe 中文 
 Edit links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Article Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 English 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 More 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
 
 
 Culinary traditions of New Zealand 
 This article has multiple issues.  Please help  improve it  or discuss these issues on the  talk page .  ( Learn how and when to remove these template messages ) 
 
 This article's  tone or style may not reflect the  encyclopedic tone  used on Wikipedia .  See Wikipedia's  guide to writing better articles  for suggestions.   ( July 2022 )  ( Learn how and when to remove this template message ) 
 This article  needs additional citations for  verification .  Please help  improve this article  by  adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources:   "New Zealand cuisine"  –  news   ·   newspapers   ·   books   ·   scholar   ·   JSTOR   ( January 2023 )  ( Learn how and when to remove this template message ) 
 
  ( Learn how and when to remove this template message ) 
   Pavlova  is popular in Australian and New Zealand cuisine. 
 Part of  a series  on the Culture of New Zealand 
 History 
 Timeline 
 Independence 
 Colonial 
 Dominion 
 Māori 
 Military 
 
 People 
 "Kiwi" 
 Māori culture 
 
 Languages 
 English 
 Māori 
 NZ Sign Language 
 
 Traditions 
 Humour 
 Māori mythology 
 
 Cuisine 
 Alcohol 
 Hāngi 
 
 Festivals 
 Music festivals 
 
 Religion 
 Christianity 
 Māori religion 
 
 Art 
 Architecture 
 Māori art 
 
 Literature 
 Māori poetry 
 
 Music  and Performing arts 
 Kapa haka 
 
 Media 
 Radio 
 Television 
 Cinema 
 
 Sport 
 Sportspeople 
 Cricket 
 Cycling 
 Football 
 Netball 
 Rugby league 
 Rugby union 
 
 Monuments 
 World Heritage Sites 
 Heritage New Zealand 
 
 Symbols 
 Flag 
 Coat of arms 
 National anthem 
 National anthems 
 
 Organisations 
 Museums and art galleries 
 
   New Zealand portal v t e 
 The cuisine of  New Zealand  is largely driven by local ingredients and seasonal variations. An island nation with a primarily agricultural economy, New Zealand yields produce from land and sea. Similar to the  cuisine of Australia , the  cuisine  of New Zealand is a diverse  British-based cuisine , with Mediterranean and  Pacific Rim  influences as the country has become more cosmopolitan.
 Historical influences came from  British cuisine  and  Māori culture . Since the 1970s, new cuisines such as  New American cuisine ,  Southeast Asian ,  East Asian , and  South Asian  have become popular.
 
 
 Māori cuisine [ edit ] 
   A  hāngi  dinner as served to tourists 
 The  Māori-language  term  kai  refers to traditional Māori cuisine. [1]  When the  Māori  arrived in New Zealand from tropical  Polynesia , they brought a number of food plants, including  kūmara ,  taro ,  purple yam ,  hue  and  tī-pore , most of which grew well only in the north of the  North Island . Kūmara could be grown as far south as the northern  South Island , and became a staple food as it could be stored over the winter. [2]  Native New Zealand plants such as  fernroot  became a more important part of the diet, along with insects such as the  huhu grub .  Earthworms , called  noke , are a part of the traditional Māori diet as well. Problems with horticulture were made up for by an abundance of bird and marine life. The large flightless  moa  was soon hunted to extinction. [3] [4]   Rāhui , or resource restrictions, included forbidding the hunting of certain species in particular places or at certain times of year to allow populations to be maintained. [5]  Seafood consumed included  kōura  or freshwater crayfish,  pāua  or abalone, and  tio  or  bluff oysters .
 
   Preparation of a modern hāngi for tourists at Mitai Maori Village, Rotorua. 
 Like other Polynesian people, Māori cooked food in earth ovens, known in New Zealand as  hāngi , although the word  umu  is also used. [6]  Stones are heated by fire and food packed in leaves placed on top. These packs are then covered with foliage, cloth, or wet sacks, and then a layer of earth. [7]  Other cooking methods included roasting, boiling or steaming using geothermal heated water, and cooking over an open fire. [7] 
 Some foods were preserved using smoke, air-drying, fermentation, or layers of fat—particularly  muttonbirds .
 Māori were one of the few people to have no form of  alcoholic beverage . [8] 
 
 Food and religion [ edit ] 
 In traditional  Māori religion  food was noa, or non-sacred. This meant care had to be taken to prevent it from coming into contact with  tapu  places or objects. If it did, the tapu of the place or object, and often the people associated with it, would be at risk. High chiefs, and people engaged in tapu work such as tattooing, were tapu and were restricted in how they could deal with food, with the most tapu needing to be fed by others. One story tells of a war party which had to be postponed as no non-tapu people were available to load the food supplies into the party's  waka .
 
 European influences [ edit ] 
   Sheep grazing in Canterbury. Early British settlers introduced Western stock and crops.  New Zealand agriculture  now produces an abundance of fresh produce. 
 When Europeans ( Pākehā ) first arrived in New Zealand from the late eighteenth century, they brought their own foods with them. Some of these, especially  pork  and  potatoes , were quickly adopted by Māori. Potatoes were particularly popular as they were grown in a similar way to  kūmara  but produced a much higher yield with less effort. Other European foods such as  wheat ,  pumpkin ,  mutton ,  sugar , and many types of fruit also became a part of the Māori diet and were widely traded with visiting ships. [9]  American sailors brought new varieties of  kūmara  to New Zealand, and these high-yield varieties quickly superseded the original varieties of kūmara. (Today most kūmara are the commercial varieties Owairaka Red, Toka Toka Gold and Beauregard.) [2]  A coffee and spice merchant of European descent, David Strang, invented instant coffee in Invercargil in 1890. The drink quickly spread around New Zealand and then around the world. [10] 
 Alcohol , initially rejected as  wai piro  (stinking water), also became acceptable in Māori life. [11]  Most Māori tribes grew surpluses of food for trade with other tribes and with European visitors and settlers. Some tribes grew wealthy from this trade, although the Māori food industry declined in the mid-nineteenth century because of land loss and competition from settler farmers. Many traditional food sources, such as the  kererū  (wood pigeon) and other birds, as well as some types of fish and plants, became scarce as forests were destroyed and species were over-hunted.
 
 Māori cuisine today [ edit ] 
   A Māori boil-up 
 Present day Māori cuisine is a mixture of Māori tradition, old-fashioned English cookery, and contemporary dishes. Some Māori names for consumables, like  pāua  (also prized for its shell), [12]  have entered common New Zealand English usage. 
 Most large Māori gatherings feature a  hāngi , which is likely to contain foods brought to New Zealand by Māori and by Pākehā. In recent decades, there has been much concern that Māori are disproportionately likely to suffer from  obesity ,  heart disease , and  diabetes  as a result of eating habits. [13] 
 Two dishes regarded as distinctively Māori are the  boil up —made of pork, potatoes, kūmara, and dumplings—and pork and puha ( sow thistle ), which combine introduced and indigenous foods. Both dishes owe much to nineteenth-century British cooking methods.
 Another distinctive food is  rēwena  or "Māori bread", which is made with fermented potatoes. [14]  The 2020 cookbook  Hiakai  by chef  Monique Fiso , academic  Tracy Berno  and food writer Lucy Corry describes the history, development and  tikanga  of modern Māori food. [15] 
 
 New Zealand European cuisine [ edit ] 
 The majority of New Zealanders are  Pākehā  of British descent, so  British cuisine  has been very influential.
 
 British Isles settler food [ edit ] 
 Nineteenth-century British settlers in New Zealand tried as much as possible to reproduce the foods of their homeland. In the early stages of colonization this was difficult as many ingredients were unavailable.  Pākehā settlers  ate native birds and fish, and used local ingredients in substitution for those which were unavailable, for example brewing  tea  and  beer  using unconventional plants. Most of these innovations were abandoned as the Pākehā population increased and conventional ingredients began to be mass-imported or produced in New Zealand. One innovation which was commonly served on New Zealand tables until the mid-1980s was  colonial goose , a stuffed leg of lamb which substituted for goose. [16]  A major difference between British and Pākehā food was that meat was much more readily available to all social classes in New Zealand. Whereas in nineteenth-century  Britain , labourers ate meat in very small quantities, in New Zealand they could have it for every meal. Since meat was a high-status food in Britain, British settlers in New Zealand ate vast quantities of it. [17] 
 Like the British, Pākehā have traditionally preferred sweet foods, and a wealth of baking dishes celebrate important occasions, reflected through  cakes ,  scones ,  muffins  and other mainly sweet baking dishes. The country's most iconic recipe book, the  Edmonds Cookery Book , originally began as publicity material for a  baking powder  company, and contains a high proportion of baking recipes. [18] 
 
 From Antipodean British fare to Asia-Pacific fusion [ edit ] 
 For most of the twentieth century, New Zealand cuisine remained highly derivative of British food. [17]  Unlike Britain, New Zealand escaped major food shortages during World War II. However, demands of the US forces in the Pacific as well as exports to Britain saw meat and butter  rationed  between 1943 and 1950. [19]   From about the 1960s, the advent of affordable air travel allowed New Zealanders to travel overseas more easily. Many New Zealanders went to Europe on  overseas experience  where they encountered French and Italian cooking, and also the Indian and Chinese restaurants of  Britain  as well as the  New British cuisine . When they returned home they helped create a demand for better-quality food and more variety. [17]  They also tried to discover what New Zealand cuisine was, experimenting with  hangi  and gaining a greater appreciation of New Zealand produce.
 The United Kingdom's joining of the  European Economic Community  (EEC) (now the  European Union ) in 1973 sounded the death knell of New Zealand's identity as an agricultural producer for the British Isles, and the formal cultural ties, including cuisine, with the United Kingdom started to become diluted.  During this period, certain non-British or Irish European dishes, such as  beef bourguignon , had shed the 'ethnic' connotation and entered mainstream New Zealand cooking. The 1970s also saw major changes in take-away food with the arrival of the first American fast-food chains:  Kentucky Fried Chicken (KFC)  in 1971, [20]   Pizza Hut  in 1974, [21]  and  McDonald's  in 1976. [22] 
 The 1980s was marked with economic liberalisation dubbed  Rogernomics  (named for the then Minister of Finance, Roger Douglas) that abolished farm subsidies, forcing many farmers to find alternative means of survival. Many chose to produce specialty cheese types like  Havarti ,  Brie  and  Stilton , or diversified into growing olives [a]  or grapes instead of traditional meat and dairy farming.  Avocado oil  for cooking was commercialised in New Zealand in 1999 by a group of growers based in the  Tauranga  region.
 Rogernomics also abolished much of import tariffs and instituted a more relaxed agricultural product import quarantine regime. This allows hereunto prohibited or prohibitively expensive specialty foods, such as genuine  serrano  ham from Spain,  extra virgin olive oil  from Italy, and  mango  from Thailand, to be available in New Zealand at reasonable costs. These two developments from Rogernomics have given birth to a proliferation of specialist food products available in New Zealand.
 On top of changes in available ingredients, the 1980s also witnessed a wholescale liberalisation in attitude towards the formerly 'foreign muck' cooking styles and segmentation of lifestyles according to income and socio-economic status.  New Zealand had by this time developed a largely distinct cultural outlook away from the British Isles, and this also made foreign cooking styles more acceptable among the general public. [24]  The same era also saw the moneyed populations feeling free to openly emulate the luxurious eating and drinking habits of upper and upper middle classes overseas, as the traditional New Zealand preference of egalitarianism, manifested in widespread prejudice against any deviation from lower-middle-class lifestyles, waned in influence. In the words of New Zealand-based anthropologist  David Veart , this period of sea change in New Zealand's culinary culture was akin to "being let out after a long school detention". [ verify ] 
 
 Other cuisines in New Zealand [ edit ] 
 People from many different backgrounds have settled in New Zealand, and many have tried to reproduce their native cuisines or national dishes in New Zealand. Similar to early Pākehā settlers, this often proved difficult. Larger ethnic groups, such as the Chinese, were able to import some ingredients, but often dishes had to be modified to use local ingredients. Ethnic restaurants have served as community meeting places and have also given other New Zealanders a chance to try different cuisines. However, for most of its history there were few ethnic restaurants in New Zealand other than inauthentic Chinese, Indian and Italian eateries. [25] 
 The Immigration Act 1986 completely abolished nationality preference for immigration, and immigration from  East Asia ,  Southeast Asia  and  South Asia  has greately increased since. Many of these immigrants have brought their different cuisines to New Zealand, and often opened ethnic restaurants and takeaway eateries, giving New Zealanders a chance to try more authentic editions of  Japanese ,  Thai ,  Malay , regional  Chinese ,  Indian , and other  Asian cuisines . Over time these ethnic cuisines have been gradually accepted by Pākehā and Māori New Zealanders. [25]  Consequently, most New Zealand cities have a wide variety of ethnic restaurants, and foods such as  kebabs ,  couscous , and  sushi  are served virtually everywhere. Many ethnic origin dishes have been willingly adopted by New Zealanders as their own, including sushi,  antipasto ,  butter chicken ,  pad thai ,  pasta , such that they appear in home cooking, as well as in generic New Zealand restaurants.
 Ingredients for many ethnic dishes have become much easier to find in major cities, mostly through speciality or ethnic food stores started by many of the post-1987 migrants to New Zealand, but in some cases also through mainstream New Zealand supermarket chains. Similar to Australia, in time the increasing availability of ingredients gave birth to a more authentic style of ethnic cooking, and some ethnic food ingredients have been adopted for local cooking: ingredients such as  extra virgin olive oil  and  sun-dried tomatoes , and to a lesser extent  fish sauce  and  rice paper  were already seen as ordinary ingredients by the year 2000, whereas even by the late 1980s many people would still have regarded them as highly exotic. [b] 
 
 Contemporary cuisine [ edit ] 
   This  hamburger  at a Botany fast food chain contains slices of canned  beetroot . 
   Kingfish crudo, lotus chips, ponzu served at the restaurant Field & Green in Wellington 
 As a result of various developments, the cuisine of New Zealand in the 21st century is in a state of flux: cosmopolitan  Pacific Rim  fare's reign is now the norm in much of metropolitan eating-out scenes, [c]  and traditional hearty settlers' food, now dubbed 'Kwisine  Kiwiana ', [ citation needed ]  but reinterpreted through Pacific Rim cooking knowledge, is a popular cooking style for eating-out scenes even in the most remote rural regions. Most of the home cooking prepared at households in  Auckland  is now a mix of traditional Kiwiana dishes heavily modified by Mediterranean and Asian techniques and ingredients, and adapted versions of  Mediterranean , Chinese, and Indian dishes. [ citation needed ]  In the more culturally traditional parts of the country, such as rural  Canterbury  and the  West Coast , however, traditional Kiwiana fare is still the norm at many homes. [ citation needed ] 
 Certain vestiges of traditional Kiwiana dishes remain popular throughout the country, such as  fish and chips ,  meat pies ,  custard squares ,  pavlova , and others. [d]  An active nostalgia movement supports the traditional Kiwiana cuisine, as spearheaded by the popularity of the television series  Kiwi Kitchen  presented by Richard Till, which is believed to be a public response to a common perception that the traditional Kiwiana dishes are disappearing from the New Zealand tables. [28]  Home baking is particularly believed to be the last bastion of New Zealand cuisine still unaffected by international trends. [ citation needed ] 
 Concurrently, food habits are changing in Australia to lighter fares influenced by the Mediterranean, and subsequently Southeast Asian, styles of cooking. The proximity, common history, and strong modern political, economic, cultural, and family ties between the two countries means many New Zealand diners and chefs have always been well informed of the trends in the Australian dining scene.  Many chefs had worked in Australia and endeavour to learn from their trans-Tasman counterparts, and in time the changing Australian culinary scene has trickle-down effects on the New Zealand cuisine as well. [e] 
 In general, there are minimal differences between the food preference of New Zealand and Australia. The food trends in New Zealand tend to trail its trans-Tasman counterparts by a few years to a decade, such as Mediterranean cookery, which did not become mainstream in New Zealand until the dawn of the 1990s, while its influence was already felt in Australia by the 1980s. While Australia has by the early 21st century developed a well-established niche specialist produce distributing channel, a similar system is still in its infancy across the Tasman.  However, in recent times  Auckland  and  Wellington  have food fashions moving essentially in sync with that of  Sydney  and  Melbourne . [f] 
 One major recent development in the food scene is the emergence of a genuine  café culture  and disappearance of the traditional institution of  tearooms  at large. Before the 1990s, tearooms proliferated throughout the country offering  cream tea ,  cakes ,  cucumber sandwiches , and pastries such as  custard squares , with filtered coffee or tea as drinks. New Zealanders have copied the Mediterranean practise of drinking  espresso -based coffees, but also invented  instant coffee , which is now widely consumed around the world. [31] [32]  In time, cafes became popular and many tearoom owners converted their businesses to cafes. Cream tea has gone out of fashion in the contemporary New Zealand dining scene, and scones are baked at homes rather than served in eateries. [ citation needed ] 
 
   Instant coffee, invented in  Invercargill  in 1890. The powdered drink is perhaps New Zealand's greatest contribution to international gastronomy. [33] [34] 
 Vegetarianism  had been regarded as an alternative lifestyle for many years, but became more mainstream during the 1980s. [35]  However, despite exhortations by the  Ministry of Health  and their allies for people to eat less meat, and more cereals, fruits, and vegetables, a highly meat-based diet remains a part of New Zealand culture, albeit with a decrease in red meat consumption, and intake of fish and chicken has been on the rise due to their relative affordability compared to red meat. [35]  Annual meat consumption was 75.2 kg (166 lb) per capita in 2019, comprising 41.1 kg (91 lb) of chicken and other poultry, 18.9 kg (42 lb) of pork, ham and bacon, 11.6 kg (26 lb) of beef and veal, and 3.6 kg (7.9 lb) of lamb and mutton. [36] 
 Gluten-free  foodstuffs have become a dietary trend in New Zealand, with cafes and restaurants increasingly offering gluten-free versions of popular foods such as  cakes ,  pizza , and  hamburger  buns. Some supermarkets, delicatessens and bakeries similarly offer gluten-free products and there has been a rise in specialty stores.
 A number of organic raw food operations have developed in the last decade in the major cities.
 
 New Zealand cuisine in other countries [ edit ] 
 Globally, New Zealand cuisine has little effect, although Australia does feel influences from New Zealand cuisine. [37]  The country's well known culinary export, the  pavlova , has been the object of a decades-long battle with Australia over where it was invented.
 Fusion cuisine  and foreign cuisine styles interact with modern New Zealand cuisine, with chefs from New Zealand actively learning overseas trends, [g]  and chefs like Peter Gordon, bakers such as Dean Brettschneider, and foodies such as Lauraine Jacobs influencing fusion cuisines derived from New Zealand cuisine.  Cuisine  magazine, first published in 1986, has earned global fame and is held in high prestige among the worldwide foodie communities. [h] 
 
 Alcoholic beverages [ edit ] 
 Main articles:  Alcohol in New Zealand ,  Beer in New Zealand , and  New Zealand wine 
   A selection of New Zealand wines 
 New Zealand has a successful wine industry, with about 76 million litres being exported in the year to June 2007. [40]  The first vines are thought to have been introduced by missionary  Samuel Marsden , and planted in 1817 by Charles Gordon, superintendent of agriculture for the missionaries, according to Dr Richard Smart who was viticultural editor of both editions of  The Oxford Companion to Wine . [41]  Official British resident  James Busby  is credited with producing wine at  Kerikeri  in 1833, and  Charles Darwin  noted the winery in his diary when he visited Kerikeri in 1835.
 Small vineyards were also planted by French settlers in  Akaroa  in the 1840s. However, wine was drunk in relatively small quantities well into the twentieth century, with the average  per capita  consumption only about 2.6 litres in 1966. The high price of imported wines probably prevented New Zealanders from developing a taste for wine, although it did help sales of local vintages. [42]  The quality of these wines slowly improved, with New Zealand wines winning three gold and 13 silver medals at the  International Wine Fair  in 1963. [43]  Aided by the deregulation of the economy in the 1980s and 1990s, domestic wine consumption increased and New Zealand wine won increasing accolades internationally.
 There are 10 major wine-producing areas in New Zealand, with  Marlborough  famed for its  sauvignon blanc ,  Gisborne  for its  chardonnay , and  Central Otago  and  Martinborough  known for  pinot noir  and  pinot gris .  Hawkes Bay  is known for its bold  cabernets , and  Auckland 's  Waiheke Island  is home to one of the top 20 cabernet blends in the world. Marlborough and Hawkes Bay are New Zealand's two premium wine-growing regions. [ citation needed ] 
 Beer  is the most popular alcoholic drink in New Zealand, accounting for 63% of available alcohol for sale. [44]  New Zealand is ranked 27th in  beer consumption per capita , at around 64.7 litres per person per annum. The vast majority of beer produced in New Zealand is a type of  lager , either pale or amber in colour, and between 4%–5% alcohol by volume. 
There are also over 100 smaller craft breweries and brewpubs producing a vast range of beer styles. [45] [46]  The two largest breweries in New Zealand,  Lion Nathan  and  DB Breweries , control almost 90% of sales by volume between them. [47]   New Zealand is also a leading  hops -producing nation with some of the most sought-after hops in the world.
 
 Patterns of eating [ edit ] 
 Most New Zealanders eat their main meal—known as 'dinner' or sometimes ' tea '—in the evening. The move from midday to evening dinners began in the early 20th century, although the tradition of a midday dinner on Sunday remained well into the 1960s. In 1962, a nationwide food survey reported 75% of households normally ate their main meal in the evening, but over 50% of households ate their Sunday main meal at midday. The survey was repeated in 1982, by which time 83% of households ate their main meal in the evening, and only 21% of households ate their Sunday main meal at midday. [48] 
 In the summer,  barbecues  have became popular since the late 20th century, generally as a social event. [49]  Guests will usually be invited to bring  beer  or wine, and on occasion meat, which the host will cook. Sometimes guests contribute a salad to the gathering instead. Traditionally, the men cook the meat. Many gardens are designed with special areas for barbecuing. [49]  Similar Māori gatherings will often feature a  hāngi , a pit in which meats or fish are cooked with vegetables. A deep hole is dug in the ground, lined with red-hot stones and covered with vegetation. The food is then placed on top and covered with damp cloth or leaves. Water is added before the hole is quickly covered with earth and left to steam for several hours. [50]  Traditionally, men dig and prepare the hole, and women prepare the food to go in it. All members of an extended family ( whānau ) help out for such a feast.
 Many New Zealand gatherings feature a custom known as 'bring a plate' ( potluck ) in which each guest will bring a plate of food to share. [51]  This allows people to host large groups without incurring serious expense. Similar customs include guests bringing salads or meat to a barbecue. Most New Zealand parties are ' BYO ' (bring your own alcohol), but in this case the drinks are not usually shared. [ citation needed ] 
 
   A  fish and chip shop  in Rotorua. Fish and chips is a popular take-away food in New Zealand. 
 New Zealand's dining-out culture developed strongly in the 1960s, [52] [25]  thanks partially to the liberalisation of liquor licensing laws (in 1961) and popularisation of  cafés  and other similar casual dining establishments. It is common for people to visit cafés regularly for lunch or morning or afternoon snacks.  On the other hand, eating at a restaurant is still regarded as a special occasion or treat for most of the population. [ citation needed ] 
 Fish and chips , the staple  take-away  meal in New Zealand, has been popular for decades. [53]  Since the 1970s, a larger  fast food  culture has developed, similar to that in the United States. [52]  Many American fast-food chains have a presence in New Zealand, and local variants (such as  Burger Fuel  and  Hell Pizza ) have arisen. The  meat pie  is possibly the nearest thing New Zealand has to  street food , sold in  dairies , bakeries, supermarkets, petrol stations, and school canteens. Pies are usually made with beef mince or steak, lamb, chicken, veggies, or pork; sweet pies are less common. A fast-food chain based on pies,  Georgie Pie , was founded in 1977; however, it ran into financial trouble and went out of business in 1998, with  McDonald's New Zealand  buying its assets. (The chain was revived in a limited form between 2013 and 2020, with pies being sold through McDonald's restaurants.) [54] 
 In malls,  food courts  have become popular, with several in  Auckland  alone. Immigration has led to an increase in choice and quality, with many food halls offering  Asian cuisines  including  Thai ,  Indian ,  Turkish ,  Malaysian ,  Japanese  and  Chinese , as well as distinctly New Zealand fare such as roast dinners.
 
 New Zealand foods [ edit ] 
 See also:  New Zealand dishes 
 This section  needs expansion . You can help by  adding to it .   ( March 2021 ) 
 Developed in New Zealand [ edit ] 
 
 Hāngi 
 Pavlova 
 Colonial goose 
 Cheese roll 
 Lolly cake 
 Kānga pirau 
 Rēwena bread 
 Boil up 
 Paraoa parai 
 Toroi 
 Hokey pokey ice cream 
 Afghan biscuits 
 Anzac biscuits 
 Seafood fritters , commonly made with  whitebait ,  mussel  or  pāua 
 Marmite (New Zealand variety) 
 Kiwi onion dip 
 Fairy bread 
 
 Imported foods, now significant in New Zealand [ edit ] 
 
 Fish and chips 
 Roast lamb  and  mutton 
 Vegemite 
 Scones 
 Lamingtons 
 Sausage sizzle 
 Savoury pies , commonly filled with meat, fish or bacon and egg 
 Sausage rolls 
 Pikelets, derived from the  Scotch pancake 
 Shortbread 
 
 See also [ edit ] 
 
 Food portal New Zealand portal 
 List of Australian and New Zealand dishes 
 Category:Restaurants in New Zealand 
 Alcohol in New Zealand 
 List of Oceanian cuisines 
 Notes [ edit ] 
 
 
 ^   As an example, in 1984 there were only two producers of olive oil hailing from New Zealand. Twenty years later, the figure stood at 600. [23] 
 
 ^   Peta Mathias in 2005 claims ingredients such as  fish sauce  and  rice paper  are now a normal part of New Zealand household pantries. [26]  Many New Zealanders still regard these as 'ethnic' ingredients, although as in Australia the foreign connotation is decreasing with the passage of time. [27] 
 
 ^   There are even reports that in Auckland by 2007, the traditional fund-raising  sausage sizzles  at many schools in the more affluent suburbs have been replaced with sushi, a supposedly lower fat and healthier alternative. 
 
 ^   The author David Burton has witnessed plenty of New Zealand comments that they are thankful New Zealand no longer eats much of traditional Kiwiana fare. [16] 
 
 ^   An example is Judith Tabron, owner of the Soul Bar and Bistro in Auckland. Tabron invites Australian chefs such as  Bill Marchetti ,  Philip Johnson ,  Stephanie Alexander , and  Greg Malouf  across the Tasman to New Zealand as guest chefs at Soul from time to time specifically to teach her staff about current Australian food trends, and some of their styles of cooking have become part of the standard menu at Soul which subsequently become part of the New Zealand eating scene via the publishing of these dishes' recipes in popular home cookbooks in New Zealand. [29] 
 
 ^   A positive Australian comment on modern urban New Zealand cooking, specifically Auckland, is from  Bruce Elder  of the  Sydney Morning Herald , "...here was a time when discriminating eaters [from Australia] were told to take a packed lunch when visiting New Zealand. Now it is consistently good and also, at the upper end, very cheap. With an exchange rate of around $NZ1.20 equalling A$1 meals at the best restaurants in Auckland work out at around A$25 for mains and that, literally, is half what you would pay for the same in Sydney's upmarket restaurants." [30]  A number of Sydney and Melbourne fine-dining restaurants have Auckland connections, such as Wildfire restaurant in Sydney, owned by the former owner of Cin Cin in Auckland.  Molecular cuisine  has also landed in Auckland as in Sydney by 2006, but is still unheard of in much of the country. 
 
 ^   Mark McDonough of Zarbo Cafe and Deli claims how he actively sources overseas food and accompanying culinary ideas for inspiration. [38] 
 
 ^   For example, the  Cuisine  magazine was selected as the best food magazine in the world at the 2007 Le Cordon Bleu World Food Media Awards run by Tasting Australia and sponsored by Le Cordon Bleu, beating other food magazines published in other parts of the English-speaking world. [39] 
 
 
 References [ edit ] 
 
 
 ^   Royal, Charles; Kaka-Scott, Jenny (5 September 2013).  "Māori foods – kai Māori" .  Te Ara: The Encyclopedia of New Zealand . Retrieved  23 January  2023 . 
 
 ^  a   b   Adds, Peter (24 Nov 2008).  "Kūmara" .  Te Ara: The Encyclopedia of New Zealand . Retrieved  2020-03-06 . 
 
 ^   Morell, Virginia (17 March 2014).  "Why Did New Zealand's Moas Go Extinct?" .  Science | AAAS . Retrieved  2020-03-06 . 
 
 ^   Perry, George L. W.; Wheeler, Andrew B.; Wood, Jamie R.; Wilmshurst, Janet M. (2014). "A high-precision chronology for the rapid extinction of New Zealand moa (Aves, Dinornithiformes)".  Quaternary Science Reviews .  105 : 126–135.  Bibcode : 2014QSRv..105..126P .  doi : 10.1016/j.quascirev.2014.09.025 .  ISSN   0277-3791 . 
 
 ^   Nathan, Simon (24 September 2007).  "Conservation – a history - Māori conservation traditions" .  Te Ara: The Encyclopedia of New Zealand . Retrieved  24 January  2023 . 
 
 ^   Jones, Kevin L. (1997).  "Umu and umu tī - Ngā Tohuwhenua Mai Te Rangi: A New Zealand Archeology in Aerial Photographs" .  nzetc.victoria.ac.nz . Retrieved  2021-02-16 . 
 
 ^  a   b   Royal, Charles; Kaka-Scott, Jenny (5 Sep 2013).  "Māori foods – kai Māori" .  Te Ara: The Encyclopedia of New Zealand . Retrieved  2020-03-06 . 
 
 ^   Cook, Megan (5 September 2013).  Māori use of alcohol . Te Ara: The Encyclopedia of New Zealand . Retrieved  23 January  2023 . 
 
 ^   "The Reserve Bank and New Zealand's economic history"   (PDF) . Archived from  the original   (PDF)  on 2019-01-25 . Retrieved  2022-09-14 . 
 
 ^   "No.8 Re-Wired - Instant Coffee" .  No.8 Re-Wired . Retrieved  2023-01-02 . 
 
 ^   'Wai Piro'  in  Transactions and Proceedings of the Royal Society of New Zealand 
 
 ^   "Pāua" .  Te Ara: The Encyclopedia of New Zealand . Retrieved  24 January  2023 . 
 
 ^   Metcalf, Patricia A.; Scragg, Robert R.K.; Schaaf, David; Dyall, Lorna; Black, Peter N.; Jackson, Rod (October 2008).  "Dietary intakes of European, Māori, Pacific and Asian adults living in Auckland: the Diabetes, Heart and Health Study" .  Australian and New Zealand Journal of Public Health .  32  (5): 454–460.  doi : 10.1111/j.1753-6405.2008.00279.x .  PMID   18959550 .  S2CID   41682168 . 
 
 ^   Hereaka, Whiti; Taonga, New Zealand Ministry for Culture and Heritage Te Manatu.  "Making rewena bread" .  teara.govt.nz . 
 
 ^   Monique Fiso; Lucy Corry;  Tracy Berno  (2020).  Hiakai: modern Māori cuisine . Auckland:  Godwit Press .  ISBN   978-0-14-377260-6 .  OCLC   1182024455 .  Wikidata   Q115488367 . 
 
 ^  a   b   David Burton (March 2008). "Pavlova Paradise Lost".  Cuisine .  127 : 124–128. 
 
 ^  a   b   c   "Food, drink and dress" .  Te Ara: The Encyclopedia of New Zealand . 
 
 ^   Palenski, Ron (2004).  Kiwi Milestones: New Zealand's population through the millions . Auckland: Hodder Moa Beckett. p. 25.  ISBN   978-1-86958-981-3 . 
 
 ^   "Rationing of New Zealand-Grown Foods - NZETC" .  nzetc.victoria.ac.nz . 
 
 ^   "Dining out - Food in the 20th century | NZHistory, New Zealand history online" .  nzhistory.govt.nz . Retrieved  2021-03-25 . 
 
 ^   Walters, Laura (2016-03-03).  "The evolution of New Zealand's pizza industry" .  Stuff . Retrieved  2021-03-25 . 
 
 ^   Fallon, Virginia (2016-06-10).  "McDonald's NZ was born in Porirua 40 years ago with queues out the door" .  Stuff . Retrieved  2021-03-25 . 
 
 ^   Taber (2007) , p. 9 
 
 ^   Veart (2008) , pp. 216–294 
 
 ^  a   b   c   Rowland, Perrin (2010).  Dining Out: A History of the Restaurant in New Zealand . Auckland: Auckland University Press.  ISBN   9781869404642 . 
 
 ^   Mathias (2005) , p. 16 
 
 ^   See also  Veart (2008) , pp. 295–314. 
 
 ^   Matthews, Philip (29 August 2008).  "The way we ate" .  The Press . Retrieved  30 October  2011 . 
 
 ^   Tabron (2005) , pp. 7–9 
 
 ^   Bruce Elder,  Eating in New Zealand (Part 2)   http://blogs.smh.com.au/trampaboutnz/archives//007306.html 
 
 ^   "No.8 Re-Wired - Instant Coffee" .  No.8 Re-Wired . Retrieved  2023-01-02 . 
 
 ^   Jones, Bridget (2012-12-16).  "Instant coffee invented down south" .  Stuff . Retrieved  2023-01-02 . 
 
 ^   Jones, Bridget (2012-12-16).  "Instant coffee invented down south" .  Stuff . Retrieved  2023-01-02 . 
 
 ^   "Southland Innovation: The Instant Coffee Story" .  COIN South . Retrieved  2023-01-02 . 
 
 ^  a   b   White, Mandala; Potts, Annie (2008).  "New Zealand Vegetarians: At Odds with Their Nation"   (PDF) .  Society & Animals .  16  (4): 336–353.  doi : 10.1163/156853008X357667 . 
 
 ^   "Agricultural output - Meat consumption - OECD Data" .  theOECD . Retrieved  2021-03-07 . 
 
 ^   Tabron (2005) , p. 128 
 
 ^   McDonough (2002) , p. 6 
 
 ^   "Cuisine.co.nz - food - cuisine best food magazine in the world" . Archived from  the original  on 2008-12-11 . Retrieved  2008-04-19 . 
 
 ^   "New Zealand Winegrowers Statistical Annual"   (PDF) . 2007. p. 44. Archived from  the original   (PDF)  on 2008-10-18 . Retrieved  2008-07-22 . 
 
 ^   "Dr Sherlock Smart unravels a grape mystery - Articles - JancisRobinson.com" .  www.jancisrobinson.com . 
 
 ^   "W – 1966 Encyclopaedia of New Zealand – Te Ara" .  teara.govt.nz . 
 
 ^   "W – 1966 Encyclopaedia of New Zealand – Te Ara" .  teara.govt.nz . 
 
 ^   Carroll, Joanne (20 March 2011).  "Beer hops off buyers' lists" .  The New Zealand Herald . Retrieved  19 September  2011 . 
 
 ^   Impressions of New Zealand  Tom Cannavan, March 2006, www.beer-pages.com. Retrieved 31 August 2008. 
 
 ^   New Zealand breweries directory  RateBeer. Retrieved 20 May 2015. 
 
 ^   Brewer's Association letter to Justice & Electoral Committee , 20 May 2009 
 
 ^   Pollock, Kerryn (5 September 2013).  "Eating - Meals" .  Te Ara: The Encyclopedia of New Zealand . Retrieved  2021-03-25 . 
 
 ^  a   b   Clayworth, Peter (5 September 2013).  "Picnics and barbecues" .  Te Ara: The Encyclopedia of New Zealand . Retrieved  23 January  2023 . 
 
 ^   "Inside a hāngī" .  Te Ara: The Encyclopedia of New Zealand . Retrieved  23 January  2023 . 
 
 ^   "Annabel Langbein's Mission to Make Potluck Dinner Cool" .  New Zealand Herald . 12 April 2016 . Retrieved  26 January  2023 . 
 
 ^  a   b   "Dining out" .  nzhistory.govt.nz .  Ministry for Culture and Heritage . Retrieved  23 January  2023 . 
 
 ^   McLean, Alastair (12 June 2006).  "Fish and chips" .  Te Ara: The Encyclopedia of New Zealand . Retrieved  23 January  2023 . 
 
 ^   Crombie, Nathan (4 December 2013).  "It's back! Georgie Pie returns to town" .  Wairarapa Times-Age . Retrieved  4 December  2013 . 
 
 
 Bibliography [ edit ] 
 Mathias, Peta (2005).  A Cook's Tour of New Zealand . Penguin Viking.  ISBN   9780670045600 . 
 McDonough, Mark (2002).  Zarbo: Recipes From a New Zealand Deli . Random House New Zealand.  ISBN   9781869415341 . 
 Taber, André (2007).  A Buyer's Guide to New Zealand Olive Oil . New Holland Publishers.  ISBN   9781869661076 . 
 Tabron, Judith (2005).  Soul: Recipes from Judith Tabron and Friends at Soul Bar and Bistro . Random House New Zealand.  ISBN   9781869417543 . 
 Veart, David (2008).  First, Catch Your Weka: the Story of New Zealand Cooking . Auckland University Press.  ISBN   9781869404109 . 
 External links [ edit ] 
 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons has media related to  Cuisine of New Zealand . 
 
 
 
 
 Wikibooks  Cookbook  has a recipe/module on
 
  Cuisine of New Zealand 
 
 
 Webpage on traditional Māori food 
 New Zealand restaurant review and dining guide 
 New Zealand restaurant menus 
 v t e Cuisine of Oceania Sovereign states 
 Australia 
 Federated States of Micronesia 
 Fiji 
 Kiribati 
 Marshall Islands 
 Nauru 
 New Zealand 
 Palau 
 Papua New Guinea 
 Samoa 
 Solomon Islands 
 Tonga 
 Tuvalu 
 Vanuatu 
 Associated states of New Zealand 
 Cook Islands 
 Niue 
 Dependencies and other territories 
 American Samoa 
 Christmas Island 
 Clipperton Island 
 Cocos (Keeling) Islands 
 Easter Island 
 French Polynesia 
 Guam 
 Hawaii 
 New Caledonia 
 Norfolk Island 
 Northern Mariana Islands 
 Pitcairn Islands 
 Tokelau 
 Wallis and Futuna 
 
 v t e Oceanian cuisine Sovereign states 
 Australia 
 Federated States of Micronesia 
 Fiji 
 Kiribati 
 Marshall Islands 
 Nauru 
 New Zealand 
 Palau 
 Papua New Guinea 
 Samoa 
 Solomon Islands 
 Tonga 
 Tuvalu 
 Vanuatu 
 Associated states 
 Cook Islands 
 Niue 
 Dependencies  and other territories 
 American Samoa 
 Christmas Island 
 Cocos (Keeling) Islands 
 Easter Island 
 French Polynesia 
 Guam 
 Hawaii 
 New Caledonia 
 Norfolk Island 
 Northern Mariana Islands 
 Pitcairn Islands 
 Tokelau 
 Wallis and Futuna 
 
 v t e Cuisines Continental 
 African 
 North 
 West 
 list 
 Americas 
 Caribbean 
 North 
 South 
 list 
 Asian 
 Caucasian 
 Central 
 Indian subcontinent 
 Levantine 
 list 
 European 
 Balkan 
 Central 
 Eastern 
 list 
 Oceanic 
 Intercontinental
 Global 
 Latin American 
 Mediterranean 
 Middle Eastern 
 National  and regional 
 Afghan 
 Albanian 
 Algerian 
 American 
 Californian 
 Floribbean 
 Hawaiian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Lowcountry (South Carolina) 
 New England 
 New Mexico 
 Pacific Northwest 
 Pennsylvania Dutch 
 Puerto Rican 
 Southern US 
 Southwest US 
 Texas 
 Angolan 
 Argentine 
 Armenian 
 Australian 
 Austrian 
 Azerbaijani 
 Bahraini 
 Bangladeshi 
 Barbadian 
 Belarusian 
 Belgian 
 Belizean 
 Beninese 
 Bhutanese 
 Bolivian 
 Bosnian-Herzegovinian 
 Botswana 
 Brazilian 
 British 
 Channel Islands 
 English 
 Gibraltarian 
 Northern Irish 
 Saint Helena 
 Scottish 
 Welsh 
 Bruneian 
 Bulgarian 
 Burkinabé 
 Burmese 
 Burundian 
 Cambodian 
 Cameroonian 
 Canadian 
 Acadian 
 Québécois 
 Central African Republic 
 Chadian 
 Chilean 
 Chinese 
 Cantonese 
 Hong Kong 
 Macanese 
 Tibetan 
 Xinjiang 
 Colombian 
 Congolese 
 Corsican 
 Croatian 
 Cuban 
 Cypriot 
 Czech 
 Danish 
 Faroese 
 Greenlandic 
 Djiboutian 
 Dominican 
 Dominican Republic 
 Dutch 
 East Timorese 
 Ecuadorian 
 Egyptian 
 Emirati 
 Equatorial Guinean 
 Eritrean 
 Estonian 
 Ethiopian 
 Fijian 
 Filipino 
 Finnish 
 French 
 Occitan 
 French Guianan 
 Gabonese 
 Gambian 
 Georgian 
 German 
 Ghanaian 
 Greek 
 Cretan 
 Epirotic 
 Greek Macedonian 
 Heptanesean 
 Guatemalan 
 Guinea-Bissauan 
 Guinean 
 Haitian 
 Honduran 
 Hungarian 
 Icelandic 
 Indian 
 Arunachalese 
 Assamese 
 Bengali 
 Bihari 
 Goan 
 Gujarati 
 Himachal Pradesh 
 Kashmiri 
 Jharkhandi 
 Karnataka 
 Kerala 
 Maharashtrian 
 Manipuri 
 Meghalayan 
 Mizo 
 Naga 
 Odia 
 Punjabi 
 Rajasthani 
 Sikkimese 
 Sindhi 
 Tamil 
 Telangana 
 Telugu 
 Indonesian 
 Acehnese 
 Balinese 
 Banjar 
 Batak 
 Betawi 
 Indo 
 Javanese 
 Madurese 
 Makassar 
 Minahasan 
 Minangkabau 
 Palembangese 
 Sundanese 
 Iranian 
 Iraqi 
 Irish 
 Israeli 
 Italian 
 Abruzzese 
 Ligurian 
 Lombard 
 Lucanian 
 Neapolitan 
 Roman 
 Sardinian 
 Sicilian 
 Venetian 
 Ivorian 
 Jamaican 
 Japanese 
 Okinawan 
 Jordanian 
 Kazakh 
 Kenyan 
 Korean 
 North Korean 
 South Korean 
 Kosovan 
 Kuwaiti 
 Kyrgyz 
 Lao 
 Latvian 
 Lebanese 
 Lesotho 
 Liberian 
 Libyan 
 Liechtensteiner 
 Lithuanian 
 Luxembourg 
 Macedonian 
 Malagasy 
 Malawian 
 Malaysian 
 Sabahan 
 Sarawakian 
 Maldivian 
 Malian 
 Maltese 
 Mauritanian 
 Mauritian 
 Mexican 
 Moldovan 
 Monégasque 
 Mongolian 
 Montenegrin 
 Moroccan 
 Mozambican 
 Namibian 
 Nauruan 
 Nepalese 
 New Zealand 
 Nicaraguan 
 Niger 
 Nigerian 
 Niuean 
 Norwegian 
 Omani 
 Pakistani 
 Palestinian 
 Panamanian 
 Peruvian 
 Polish 
 Portuguese 
 Qatari 
 Romanian  (incl.  Transylvanian Saxon ) 
 Russian 
 Bashkir 
 Chechen 
 Circassian 
 Komi 
 Mordovian 
 Sakha 
 Tatar 
 Udmurt 
 Yamal 
 Rwandan 
 Saint Lucian 
 Salvadoran 
 Sammarinese 
 São Tomé and Príncipe 
 Saudi Arabian 
 Senegalese 
 Serbian 
 Seychellois 
 Sierra Leonean 
 Singaporean 
 Slovak 
 Slovenian 
 Somali 
 South African 
 Spanish 
 Andalusian 
 Asturian 
 Balearic 
 Basque 
 Canarian 
 Cantabrian 
 Catalan 
 Extremaduran 
 Galician 
 Manchegan 
 Valencian 
 Sri Lankan 
 Sudanese 
 Swazi 
 Swedish 
 Swiss 
 Syrian 
 Taiwanese 
 Tajik 
 Tanzanian 
 Zanzibari 
 Thai 
 Togolese 
 Tunisian 
 Turkish 
 Turkmen 
 Trinidadian and Tobagonian 
 Ugandan 
 Ukrainian 
 Uruguayan 
 Uzbek 
 Venezuelan 
 Vietnamese 
 Western Saharan 
 Yemeni 
 Zambian 
 Zimbabwean 
 Ethnic 
 Ainu 
 Arab 
 Indonesian 
 Aromanian 
 Assyrian 
 Balochi 
 Berber 
 Cajun 
 Chinese 
 American 
 Canadian 
 Chifa 
 Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Crimean Tatar 
 Greek American 
 Hazaragi 
 Indian 
 Anglo-Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Indigenous American 
 Inuit 
 Italian American 
 Kurdish 
 Livonian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Malay 
 Ossetian 
 Parsi 
 Pashtun 
 Peranakan 
 Romani 
 Sámi 
 Soul food 
 Sylheti 
 Transylvanian Saxon 
 Yup'ik 
 Religious 
 Buddhist 
 Christian 
 Goan Catholic 
 Mangalorean Catholic 
 Mennonite 
 Hindu 
 Islamic 
 Chinese 
 Ital 
 Jain 
 Jewish 
 American 
 Ashkenazi 
 Bukharan 
 Ethiopian 
 Mizrahi 
 Sephardic 
 Syrian 
 Ritual slaughter 
 Sikh 
 Historical 
 Ancient Egyptian 
 Ancient Greek 
 Ancient Israelite 
 Ancient Roman 
 Antebellum America 
 Aztec 
 Byzantine 
 Early modern European 
 Historical Chinese 
 Historical Indian subcontinent 
 Historical North Indian and Pakistani 
 History of agriculture 
 History of alcoholic drinks 
 History of bread 
 History of seafood 
 History of vegetarianism 
 Historical Argentine 
 Historical Japanese 
 Inca 
 Mayan 
 Muisca 
 Mughal 
 Medieval 
 Ottoman 
 Peasant 
 Soviet 
 Thirteen Colonies 
 Styles 
 Classique 
 Fast food 
 Fusion 
 New American 
 Eurasian 
 Haute 
 Molecular gastronomy 
 Note by Note 
 Nouvelle 
 Lists 
 List of cuisines 
 List of historical cuisines 
 Lists of prepared foods 
 Related 
 Cookbook 
 Cooking 
 Culinary arts 
 Drink 
 Food 
 history 
 Diet 
 Meal preparation 
 
   Food portal 
   Drink portal 
   Category 
   Commons 
   Cookbook 
   WikiProject 
   Outline 
 
 Authority control : National libraries  
 Israel 
 United States 
 
  
NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw2389
Cached time: 20230310194355
Cache expiry: 1814400
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc, no‐toc‐conversion]
CPU time usage: 1.185 seconds
Real time usage: 1.437 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 8989/1000000
Post‐expand include size: 253449/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 23218/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 18/100
Expensive parser function count: 43/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 184433/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.724/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 23500713/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 2/400
 
 
Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1188.104      1 -total
 34.95%  415.271      2 Template:Reflist
 12.48%  148.271      4 Template:Ambox
 11.16%  132.574      1 Template:Culture_of_New_Zealand
 10.98%  130.452      1 Template:Culture_of_region
 10.71%  127.217      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 10.23%  121.597     11 Template:Cite_encyclopedia
  9.93%  117.933     10 Template:Lang
  8.38%   99.585      1 Template:Multiple_issues
  7.70%   91.464     21 Template:Cite_web
 
  Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:idhash:1148043-0!canonical and timestamp 20230310194353 and revision id 1138962301. Rendering was triggered because: page-view
  
 esi <esi:include src="/esitest-fa8a495983347898/content" />  
 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=New_Zealand_cuisine&oldid=1138962301 " 
 Categories :  New Zealand cuisine Māori cuisine Hidden categories:  Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Wikipedia articles with style issues from July 2022 All articles with style issues Articles needing additional references from January 2023 All articles needing additional references Articles with multiple maintenance issues Articles containing Māori-language text All pages needing factual verification Wikipedia articles needing factual verification from January 2023 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2021 Articles with unsourced statements from June 2022 Articles with unsourced statements from January 2023 Articles to be expanded from March 2021 All articles to be expanded Articles using small message boxes Commons category link is on Wikidata Region topic template using suffix Articles with J9U identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  This page was last edited on 12 February 2023, at 16:57  (UTC) . 
 Text is available under the  Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0 ;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the  Terms of Use  and  Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the  Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. 
 
 
 Privacy policy 
 About Wikipedia 
 Disclaimers 
 Contact Wikipedia 
 Mobile view 
 Developers 
 Statistics 
 Cookie statement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
