
 
 
 Jump to content 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle sidebar 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Create account Log in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Personal tools 
 
 
 
 
   Create account   Log in 
 
 
 
 
		Pages for logged out editors  learn more 
 
 
 Contributions Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Navigation 
 
 
 Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate 
 
 
 
 
 Contribute 
 
 
 Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file 
 
 
 
 
 Tools 
 
 
 What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item 
 
 
 
 
 Print/export 
 
 
 Download as PDF Printable version 
 
 
 
 
 In other projects 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons 
 
 
 
 
 Languages 
 
 On this Wikipedia the language links are at the top of the page across from the article title.  Go to top . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CentralNotice  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Contents 
 move to sidebar 
 hide 
 
 
 
 
 (Top) 
 
 
 
 
 
 1 History 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 Ingredients 
 
 
				Toggle Ingredients subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 2.1 Chile 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.2 Piñon 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.3 Other ingredients 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 Foods and dishes 
 
 
				Toggle Foods and dishes subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 3.1 Beverages 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.1.1 Alcohol 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4 Restaurants 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5 See also 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6 References 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
						Toggle the table of contents
					 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle the table of contents 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 New Mexican cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 2 languages 
 
 
 
 Jawa ქართული 
 Edit links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Article Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 English 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 More 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
 
 
 Cuisine originating from New Mexico 
 
 
   Dried red New Mexico chile peppers Part of a series on American cuisine 
 Regional cuisines 
 Northeastern 
 
 New England 
 New Jersey 
 New York City 
 Philadelphia 
 Midwestern 
 
 Chicago 
 Michigan 
 North Dakota 
 Omaha 
 St. Louis 
 Wisconsin 
 Mid-Atlantic 
 
 Baltimore 
 Pittsburgh 
 Southern  ( list ) 
 
 Atlanta 
 Cajun 
 Floribbean 
 Kentucky 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Lowcountry 
 Houston 
 New Orleans 
 Texas 
 Tex-Mex 
 Western 
 
 California 
 California fusion 
 Los Angeles 
 Pacific Northwest 
 Rocky Mountain 
 Southwestern 
 
 New Mexican 
 Other 
 
 Hawaiian 
 Military rations 
 Puerto Rican 
 Roadkill 
 Tailgate party 
 
 History 
 Thirteen Colonies 
 Antebellum America 
 Chuckwagon 
 Culinary Revolution 
 
 Ingredients and foods 
 List of American foods 
 Apple 
 Beef 
 Blueberry 
 Chocolate 
 Collard greens 
 Corn 
 Okra 
 Pecan 
 Potato 
 Pumpkin 
 Sunflower seed 
 Tomato 
 Turkey 
 Vanilla 
 
 Styles 
 Barbecue in the United States 
 Kansas City 
 Memphis 
 North Carolina 
 Santa Maria 
 St. Louis 
 Texas 
 Fast food 
 Fusion 
 New American 
 Pizza in the United States 
 
 Ethnic and cultural 
 American Chinese 
 Filipino-American cuisine 
 Greek-American 
 Indian 
 Italian-American 
 Japanese 
 Jewish 
 Mexican-American 
 Native American 
 Pennsylvania Dutch 
 Soul food 
 Tlingit 
 
 Holidays and festivals 
 Fourth of July 
 Christmas 
 Thanksgiving 
 
   United States portal 
   Food portal v t e New Mexican cuisine  is the cuisine of the  Southwestern   US   state  of  New Mexico . The region is primarily known for its fusion of  Pueblo   Native American cuisine  with  Hispano   Spanish  and  Mexican cuisine  originating in  Nuevo México . [1] [2] [3] 
 This cuisine had adaptations and influences throughout its history, including early on from the nearby  Apache ,  Navajo , and throughout  New Spain  and the  Spanish Empire , also from  French ,  Italian ,  Portuguese , and other  Mediterranean cuisine , along with early European  bed and breakfasts  and  cafés , furthermore during the American territorial phase from cowboy  chuckwagons  and  Western saloons , additionally after statehood from  Route 66  American  diner ,  Mexican-American cuisine , fast food restaurants, and  global cuisine . [4] [1] [5] 
 Even so, New Mexican cuisine developed in fairly isolated circumstances, which has allowed it to maintain its indigenous, Spanish, Mexican and Latin identity, and is therefore not like any other  Latin  food originating in the  contiguous United States . [6] : 109  [7] [8]  It can be easily distinguished from Mexican and  American  cuisines, due to its emphasis on New Mexican spices, herbs, flavors, and vegetables; especially red and green  New Mexico chile  peppers, [9] [10] [11] [12]   anise  (used in  biscochitos ), [13]  and  piñon  (used as a snack or in desserts). [14] 
 It is also identifiable by the presence of foods and dishes that originate in New Mexico, such as Native American  frybread -style  sopapillas ,  breakfast burritos ,  enchilada  montada  (stacked enchiladas), green chile stew,  carne seca  (a thinly sliced variant of  jerky ), green chile burgers,  pozole  (a  hominy  dish), slow-cooked  frijoles  (beans, typically  pinto beans ),  calabacitas  (a sautéed  zucchini  and  summer squash  dish), and  carne adobada  (pork marinated in red chile). [15] [16] [17] 
 
 
 History [ edit ] 
   Traditional  horno  outdoor oven 
 Prior to the establishment of New Mexico's current boundaries,  Santa Fe de Nuevo México 's land claim encompassed the  Pueblo  peoples and also oversaw the land of the  Chiricahua ,  Comanche ,  Mescalero , and  Navajo . 
 The Spaniards brought their cuisine which mingled with the indigenous. They introduced wheat, rice, beef, mutton/lamb, among other foods and flavors, to the native corn, chile, beans, squash, and other indigenous ingredients. [6] : 110–116  
 During this early development period the  horno , an outdoor beehive-shaped  earth oven , became ubiquitous in  Pueblo  and  Hispano  communities. [18]  This distinct history, combined with the local terrain and climate, has resulted in significant differences between the cuisine of New Mexico and somewhat similar styles in  Northern Mexico , and other  Southwestern US states  such as  California ,  Arizona , and  Texas . [6] [8] 
 New Mexico's population includes Native Americans who have worked the land thousands of years, including the farms of the  Ancestral Pueblo  peoples as well as the modern extant  Pueblo ,  Navajo  and  Apache . The  Hispano  explorers included farmers and ranchers as they arrived during the Spanish era in the 16th century, well into the Mexican era which ended in the 19th century. 
 Americans traded and settled after the Civil War, today groups from Asian and communities have come to New Mexico. [19] [20] 
 When New Mexicans refer to  chile  they are talking about pungent pods, or sauce made from those pods, not the concoction of spices, meat or beans known as Texas  chili con carne . [ citation needed ]  While the chile pod is sometimes spelled chili outside of New Mexico, US Senator  Pete Domenici  of New Mexico made this state's spelling official as  chile , by entering it into the  Congressional Record . [21] : 61  
 One of the first authors to publish a cookbook describing traditional New Mexican cuisine was educator and writer  Fabiola Cabeza de Baca Gilbert , who published  Historic Cookery  in 1931. [22]  Her work helped introduce cooking with  chiles  to the United States more broadly. [23] 
 
 Ingredients [ edit ] 
 This section  needs additional citations for  verification .  Please help  improve this article  by  adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.   ( July 2018 )  ( Learn how and when to remove this template message ) 
 Chile [ edit ] 
 Main article:  New Mexico chile 
   Chile  ristras  ripening from green to red 
   Hatch, New Mexico green chiles New Mexico chile  is the defining ingredient of New Mexican food. Chile is New Mexico's largest agricultural crop. [24]  Within New Mexico, green chile is also popular in non-New Mexican cuisines including  Mexican-style  food and American food like  cheeseburgers ,  french fries ,  bagels , and  pizza . [25] 
 The New Mexico official State Question is "Red or green?" [26]  This refers to the choice of red or green chile with an  entrée . "Christmas," a relatively new tradition originating in the 1980s, [27]  is a request for both (one side covered with green, the other with red). [28]  New Mexico red and green chile have such a rich and distinctive flavor that traditional preparations require few additional flavoring ingredients. The essence of New Mexico chile preparation is its simplicity. [29] 
 The New Mexico green chile is a variety of the chile pepper,  Capsicum annuum , and was developed as a recognizable strain in New Mexico by the late nineteenth century. It is available today in several distinct and selectively-cultivated strains called  cultivars . 
 The chile pepper is grown in the state's very high altitude (4,000–8,000 ft) and dry, hot climate. Much like grapes for wine, these growing conditions contribute, along with genetics, to giving New Mexico green chile its distinctive deep green color, texture, and flavor. 
 The climate of New Mexico tends to increase the  capsaicin  levels in the chile pod compared to pods grown in other regions. This results in the possibility of hotter varieties. New Mexico green chiles can range from mild to extremely hot. [30] 
 At harvest time (August through the middle of October) green chile is typically roasted, peeled and frozen for the year ahead. Chile is such a staple in New Mexico that many national restaurant chains offer New Mexico chile at their New Mexico locations. [25] 
 New Mexico red chile is simply the fully ripened green chile pepper. As it ripens, it first turns orange and then quickly turns red. As it does so, the skin thickens and fuses to the inner fruit or "meat" of the pepper. This means that, for the red pepper to be enjoyable, it must first be dried then blended into a puree. The puree can be made using full red chile pods or red chile powder (which is made by finely grinding the dried pod). 
 The purée is not edible until cooked as  red chile sauce . This is made by cooking the puree with garlic, salt—and occasionally oregano—and has the consistency of tomato soup. Discerning native New Mexicans prefer sun-dried over oven-dried red chile, as the oven-drying process gives it a non-traditional smoky flavor and a dark maroon color. 
 Red chile peppers are traditionally sun-dried in bundles called  ristras , which are a common decorative sight on porches and in homes and businesses throughout the Southwest. [31]  The process of creating the  ristra  is highly labor-intensive, so in recent decades it has become a predominantly decorative item.
 The bulk of New Mexico chile is grown in the  Hatch Valley  in the south of the state, in and around the village of  Hatch . It is also grown along the entire  Rio Grande Valley , and  Chimayo  in the north is also well known for its chile. [32] : 15–46  
 
 Piñon [ edit ] 
   Typical New Mexico street scene with a truck (in this case a van) selling  piñon  nuts 
 Piñones , or  piñon  nuts, are a traditional food of Native Americans and Hispanos in New Mexico that is harvested from the ubiquitous  piñon  pine tree . [33]  The state of  New Mexico  protects the use of the word  piñon  for use with pine nuts from certain species of indigenous New Mexican pines. [14]  The harvest doesn't generally arrive in full force until after New Mexico’s first freeze of the winter. [34] 
 
 Other ingredients [ edit ] 
   Raw blue corn 
 Wheat flour  tortillas  are more prevalent in New Mexico cuisine as a table bread than  corn  tortillas. [35] : 131–133   However, corn tortillas, corn tortilla chips, and  masa  are the foundations of many traditional New Mexico dishes, and sometimes made of  blue corn . [36]  Common traditional dishes include  enchiladas ,  tacos ,  posole ,  tamales , and  sopaipillas  and honey served with the meal. 
 Corn (maize)  remains a staple grain, the yellow  sweet corn  variety is most common in New Mexico, though white is sometimes used, and blue and red  flint corn  varieties are used for specialties like  atole  and blue-corn tortilla chips.  Kernel corn and corn on the cob are frequent side dishes, as in the American South.
 Corn is not a frequent component of New Mexico  salsa  or  pico de gallo , and is usually a separate side dish in and of itself.
 Anise  is common in some desserts, especially the state cookie, the  bizcochito . 
 Cilantro , a pungent green herb (also called Mexican or Chinese parsley, the seeds of which are known as  coriander ) used fresh in salsas, and as a topping for virtually any dish; not common in traditional New Mexican cuisine, but one of the defining tastes of Santa Fe style. 
 Cumin , the quintessential "Mexican food" spice, is used very differently in New Mexican food, usually reserved for spicing ground beef and sometimes other meats for burritos, tacos, and nachos. It is not used to flavor red and green chile sauces.  Oregano  is a sparingly used but common herb in traditional New Mexican dishes.
 The early Spanish Colonies along the  Rio Grande River  in  New Mexico  used  safflower  as a substitute for  saffron  in traditional recipes.  An heirloom variety originating from  Corrales, New Mexico , called "Corrales Azafran" is still cultivated and used as a saffron substitute in New Mexican cuisine. [37] [38] 
 
 Foods and dishes [ edit ] 
 This section  needs additional citations for  verification .  Please help  improve this article  by  adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.   ( August 2017 )  ( Learn how and when to remove this template message ) 
   Biscochitos , the  state cookie  of New Mexico 
   Chile con queso 
 Albóndigas  (meatball soup)—traditionally made with beef broth, ground pork or beef, vegetables and rice. Also known as  sopa de albóndigas .  Albóndigas  is the term for the dish as well as the meatball itself. [39] : 184–186  
 Arroz dulce —sweet rice pudding, a traditional Northern New Mexican dessert, primarily popular in traditional homes, and rarely found in restaurants.  Rice is generally cooked in milk and water. Then, simmered with sugar and raisins,  garnished with cinnamon, and served hot. 
 Atole —a thick, hot  gruel  made from  blue corn  meal in New Mexico. 
 Biscochito — anise -flavored cookie sprinkled with cinnamon sugar, traditionally made with  lard . [7]  It was developed by residents of New Mexico over the centuries from the first  Spanish colonists  of what was then known as  Santa Fe de Nuevo México . Although  biscochitos  may sometimes be found at any time of year, they are a traditional Christmas cookie. [6] : 111–112  
 Burrito —the New Mexico  burrito  is a white-flour  tortilla  with fillings of meat, such as pork  carnitas , chicken, ground or shredded beef or  carne adovada , refried pinto beans, or both meat and beans, along with red or green chile. [40] 
 Breakfast burrito —a breakfast version of the above, typically including  scrambled eggs , potatoes, red or green chile, cheese (usually  Cheddar ), and sometimes bacon or sausage; originated in New Mexico. 
   A smothered, Christmas-style breakfast burrito from Tia Sophia's diner in  Santa Fe, New Mexico 
 Calabacitas : Chopped  summer squash  with onions, garlic, yellow corn, green chile, sauteed in oil. [7] 
 Caldillo —a thin, green or red chile stew or soup of meat (usually beef, often pork or a mixture), potatoes, and chiles. Sometimes called  caldito , especially as a side dish. Both terms are diminutive forms of the Spanish word,  caldo , for soup. [41] 
 Capirotada —a bread-pudding dessert, traditionally made during  Lent  festivities.  Capirotada  is made of toasted bread crumbs or fried slices of  birote  or  bolillo  bread, then soaked in a syrup made of melted sugar, or  piloncillo , and cinnamon. It usually contains raisins, and possibly other fruits and nut bits. Finely grated cheese may be added when it's still hot from the oven, so that it melts. Served warm or cold. [39] : 354–355  
 Carne adovada —cubes of pork that have been marinated and slow cooked in red chile sauce,  garlic  and  oregano . [7] 
 Carne asada —roasted or broiled meat (often  flank steak ), marinated. [7] 
 Carne seca —literally translated to "dried meat", in New Mexican cuisine refers to a unique style of thinly sliced  jerky  which has a  cracker  or  potato chip -like texture. [17] 
 Carnitas —grilled or broiled cubes of pork, traditionally smothered with red or green chile sauce and served as and entree. 
 Chalupa —originating in California-style Mexican cuisine, a corn tortilla fried into a bowl shape and filled with shredded chicken or other meat or beans, and usually topped with  guacamole  and  salsa . [39] : 125–126   (another vegetable-laden version called  taco salads ; compare with  tostadas .) 
 Chicharrones —deep-fried pieces of pork trimmings usually including a layer of meat. 
 Chile con queso —chile and melted cheese mixed together into a dip. [42] 
 Chiles rellenos —whole green chiles stuffed with cheese, dipped in egg batter, and fried. [43]  This dish varies from other Mexican-style cuisines in that it uses the New Mexican chile, rather than a  poblano  pepper. 
 Chile sauce—sauce made from red or green chiles usually served hot. Green chile is made with chopped, roasted fresh or frozen green chiles, while red chile is made from dried, roasted and pulverized ripe (red) chiles. [40] 
 Chile is one of the most definitive differences between New Mexican and other Mexican and Mexican-American cuisines (which often make a different green chile sauce from tomatillos). 
 New Mexican cuisine uses chile sauce as taco sauce, enchilada sauce, burrito sauce, etc. (though any given meal may use both red and green varieties for different dishes). A thicker version of green chile with onions and other additions is called green chile stew and is popular in Albuquerque-style New Mexican food. [7] 
 The green chile sauce is can sometimes be hotter than its red counterpart, though this depends entirely on the chile varieties used. 
 Chimichanga —a small, deep-fried meat and (usually) bean wheat-tortilla burrito, also containing (or smothered with) chile sauce and cheese; popularized by the  Allsup's  convenience store chain with a series of humorous commercials in the 1980s with candid footage of people attempting and failing to pronounce the name correctly. 
 Chimichangas , like  flautas  and  taquitos , are a fast-food adaptation of traditional dishes in a form that can be stored frozen and then quickly fried as needed; they are also rigid and easily hand-held, and thus easy to eat by people while walking or driving. 
 Chorizo —a spicy pork sausage, seasoned with garlic and red chile, usually used in ground or finely chopped form as a breakfast side dish or quite often as an alternative to ground beef or shredded chicken in other dishes. [7] 
 Empanadita  (small  empanada )—a pasty or turnover filled with sweet pumpkin, fruit, or minced meat, spices and nuts. [7] 
   Stacked-style blue-corn chicken enchiladas smothered in red chile sauce with  posole  and pinto beans 
 Enchiladas —corn tortillas filled with chicken, meat or cheese. They are either rolled, or stacked, and covered with chile sauce and cheese. [39] : 216–220  [6] : 109  
 Enchiladas montandas , or stacked  enchilada —usually covered with either red or green chile sauce, and optionally topped with a fried egg. [17]  These stacked enchiladas are also common with blue-corn tortillas. 
 Fish—being landlocked, New Mexico has no native  seafood  tradition, but  freshwater fish  are not uncommon entrees, especially  trout .  Crayfish  are found in New Mexico. [44]  In the southeast of the state, crayfish tails are also consumed, as in Texas and Louisiana. While the native population made use of freshwater shellfish since prehistoric times, [ dubious    –  discuss ]  they are not common in modern New Mexico cuisine, though it has adapted various seafood items (e.g.,  shrimp  tacos are common in restaurants). 
 Flan —a caramel custard. 
 Flauta —a small, tightly rolled, fried corn tortilla filled with ground beef, chicken, pork or turkey and served topped with guacamole and sour cream. Compare  chimichanga  and  taquito . [45] 
 Frijoles  (whole  pinto beans )—along with  Spanish rice ,  frijoles  are the standard side served with any entrée. Traditional New Mexico beans are cooked very simply with  salt pork  and garlic. [46]   Frijoles  are often served whole in New Mexico, rather than as  refried beans  ( Frijoles refritos ). [47] 
 Frijoles refritos  ( refried beans )—whole cooked beans are fried in bacon fat and mashed until they turn into a thick paste. Also known as simply  refritos  and often served with a topping of cheese. [46] 
   Frito pie at Five & Dime General Store on the  Santa Fe Plaza 
 Frito pie —a  Tex-Mex  casserole, made of  red chile sauce, sometimes with meat and or pinto beans , atop a bed of  Fritos  (or similar) corn chips, topped with cheese, usually topped with shredded lettuce, chopped tomato and onion. 
 Some five-and-dime stores make it by slicing open a bag of Frito's and adding the rest of the ingredients. 
 Although a Texas invention, it has become popular in New Mexico, and typically uses New Mexican red chile in the state. [36] [48] 
 Green chile cheeseburger—widely considered the New-Mexican variety of  cheeseburger , it is a regular hamburger topped with melted cheese and either whole or chopped green chile. The flavor is very distinctively New Mexican as opposed to other types of hamburgers, and is even offered in the region by major fast food chains. [49] [50] 
 Green chile cheese fries—a New Mexican variant to traditional  cheese fries , fries served smothered with green chile sauce and topped with cheese. 
 Green chile stew—similar to  caldillo  with the use of green chile. Standard ingredients are coarsely-chopped green chile, ground or cubed beef, ground or cubed pork, potato, diced tomato, onion, garlic, and chicken or beef stock. [7]  The stew often contains coarsely-chopped carrots or other vegetables.  [51] 
 Guacamole —the traditional New Mexico version is avocados smashed or blended with a very small amount of the following: finely chopped onion, tomato, garlic, salt and lemon juice. [45] 
 Huevos rancheros — fried eggs  any style on corn tortillas, smothered with red or green chile sauce, topped with shredded cheddar cheese, often served with potatoes or  pinto beans . Flour tortillas on the side come standard. [7] 
 Indian Fry Bread —a traditional thick flatbread of deep-fried dough, developed by the  Navajo people  after the " Long Walk ", when they were forcibly relocated to  Bosque Redondo, New Mexico . Served as a snack with honey or for making  Navajo tacos . The New Mexico  sopaipilla  is a variant of this. 
 Jalapeño —a small, fat  chile  pepper, ranging from mild to painfully hot. In New Mexican food they are used chopped (fresh) in salsa and guacamole or as a topping (either pickled or fresh) for nachos. 
 Natillas —soft custard-like dessert made from egg whites, milk, white sugar, vanilla, nutmeg, and cinnamon, cooked while whisking on a stove top and served either warm or cold. [21] : 115  
 Navajo taco —A taco made with frybread, rather than a tortilla. 
 Panocha —a pudding made from sprouted wheat flour and  piloncillo . The sprouted-wheat flour is called "panocha flour", or simply "panocha", as well. [39] : 26  
 Pastelitos  (little pies)—a thin pie baked on flat cookie sheet with dried fruit and spices, usually cut into small squares. 
 Pico de gallo  (rooster's beak)—a cold salsa with thick-chopped fresh chiles, tomatoes, onions and cilantro, without tomato-paste base as in commercial packaged salsas, never contains vinegar. [39] : 176  
 Posole —a thick stew made with  hominy  and pork. Chicken in lieu of pork is a popular variation. It is simmered for hours with pork or chicken and then combined with red or green chile [7]  and other ingredients such as onion, garlic, and oregano. Native New Mexicans include off-cuts of pork (especially pork rinds and pigs feet) in the pork version. They also prefer to use the un-popped hominy kernel, either blue or white, which goes by the same name as the dish, "posole". The un-popped kernels are boiled separately from the other ingredients until the kernels pop revealing the hominy-like form. To New Mexicans,  posole  is one of the most important of Christmas traditions. [39] : 266–269   The Mexican spelling  pozole  is uncommon in New Mexico. 
 Quelites —a traditional New Mexico side dish made with spinach sauteed in bacon fat with onion, garlic, pinto beans, and crushed, red, New Mexico chile flakes. [52]   Wild lamb's quarters  were the original leafy green for this dish, but now it is extremely rare to find quelites made with them. 
 Quesadilla —a grilled cheese sandwich of sorts in which two flour tortillas, or one folded, are used instead of bread. It is often lightly oiled and toasted on a griddle to melt the cheese, then served with either  salsa ,  pico de gallo,  chile, guacamole and sour cream, as an appetizer or entrée.   Sopaipillas 
 Sopaipilla  (or  sopapilla )—a puffed fried quick bread with a flavor similar to Indian fry bread. The New Mexico version is very large. It is served as a standard table bread at New Mexican restaurants with a squeeze bottle of honey or honey butter. Prior to the  Great Depression  in the 1930s, they were served with jelly or jam, and honey was used as a substitute and from then on became the traditional accompaniment. They can also become an entrée by stuffing them with savory ingredients such ground beef, shredded chicken, and refried beans. [39] : 127–131  [7] 
 Stuffed  sopapilla —a standard New Mexico entrée, stuffed with various fillings, covered with melted cheddar cheese, usually smothered with red or green chile sauce and topped with shredded iceberg lettuce and diced tomatoes. Fillings include pinto beans, ground beef, shredded beef, shredded chicken, potatoes, spanish rice, and  carne adovada . 
 Spanish rice:  rice  ( arroz ) with a tomato base and other ingredients, usually a mild dish, but may also be made spicy. Traditional New Mexico versions are made with long-grain rice, onion, and garlic.  Rice may also be served in other fashions, and recipes vary. 
 Salsa —an uncooked mixture of chiles/peppers, tomatoes, onions, frequently blended or mixed with tomato paste to produce a more sauce-like texture than  pico de gallo ; usually contains lemon juice or vinegar in noticeable quantities. 
 The green-chile variant usually is mostly green chile and without tomatoes, though some varieties may use some cooked  tomatillos ; the style does not use avocado (which is very common in California green salsa). 
 The New Mexico and California styles share a typically large amount of cilantro added to the mix. The word simply means "sauce" in Spanish. 
 Salsa picante , or picante sauce—a thin, vinegary, piquant (thus its name) sauce of pureéd red peppers and tomatoes with spices, reminiscent of a combination of New Mexico-style chile sauce and Louisiana-style  tabasco  pepper sauce. (Note: American commercial food producers have appropriated the term to refer simply to spicy packaged salsa.) 
 Its place in Mexican, Tex-Mex and Californian food, where it is extremely common, especially as a final condiment to add more heat, has largely been supplanted by chile, especially red chile, in New Mexican cuisine. 
 Taco —a corn tortilla fried into a trough shape, it is filled with meats or beans, and fresh chopped lettuce, onions, tomatoes, and cheese. 
 The term can also refers to the soft, rolled flour-tortilla variety popularized by fast-food chains (a  soft taco ), and the flat, unfried corn style favored in Mexico, but most corn tortillas for tacos are fried in New Mexican cuisine. 
 The entire taco is not fried (a Mexican style known as  taco dorado ), just the shell. Compare  taquito ,  tostada . 
 Tamal, Tamale  (plural  tamales )—meat rolled in cornmeal dough ( masa ), wrapped traditionally in  corn husks  (waxed paper is sometimes used for commercial versions), and steamed. 
 Although there are many delicious variations, the standard New Mexico  tamal  filling is shredded pork cooked in red chile sauce. New-Mexican  tamales  typically vary from other  tamal  styles in that red chile powder is typically blended into the  masa . 
 Taquito —a tightly rolled, deep-fried variant of the corn-tortilla taco, usually filled with beef or chicken; essentially the same as a Mexican  taco dorado , but rolled into a tube shape rather than fried in wedge shape. 
 Sometimes misspelled "taquita". Compare  chimichanga  and  flauta . 
 Torta  de huevo —a whipped-egg and wheat-flour pancake, typically topped with red chile, and often and it is then served with  fideo  (a  vermicelli -style noodle),  quelites  (wild spinach), and beans. 
 It is a traditional dish for Fridays during  Lent ; some New Mexican restaurants offer it as their Lenten special. 
 Tortilla —a flatbread made predominantly either of unbleached white  wheat   flour  or of  cornmeal , with wheat flour tortillas the most common in ordinary use. [36] 
 New Mexico-style flour tortillas are typically thicker and less chewy than those found in  Sonora, Mexico . [35] : 133   Nevertheless, blue-corn tortillas are a quintessential New Mexico-style tortilla. [39] : 118–119  
 Tostada —a corn tortilla is deep fried flat until hard and crispy and covered with refried beans, cheese, lettuce, and tomato, with additional toppings such as  sour cream  and  guacamole  also added. [1] 
 Beverages [ edit ] 
 Chocolate  drinks are popular in New Mexico, including the state's various chocolate elixirs. [53]  Though both coffee and tea are well represented, with piñon flavored coffee being available at  chain   cafés  such as New Mexico Piñon Coffee House, [54]  and  tea meals  being found at establishments like Saint James Tea Room. [55]   Sweet tea , sweetened or unsweetened "sun tea" brewed with the New Mexican sun, and  boba tea  are very popular in New Mexico. [56] [57] [58] [59]  The  bizcochito  is a common  tea biscuit  in the region, and is often served with chocolate elixirs, coffee, and tea. [60] 
 Sodas have a long history in New Mexico, traditional  root beer  and  sarsaparilla  share some origins to New Mexico. [61]  Besides root beer and sarsaparilla, other  craft soda  flavor profiles that are common in the region include cactus, piñon, sandia (watermelon), and chile pepper (sweet and spicy, similar to Mexican candies  Pulparindo  or  Pelon Pelo Rico ). [62] 
 
 Alcohol [ edit ] 
 New Mexico wine  is the oldest wine growing region in the United States, several wines in New Mexico have won awards and are respected internationally. [63]   Gruet Winery  produces some of the best  sparkling wine  in the country. [64] [65] 
 A  list of breweries in New Mexico  are exemplary of neomexicanus  hops , which are the only indigenous US hops variety that are suitable for brewing. [66] [67]  As such, the beers from New Mexico have a unique flavor profile, and often win awards as a result. [68] 
 
 Restaurants [ edit ] 
 See also:  Category:Restaurants in New Mexico  and  List of restaurants in Albuquerque, New Mexico 
 There have been several restaurants and restaurant chains serving New Mexican cuisine.
 
 
 Blake's Lotaburger 
 El Modelo 
 Frontier Restaurant 
 Garduño's 
 Little Anita's 
 Mac's La Sierra 
 Mac's Steak in the Rough 
 Owl Bar and Cafe 
 Twisters 
 Sadie's 
 See also [ edit ] 
 
 New Mexico portal Food portal 
 
 Ancient Pueblo peoples 
 Apache people 
 Cuisine of the Southwestern United States 
 Hispanos of New Mexico 
 Navajo people 
 List of breweries in New Mexico 
 New Mexican English 
 New Mexican Spanish 
 New Mexico 
 New Mexico chile 
 New Mexico music 
 New Mexico wine 
 Pueblo 
 Puebloan people 
 Pueblo music 
 References [ edit ] 
 
 
 ^  a   b   c   Casey, C. (2013).  New Mexico Cuisine: Recipes from the Land of Enchantment . University of New Mexico Press.  ISBN   978-0-8263-5417-4 . Retrieved  March 19,  2018 . 
 
 ^   Swentzell, R.; Perea, P.M. (2016).  The Pueblo Food Experience Cookbook: Whole Food of Our Ancestors . Museum of New Mexico Press.  ISBN   978-0-89013-619-5 . Retrieved  March 19,  2018 . 
 
 ^   Nostrand, R.L. (1996).  The Hispano Homeland . University of Oklahoma Press. p. 13.  ISBN   978-0-8061-2889-4 . Retrieved  March 19,  2018 . 
 
 ^   Taylor, C. (2016).  Moon Route 66 Road Trip . Travel Guide. Avalon Publishing. p. 361.  ISBN   978-1-63121-072-3 . Retrieved  March 19,  2018 . 
 
 ^   New Mexico Magazine  (in Italian). New Mexico Department of Development. 2012 . Retrieved  March 19,  2018 . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   e   Arellano, Gustavo (2013).  Taco USA: How Mexican Food Conquered America .  Simon & Schuster .  ISBN   9781439148624 . Retrieved  January 18,  2018  – via Google Books. 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   e   f   g   h   i   j   k   l   Laine, Don; Laine, Barbara (2012).  Frommer's National Parks of the American West . Wiley.  ISBN   9781118224540 . Retrieved  January 18,  2018  – via Google Books. 
 
 ^  a   b   Sutter, Mike (September 14, 2017).  "Review: Need a break from Tex-Mex? Hit the Santa Fe Trail" .  San Antonio Express-News . Retrieved  March 19,  2018 . 
 
 ^   "Local Obsession: New Mexican Hatch Chile" .  Video . April 30, 2022 . Retrieved  April 30,  2022 . 
 
 ^   Tanis, David (October 14, 2016).  "Inside New Mexico's Hatch Green Chile Obsession" .  Saveur . Retrieved  April 30,  2022 . 
 
 ^   Larese, Steve (July 1, 2013).  "New Mexico Chile: America's best regional food?" .  USATODAY . Retrieved  April 30,  2022 . 
 
 ^   Lucero, Mario J. (March 4, 2022).  "Mixing Food Cultures: Japan, Mexico and Southwest US" .  Tokyo Weekender . Retrieved  April 30,  2022 . 
 
 ^   Jamison, Cheryl Alters (October 4, 2013).  "A Classic Biscochitos Recipe" .  New Mexico Tourism & Travel . Retrieved  July 8,  2018 . 
 
 ^  a   b   "Piñon Nut Act".  Act  of 1978   (PDF) . Retrieved  June 25,  2018 . 
 
 ^   "8 quintessential New Mexican foods we wish would go national" .  Matador Network . May 27, 2011 . Retrieved  May 7,  2018 . 
 
 ^   "State Symbols" .  New Mexico Secretary of State . July 3, 2018 . Retrieved  July 8,  2018 . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   "Albuquerque" .  Bizarre Foods : Delicious Destinations with  Andrew Zimmern . Season 3. Episode 15 . Retrieved  May 7,  2018 . 
 
 ^   Green, Rayna (1999).  The British Museum Encyclopedia of Native North America . London: British Museum Press. p. 4.  ISBN   0-253-33597-3 . Retrieved  June 2,  2012 . 
 
 ^   Feske, Esther.  License to Cook New Mexico Style , Penfield Press, 1988, p. 5 
 
 ^   Cheek, Lawrence W. (2007).  Santa Fe, Taos and Northern Pueblos . Compass American Guides. pp. 200–202.  ISBN   9781400018666 . Retrieved  August 9,  2017  – via Google Books. 
 
 ^  a   b   Jamison, Cheryl A.; Jamison, Bill (2014).  The Rancho de Chimayo Cookbook: The Traditional Cooking of New Mexico . Rowman & Littlefield.  ISBN   9781493009206 . 
 
 ^   DeWalt, Rob (October 22, 2014).  "Origins of Southwest Food" .  Santa Fe Reporter . Retrieved  January 24,  2017 . 
 
 ^   Finney, Teresa (May 5, 2016).  "Let's Give More Credit to Mexican Chefs, Shall We?" .  Taste Talks . Northside Media . Retrieved  January 24,  2017 . 
 
 ^   "Chile Pepper Info, Products, & Recipes" .  All About New Mexico . Retrieved  July 23,  2010 . 
 
 ^  a   b   "Some like it hot: Green chile tour of New Mexico" . Lonely Planet. July 20, 2010 . Retrieved  February 13,  2014 . 
 
 ^   "New Mexico Statutes" . New Mexico State Legislature. Sections 12-3-4 L & M . Retrieved  January 25,  2018  – via LawServer.com. 
 
 ^   Boyle, Molly (April 5, 2019).  "Old World hospitality, New World cuisine: The story of Tomasita's, Atrisco Café, Tia Sophia's, and the Plaza Café" . Santa Fe New Mexican. 
 
 ^   Sulem, Matt (May 11, 2016).  "Green or Red: What Your Chile Choices Say About You in Santa Fe" .  The Daily Meal . Archived from  the original  on May 12, 2016 . Retrieved  January 25,  2018 . 
 
 ^   Casey, Clyde (2013).  Red or Green: New Mexico Cuisine . Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press.  ISBN   9780826354167 . Retrieved  January 25,  2018  – via Google Books. 
 
 ^   "Locate New Mexico Chile" .  NMChileAssociation.com . New Mexico Chile Association. 2018 . Retrieved  January 26,  2018 .   An index of vendors of certified New Mexico chile within and outside the state. 
 
 ^   "Chile Ristras" . National Park Service, U.S. Department of the Interior. August 31, 2017. Archived from  the original  on September 3, 2017 . Retrieved  January 25,  2018 . 
 
 ^   Urig, Kelly (2015).  New Mexico Chiles: History, Legend and Lore . Arcadia Publishing.  ISBN   9781625853530 . Retrieved  August 9,  2017  – via Google Books. 
 
 ^   Ronald M. Lanner (1981).  The Pinon Pine: A Natural and Cultural History . University of Nevada Press. p. 104.  ISBN   9780874170665 . Retrieved  January 26,  2018 . 
 
 ^   Carl, David (September 15, 2017),  New Mexicans excited for this year's first piñon crop , retrieved  May 5,  2019 
 
 ^  a   b   Devon Peña; Luz Calvo; Pancho McFarland & Gabriel R. Valle (2017).  Mexican-Origin Foods, Foodways, and Social Movements: Decolonial Perspectives . University of Arkansas Press.  ISBN   9781610756181 . Retrieved  January 29,  2018 . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   Arellano, Gustavo (March 26, 2014).  "15 Signs You Grew Up Eating (New) Mexican Food in New Mexico" .  OC Weekly .  Archived  from the original on March 26, 2016 . Retrieved  January 26,  2018 . 
 
 ^   "Corrales Azafrán - Native-Seeds-Search" .  shop.nativeseeds.org . 
 
 ^   "NS/S Herb Seeds - Corrales Azafran" .  ARBICO Organics . Archived from  the original  on February 25, 2015. 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   e   f   g   h   i   Huntley Dent (1993).  Feast of Santa Fe: Cooking of the American Southwest .  Simon and Schuster .  ISBN   9780671873028 . Retrieved  August 10,  2017  – via Google Books. 
 
 ^  a   b   Anne Poore (August 3, 1978),  "New Mexican Food - Unique and flavorful" ,  Santa Fe New Mexican , Santa Fe, New Mexico, pp. 25–26 , retrieved  February 15,  2018 
 
 ^   "Caldito de Calabacita" . 
 
 ^   Dave DeWitt (2014).  Dishing Up® New Mexico: 145 Recipes from the Land of Enchantment . Storey Publishing. p. 111.  ISBN   9781612122519 . Retrieved  January 27,  2018 . 
 
 ^   New Mexico State Land Office. Bureau of Publicity (1916).  New Mexico Cookery . State Land Office. p. 43 . Retrieved  January 26,  2018 . 
 
 ^   Jay Huner (1994).  Freshwater Crayfish Aquaculture in North America, Europe, and Australia: Families Astacidae, Cambaridae, and Parastacidae . CRC Press. p. 47.  ISBN   9781560220398 . Retrieved  January 29,  2018 . 
 
 ^  a   b   Anne Poore (August 3, 1978),  "New Mexican Food - Unique and flavorful" ,  Santa Fe New Mexican , Santa Fe, New Mexico, p. 26 , retrieved  February 15,  2018 
 
 ^  a   b   Sheila MacNiven Cameron (2017).  The Best from New Mexico Kitchens . University of New Mexico Press.  ISBN   9780826359599 . Retrieved  January 29,  2018 . 
 
 ^   Brian Bell (2004).  New Mexico . Langenscheidt Publishing Group. p. 74.  ISBN   9789814120777 . Retrieved  January 29,  2018 . 
 
 ^   "These 11 Restaurants Serve The Best Frito Pie in New Mexico" .  OnlyInYourState . Retrieved  June 13,  2018 . 
 
 ^   Jane Stern & Michael Stern (2009).  500 Things to Eat Before It's Too Late: And the Very Best Places to Eat Them .  Houghton Mifflin Harcourt . p. 324.  ISBN   9780547059075 . Retrieved  January 29,  2018 . 
 
 ^   George Motz (2016).  The Great American Burger Book: How to Make Authentic Regional Hamburgers at Home . Abrams.  ISBN   9781613129425 . Retrieved  January 29,  2018 . 
 
 ^   "This dish is hearty enough to warm you on a cold winter night" . Retrieved  November 12,  2022 . 
 
 ^   Juan Estevan Arellano (2014).  Enduring Acequias: Wisdom of the Land, Knowledge of the Water . UNM Press. p. 183.  ISBN   9780826355089 . Retrieved  January 26,  2018 . 
 
 ^   "Indulge in New Mexico's centuries-old chocolate customs" .  10Best . April 11, 2020 . Retrieved  December 26,  2022 . 
 
 ^   "New Mexico Piñon Coffee planning first drive-through cafe" .  Albuquerque Journal . May 13, 2016 . Retrieved  December 26,  2022 . 
 
 ^   Flynn, Caitlin (May 20, 2022).  "The Best Themed Restaurant in Every State" .  Eat This Not That . Retrieved  December 26,  2022 . 
 
 ^   Pace, A.H.; Williams, S.; Knight, K.; Gray, R.; David, J.; Brocato, K.; Bourne, A.; Gaddis, P.; Patrick, M. (2017).  Sweet Tea & Sunshine: 9 Deep South Romances . Crimson Romance. p. 903.  ISBN   978-1-5072-0369-9 . Retrieved  December 26,  2022 . 
 
 ^   Post, Becky Krystal / The Washington (June 27, 2018).  "Make perfect homemade iced tea" .  Albuquerque Journal . Retrieved  December 26,  2022 . 
 
 ^   "Exhibit looks at the history and art behind one of nature's most elusive colors" .  Albuquerque Journal . January 1, 2022 . Retrieved  December 26,  2022 .  You're making like a sun tea 
 
 ^   Brown, Susan (February 4, 2018).  "The Best Places for Bubble Tea in New Mexico!" .  Best Things To Do and Places To Go in New Mexico . Retrieved  December 26,  2022 . 
 
 ^   Martinez, Erica (December 11, 2022).  "What Are Bizcochitos, New Mexico's State Cookie?" .  Tasting Table . Retrieved  December 26,  2022 . 
 
 ^   Cresswell, S. (2012).  Homemade Root Beer, Soda & Pop  (in Dutch). Storey Publishing, LLC. p. 50.  ISBN   978-1-61212-233-5 . Retrieved  December 26,  2022 . 
 
 ^   "Zia Sodas 12 packs" .  Made IN New Mexico . Retrieved  December 26,  2022 . 
 
 ^   Selinger, Hannah (October 26, 2020).  "New Mexico Archives" .  Wine Enthusiast . Retrieved  December 26,  2022 . 
 
 ^   Signer, Rachel (February 4, 2016).  "America's Best Sparkling Wine Surprisingly Comes From New Mexico" .  VinePair . Retrieved  December 26,  2022 . 
 
 ^   Solomon, Cori (March 4, 2021).  "The Best of New Mexican Wine: Gruet Sparkling Wine" .  Food, Wine & Travel . Retrieved  December 26,  2022 . 
 
 ^   "Hop Farm" .  Santa Fe Brewing . March 12, 2020 . Retrieved  December 26,  2022 . 
 
 ^   Biggers, Ashley M. (May 20, 2022).  "The Country's First Native American Woman-Owned Brewery Doesn't Want to be Its Last" .  Eater . Retrieved  December 26,  2022 . 
 
 ^   "Four New Mexico breweries bring home four medals from GABF awards ceremony" .  DARK SIDE BREW CREW . September 11, 2021 . Retrieved  December 26,  2022 . 
 
 
 
 
 v t e State  of  New Mexico Santa Fe  (capital) Topics 
 Index 
 Census-designated places 
 Cuisine 
 Bizcochito 
 Chile 
 Culture 
 Delegations 
 Geography 
 Government 
 History 
 Nuevo México 
 Territory 
 Landmarks 
 Military 
 National Guard 
 Civil War 
 World War II 
 Music 
 New Mexico music 
 New Mexicans 
 Hispanos 
 Pueblos and Tribes 
 Paleontology 
 Symbols 
 Tourist attractions 
 Transportation 
 Society 
 Crime 
 Demographics 
 Economy 
 Education 
 Elections 
 Literature 
 Politics 
 Regions 
 Apachian zone 
 Central New Mexico 
 Chicoma Mountain 
 Chihuahuan Desert 
 Colorado Plateau 
 Eastern New Mexico 
 Llano Estacado 
 Manzano Mountains 
 Mogollon Plateau 
 Northern New Mexico 
 Permian Basin 
 Rio Grande 
 Rocky Mountains 
 San Juan Basin 
 San Luis Valley 
 Sandia Mountains 
 Shortgrass prairie 
 Sangre de Cristo Mountains 
 Wheeler Peak  (highest point) 
 Southwestern New Mexico 
 Cities 
 Alamogordo 
 Albuquerque  ( Metropolitan Area ) 
 Aztec 
 Artesia 
 Bloomfield 
 Carlsbad 
 Clovis 
 Corrales 
 Deming 
 Española 
 Farmington 
 Gallup 
 Grants 
 Hobbs 
 Kirtland 
 Las Cruces 
 Las Vegas 
 Los Alamos 
 Los Lunas 
 Lovington 
 Portales 
 Raton 
 Rio Rancho 
 Roswell 
 Ruidoso 
 Santa Fe 
 Silver City 
 Socorro 
 Sunland Park 
 Taos 
 Tucumcari 
 Counties See:  List of counties in New Mexico 
 Bernalillo 
 Catron 
 Chaves 
 Cibola 
 Colfax 
 Curry 
 De Baca 
 Doña Ana 
 Eddy 
 Grant 
 Guadalupe 
 Harding 
 Hidalgo 
 Lea 
 Lincoln 
 Los Alamos 
 Luna 
 McKinley 
 Mora 
 Otero 
 Quay 
 Rio Arriba 
 Roosevelt 
 San Juan 
 San Miguel 
 Sandoval 
 Santa Fe 
 Sierra 
 Socorro 
 Taos 
 Torrance 
 Union 
 Valencia   New Mexico portal 
 v t e Mexican cuisine List of Mexican dishes Soups and stews 
 Birria 
 Caldo de pollo 
 Caldo de queso 
 Caldo de siete mares 
 Caldo tlalpeño 
 Caldo Xóchitl 
 Chileatole 
 Clemole 
 Cocido 
 Lime soup 
 Manchamanteles 
 Menudo 
 Mole de olla 
 Pozole 
 Sopa de fideo 
 Sopa de nopal 
 Tortilla soup 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rice dishes 
 Arroz a la tumbada 
 Arroz blanco 
 Arroz negro 
 Arroz poblano 
 Arroz rojo 
 Morisqueta 
 Bean dishes 
 Borracho beans 
 Frijoles charros 
 Frijoles negros 
 Frijoles Puercos 
 Refried beans 
 Egg dishes 
 Huevos a la mexicana 
 Huevos divorciados 
 Huevos motuleños 
 Huevos rancheros 
 Machacado con huevo 
 Vegetable dishes 
 Chile relleno 
 Chiles en escabeche 
 Chiles en nogada 
 Chipotle 
 Elote 
 Esquites 
 Guasanas 
 Nopal asado 
 Rajas con crema 
 Romeritos 
 Meat dishes 
 Al pastor 
 Barbacoa 
 Cabrito 
 Discada 
 Entomatada 
 Mixiote 
 Moronga 
 Pastel azteca 
 Relleno negro 
 Tripas 
 Poultry 
 Arroz con pollo 
 Chicken feet 
 Escabeche oriental 
 Mole poblano 
 Pollo motuleño 
 Tinga de pollo 
 Tlatonile 
 Pork 
 Adobada 
 Calabacitas con puerco 
 Carne de chango 
 Carnitas 
 Chicharrón en salsa 
 Chileajo de cerdo 
 Chilorio 
 Chorizo 
 Cochinita pibil 
 Cueritos 
 Poc chuc 
 Beef 
 Alambre 
 Aporreadillo 
 Albóndigas al chipotle 
 Beef brain 
 Beef tongue 
 Cabeza 
 Carne a la tampiqueña 
 Carne asada 
 Carne seca 
 Criadillas 
 Machaca 
 Milanesa 
 Pachola 
 Picadillo 
 Puntas 
 Quesobirria 
 Salpicón 
 Tinga de res 
 Seafood 
 Aguachil 
 Cahuamanta 
 Camarones al ajillo 
 Ceviche 
 Huachinango a la Veracruzana 
 Mixmole de pescado 
 Mojarra frita 
 Pan de cazón 
 Pescadito 
 Pescado al ajillo 
 Pulpo a la campechana 
 Other protein dishes 
 Chahuis 
 Chapulines 
 Escamoles 
 Huitlacoche 
 Jumiles 
 Maguey worm 
 Cheese dishes 
 Chicharrón de queso 
 Quesadilla 
 Queso en salsa 
 Queso flameado 
 Antojitos 
 Empalme 
 Enchilada 
 Guajolota 
 Nachos 
 Quesadilla 
 Taco 
 Taquito 
 Corn dough 
 Cazuelita 
 Chalupa 
 Chilaquiles 
 Chimichanga 
 Chochoyote 
 Corn tortilla 
 Corunda 
 Doblada 
 Duros 
 Gordita 
 Huarache 
 Molote 
 Panucho 
 Papadzules 
 Piedra 
 Salbut 
 Sope  or  Memela 
 Tamale 
 Tlacoyo 
 Tlayuda 
 Tostada 
 Totopo 
 Wheat dough 
 Burrito 
 Cemita 
 Gringas 
 Mollete 
 Pambazo 
 Paste 
 Sincronizada 
 Torta 
 Wheat tortilla 
 Sauces and condiments 
 Adobo 
 Mole 
 Mole blanco 
 Mole poblano 
 Mole verde 
 Recado rojo 
 Salsa 
 Salsa roja 
 Salsa verde 
 Desserts and sweets 
 Agave syrup 
 Alegría 
 Alfajor 
 Arroz con leche 
 Bionico 
 Brazo gitano 
 Cajeta de Celaya 
 Capirotada 
 Chongos zamoranos 
 Churros 
 Cocada 
 Coyotas 
 Flan de leche 
 Dulce de leche 
 Fried ice cream 
 Mango con chile 
 Marquesita 
 Mazapán 
 Nicuatole 
 Orejas 
 Panela 
 Polvorón 
 Tres leches cake 
 Turrón 
 Salads 
 Caesar salad 
 Curtido 
 Nopalitos 
 Guacamole 
 Pico de gallo 
 Breads 
 Bolillo 
 Buñuelo 
 Cemita 
 Cochinito de piloncillo 
 Cocol 
 Concha 
 Pan de muerto 
 Pan dulce 
 Rosca 
 de reyes 
 Beverages 
 Agua de Jamaica 
 Atole 
 Beer 
 Café de olla 
 Chamoyada 
 Champurrado 
 Curado 
 Horchata 
 Licuado 
 Margarita 
 Mexican tea culture 
 Ponche 
 Popo 
 Pozol 
 Tascalate 
 Tejate 
 Variants Regional 
 Aztec 
 Baja Med 
 Chiapas 
 Veracruz 
 Oaxaca 
 American 
 New Mexican 
 Tex-Mex 
 
 Comal 
 Escuela de Gastronomía Mexicana 
 Taco stand 
 Chocolate 
 Vanilla 
 
   Food portal 
   Mexico portal 
   Category 
   Commons 
   Cookbook 
   WikiProject 
 
 v t e Cuisine of the United States Historical 
 Cuisine of the Thirteen Colonies 
 Thanksgiving dinner 
 Regional General 
 List of regional dishes of the United States 
 List of regional beverages of the United States 
 Northeast 
 Mid-Atlantic 
 New Jersey 
 New York
 New York City 
 Pennsylvania
 Allentown 
 Philadelphia 
 New England 
 South 
 Appalachia 
 Floribbean 
 Kentucky 
 Louisiana
 Creole 
 New Orleans 
 Lowcountry 
 Texas 
 Barbecue in Texas 
 Tex-Mex 
 Midwest 
 Chicago 
 Cincinnati 
 Kansas City-style barbecue 
 Omaha 
 St. Louis 
 Wisconsin 
 West 
 California 
 Southwestern 
 New Mexican 
 Pacific Northwestern 
 Hawaii 
 Territories 
 Puerto Rico 
 Ethnic 
 Cajun 
 American Cambodian 
 American Chinese 
 Greek American 
 Soul food 
 Mexican 
 Native American 
 New Mexican (Neomexicano and Pueblo) 
 Pennsylvania Dutch 
 Italian American 
 Tejano 
 Tlingit 
 Filipino-American 
 American Jewish 
 List articles 
 American foods 
 American breads 
 American cheeses 
 American desserts 
 American regional and fusion cuisines 
 American sandwiches 
 American breakfast foods 
 Foods of the Southern United States 
 Soul foods and dishes 
 Miscellaneous 
 Barbecue 
 Christmas food 
 Fast food 
 Drinks 
 Sweet tea 
 Root beer 
 Coca-Cola 
 Egg cream 
 Milkshake 
 Shirley Temple 
 Italian soda 
 Pepsi 
 American tea culture 
   Category: American cuisine 
 v t e Cuisines Continental 
 African 
 North 
 West 
 list 
 Americas 
 Caribbean 
 North 
 South 
 list 
 Asian 
 Caucasian 
 Central 
 Indian subcontinent 
 Levantine 
 list 
 European 
 Balkan 
 Central 
 Eastern 
 list 
 Oceanic 
 Intercontinental
 Global 
 Latin American 
 Mediterranean 
 Middle Eastern 
 National  and regional 
 Afghan 
 Albanian 
 Algerian 
 American 
 Californian 
 Floribbean 
 Hawaiian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Lowcountry (South Carolina) 
 New England 
 New Mexico 
 Pacific Northwest 
 Pennsylvania Dutch 
 Puerto Rican 
 Southern US 
 Southwest US 
 Texas 
 Angolan 
 Argentine 
 Armenian 
 Australian 
 Austrian 
 Azerbaijani 
 Bahraini 
 Bangladeshi 
 Barbadian 
 Belarusian 
 Belgian 
 Belizean 
 Beninese 
 Bhutanese 
 Bolivian 
 Bosnian-Herzegovinian 
 Botswana 
 Brazilian 
 British 
 Channel Islands 
 English 
 Gibraltarian 
 Northern Irish 
 Saint Helena 
 Scottish 
 Welsh 
 Bruneian 
 Bulgarian 
 Burkinabé 
 Burmese 
 Burundian 
 Cambodian 
 Cameroonian 
 Canadian 
 Acadian 
 Québécois 
 Central African Republic 
 Chadian 
 Chilean 
 Chinese 
 Cantonese 
 Hong Kong 
 Macanese 
 Tibetan 
 Xinjiang 
 Colombian 
 Congolese 
 Corsican 
 Croatian 
 Cuban 
 Cypriot 
 Czech 
 Danish 
 Faroese 
 Greenlandic 
 Djiboutian 
 Dominican 
 Dominican Republic 
 Dutch 
 East Timorese 
 Ecuadorian 
 Egyptian 
 Emirati 
 Equatorial Guinean 
 Eritrean 
 Estonian 
 Ethiopian 
 Fijian 
 Filipino 
 Finnish 
 French 
 Occitan 
 French Guianan 
 Gabonese 
 Gambian 
 Georgian 
 German 
 Ghanaian 
 Greek 
 Cretan 
 Epirotic 
 Greek Macedonian 
 Heptanesean 
 Guatemalan 
 Guinea-Bissauan 
 Guinean 
 Haitian 
 Honduran 
 Hungarian 
 Icelandic 
 Indian 
 Arunachalese 
 Assamese 
 Bengali 
 Bihari 
 Goan 
 Gujarati 
 Himachal Pradesh 
 Kashmiri 
 Jharkhandi 
 Karnataka 
 Kerala 
 Maharashtrian 
 Manipuri 
 Meghalayan 
 Mizo 
 Naga 
 Odia 
 Punjabi 
 Rajasthani 
 Sikkimese 
 Sindhi 
 Tamil 
 Telangana 
 Telugu 
 Indonesian 
 Acehnese 
 Balinese 
 Banjar 
 Batak 
 Betawi 
 Indo 
 Javanese 
 Madurese 
 Makassar 
 Minahasan 
 Minangkabau 
 Palembangese 
 Sundanese 
 Iranian 
 Iraqi 
 Irish 
 Israeli 
 Italian 
 Abruzzese 
 Ligurian 
 Lombard 
 Lucanian 
 Neapolitan 
 Roman 
 Sardinian 
 Sicilian 
 Venetian 
 Ivorian 
 Jamaican 
 Japanese 
 Okinawan 
 Jordanian 
 Kazakh 
 Kenyan 
 Korean 
 North Korean 
 South Korean 
 Kosovan 
 Kuwaiti 
 Kyrgyz 
 Lao 
 Latvian 
 Lebanese 
 Lesotho 
 Liberian 
 Libyan 
 Liechtensteiner 
 Lithuanian 
 Luxembourg 
 Macedonian 
 Malagasy 
 Malawian 
 Malaysian 
 Sabahan 
 Sarawakian 
 Maldivian 
 Malian 
 Maltese 
 Mauritanian 
 Mauritian 
 Mexican 
 Moldovan 
 Monégasque 
 Mongolian 
 Montenegrin 
 Moroccan 
 Mozambican 
 Namibian 
 Nauruan 
 Nepalese 
 New Zealand 
 Nicaraguan 
 Niger 
 Nigerian 
 Niuean 
 Norwegian 
 Omani 
 Pakistani 
 Palestinian 
 Panamanian 
 Peruvian 
 Polish 
 Portuguese 
 Qatari 
 Romanian  (incl.  Transylvanian Saxon ) 
 Russian 
 Bashkir 
 Chechen 
 Circassian 
 Komi 
 Mordovian 
 Sakha 
 Tatar 
 Udmurt 
 Yamal 
 Rwandan 
 Saint Lucian 
 Salvadoran 
 Sammarinese 
 São Tomé and Príncipe 
 Saudi Arabian 
 Senegalese 
 Serbian 
 Seychellois 
 Sierra Leonean 
 Singaporean 
 Slovak 
 Slovenian 
 Somali 
 South African 
 Spanish 
 Andalusian 
 Asturian 
 Balearic 
 Basque 
 Canarian 
 Cantabrian 
 Catalan 
 Extremaduran 
 Galician 
 Manchegan 
 Valencian 
 Sri Lankan 
 Sudanese 
 Swazi 
 Swedish 
 Swiss 
 Syrian 
 Taiwanese 
 Tajik 
 Tanzanian 
 Zanzibari 
 Thai 
 Togolese 
 Tunisian 
 Turkish 
 Turkmen 
 Trinidadian and Tobagonian 
 Ugandan 
 Ukrainian 
 Uruguayan 
 Uzbek 
 Venezuelan 
 Vietnamese 
 Western Saharan 
 Yemeni 
 Zambian 
 Zimbabwean 
 Ethnic 
 Ainu 
 Arab 
 Indonesian 
 Aromanian 
 Assyrian 
 Balochi 
 Berber 
 Cajun 
 Chinese 
 American 
 Canadian 
 Chifa 
 Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Crimean Tatar 
 Greek American 
 Hazaragi 
 Indian 
 Anglo-Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Indigenous American 
 Inuit 
 Italian American 
 Kurdish 
 Livonian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Malay 
 Ossetian 
 Parsi 
 Pashtun 
 Peranakan 
 Romani 
 Sámi 
 Soul food 
 Sylheti 
 Transylvanian Saxon 
 Yup'ik 
 Religious 
 Buddhist 
 Christian 
 Goan Catholic 
 Mangalorean Catholic 
 Mennonite 
 Hindu 
 Islamic 
 Chinese 
 Ital 
 Jain 
 Jewish 
 American 
 Ashkenazi 
 Bukharan 
 Ethiopian 
 Mizrahi 
 Sephardic 
 Syrian 
 Ritual slaughter 
 Sikh 
 Historical 
 Ancient Egyptian 
 Ancient Greek 
 Ancient Israelite 
 Ancient Roman 
 Antebellum America 
 Aztec 
 Byzantine 
 Early modern European 
 Historical Chinese 
 Historical Indian subcontinent 
 Historical North Indian and Pakistani 
 History of agriculture 
 History of alcoholic drinks 
 History of bread 
 History of seafood 
 History of vegetarianism 
 Historical Argentine 
 Historical Japanese 
 Inca 
 Mayan 
 Muisca 
 Mughal 
 Medieval 
 Ottoman 
 Peasant 
 Soviet 
 Thirteen Colonies 
 Styles 
 Classique 
 Fast food 
 Fusion 
 New American 
 Eurasian 
 Haute 
 Molecular gastronomy 
 Note by Note 
 Nouvelle 
 Lists 
 List of cuisines 
 List of historical cuisines 
 Lists of prepared foods 
 Related 
 Cookbook 
 Cooking 
 Culinary arts 
 Drink 
 Food 
 history 
 Diet 
 Meal preparation 
 
   Food portal 
   Drink portal 
   Category 
   Commons 
   Cookbook 
   WikiProject 
   Outline 
 
 Authority control : National libraries  
 Israel 
 United States 
 
  
NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw2408
Cached time: 20230310194539
Cache expiry: 1814400
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc, no‐toc‐conversion]
CPU time usage: 1.271 seconds
Real time usage: 1.513 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 10312/1000000
Post‐expand include size: 342107/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 11267/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 16/100
Expensive parser function count: 15/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 250844/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.738/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 19143220/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/400
 
 
Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1157.784      1 -total
 39.52%  457.597      1 Template:Reflist
 16.08%  186.168     25 Template:Cite_book
 14.31%  165.664     33 Template:Cite_web
 13.97%  161.722     61 Template:Lang
  9.03%  104.590     18 Template:Rp
  8.54%   98.830     18 Template:R/superscript
  7.27%   84.131      1 Template:American_cuisine
  7.11%   82.367      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  4.58%   53.068      7 Template:Navbox
 
  Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:idhash:2281834-0!canonical and timestamp 20230310194538 and revision id 1135016807. Rendering was triggered because: page-view
  
 esi <esi:include src="/esitest-fa8a495983347898/content" />  
 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=New_Mexican_cuisine&oldid=1135016807 " 
 Categories :  New Mexican cuisine Cuisine of the Southwestern United States Mexican-American cuisine New Mexico culture Hidden categories:  CS1 Italian-language sources (it) CS1 Dutch-language sources (nl) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use mdy dates from May 2018 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2019 Articles needing additional references from July 2018 All articles needing additional references Articles containing Spanish-language text Articles needing additional references from August 2017 All accuracy disputes Articles with disputed statements from January 2018 Articles with J9U identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  This page was last edited on 22 January 2023, at 02:44  (UTC) . 
 Text is available under the  Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0 ;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the  Terms of Use  and  Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the  Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. 
 
 
 Privacy policy 
 About Wikipedia 
 Disclaimers 
 Contact Wikipedia 
 Mobile view 
 Developers 
 Statistics 
 Cookie statement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
