
 
 
 Jump to content 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle sidebar 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Create account Log in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Personal tools 
 
 
 
 
   Create account   Log in 
 
 
 
 
		Pages for logged out editors  learn more 
 
 
 Contributions Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Navigation 
 
 
 Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate 
 
 
 
 
 Contribute 
 
 
 Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file 
 
 
 
 
 Tools 
 
 
 What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item 
 
 
 
 
 Print/export 
 
 
 Download as PDF Printable version 
 
 
 
 
 In other projects 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons Wikibooks 
 
 
 
 
 Languages 
 
 On this Wikipedia the language links are at the top of the page across from the article title.  Go to top . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CentralNotice  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Contents 
 move to sidebar 
 hide 
 
 
 
 
 (Top) 
 
 
 
 
 
 1 Typical main meals 
 
 
				Toggle Typical main meals subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 1.1 Breakfast ( frokost ) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.2 Lunch ( lunsj ) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.3 Dinner ( middag ) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.4 Evening meal ( kveldsmat ) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 Meat 
 
 
				Toggle Meat subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 2.1 Game 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.2 Offal 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.3 Seafood 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.4 Curing 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.5 Sauces and marinades 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 Fruit and desserts 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4 Breads 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5 Cheese 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6 Beverages 
 
 
				Toggle Beverages subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 6.1 Coffee 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6.2 Alcohol 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6.3 Soda water 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 7 People 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8 See also 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 9 References 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 10 External links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
						Toggle the table of contents
					 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle the table of contents 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Norwegian cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 24 languages 
 
 
 
 العربية Беларуская Čeština Deutsch Eesti Español فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Italiano ქართული Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Русский Suomi Svenska Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 
 Edit links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Article Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 English 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 More 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
 
 
 Culinary traditions of Norway 
 
 
 This article  needs additional citations for  verification .  Please help  improve this article  by  adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources:   "Norwegian cuisine"  –  news   ·   newspapers   ·   books   ·   scholar   ·   JSTOR   ( April 2007 )  ( Learn how and when to remove this template message ) 
 Part of  a series  on the Culture of Norway 
 History 
 People 
 Languages 
 Mythology  and  FolkloreScandinavian folklore 
 Cuisine 
 Festivals 
 Religion 
 Christianity 
 Adventist Church 
 Anglican Church 
 Baptist Church 
 Church of Norway 
 Eastern Orthodox Church 
 Evangelical Lutheran Free Church 
 LDS Church 
 Oriental Orthodox Church 
 Pentecostal Church 
 Roman Catholic Church 
 Bahá'í Faith 
 Buddhism 
 Irreligion 
 Islam 
 Ahmadiyya 
 Judaism 
 Hinduism 
 Neopaganism 
 Sikhism 
 Theosophy 
 
 Art 
 Literature 
 Music 
 Media 
 Radio 
 Television 
 Cinema 
 
 Sport 
 Monuments 
 World Heritage Sites 
 
 Symbols 
 Flag 
 Coat of arms 
 National anthem 
 
   Norway portal v t e 
 Norwegian cuisine  in its traditional form is based largely on the raw materials readily available in  Norway  and its mountains, wilderness, and coast. It differs in many respects from continental cuisine through the stronger focus on  game  and  fish . Many of the traditional dishes are the result of using conserved materials, necessary because of the long winters.
 Modern Norwegian cuisine, although still strongly influenced by its traditional background, has been influenced by  globalization :  pasta ,  pizza ,  tacos , and the like are as common as  meatballs  and  cod  as staple foods.
 
 
 Typical main meals [ edit ] 
   Smørbrød , an open Norwegian sandwich 
 Most  Norwegians  eat three or four regular meals a day, usually consisting of a cold breakfast with coffee, a cold (usually packed) lunch at work and a hot dinner at home with the family. Depending on the timing of family dinner (and personal habit), some may add a cold meal in the late evening, typically a simple sandwich.
 
 Breakfast ( frokost ) [ edit ] 
 The basic Norwegian breakfast consists of bread,  brown cheese , and milk. Traditionally this meal included a porridge such as  grøt  (flour, rice or groats boiled with milk) or  rømmegrøt  (with sour cream instead). [1] 
 
 Lunch ( lunsj ) [ edit ] 
 For most Norwegians, weekday  packed lunch  usually consists of very simple open-faced  sandwiches  known as  matpakke , with each slice separated with smaller sheets of  wax paper  called  mellomleggspapir.  More extensive open-faced sandwiches (with multiple toppings) are considered  smørbrød .
 Cafeterias commonly feature salad bars, warm meals, and dairy products like  yogurt ,  skyr  and  kvarg .
 
 Dinner ( middag ) [ edit ] 
 Norwegians usually eat dinner starting around 4–7 PM. This is the most important meal of the day and typically includes carbohydrate-rich foods such as potatoes and protein-rich foods such as meat or fish.
 
 Evening meal ( kveldsmat ) [ edit ] 
 Norwegians usually eat a very small meal later in the evening before bed. This may consist of foods similar to what is prepared for breakfast.
 
 Meat [ edit ] 
 Preserved meat and  sausages  come in a large variety of regional variations, and are sometimes accompanied by sour cream dishes and flatbread or wheat/potato wraps. Particularly sought after delicacies include the  fenalår , a slow-cured lamb's leg, and  morr , usually a smoked cured sausage, though the exact definition may vary regionally.
 Lamb and  mutton  is very popular in autumn, often used in  fårikål  (mutton stew with cabbage).  Pinnekjøtt —steamed cured and sometimes smoked mutton ribs, traditionally on a bed of birch sticks, hence the name, meaning "stick meat" —is traditionally served as Christmas dinner in the western parts of Norway. An oddity is  smalahove , a salted, or salted and smoked, lamb's head.
 Other meat dishes include:
 Kjøttkaker : Rough, large patties — about the size of a child's fist — of ground beef, onion, salt, and pepper—generally served with  sauce espagnole  ( Kjøttkakesaus  or  Brunsaus  in Norwegian). Potatoes, stewed peas or cabbage and carrots are served on the side. Lingonberry jam is a common relish.
 Kjøttboller  –  Meatballs : A rougher version of Swedish meatballs. Served with mashed potatoes and cream sauce or  sauce espagnole  depending on the locality.
 Svinekoteletter  –  Pork chops : simply braised and served with potatoes and fried onions or whatever vegetables are available.
 Svinestek  –  Roast pork : a typical Sunday dinner, served with pickled cabbage (a sweeter
variety of German sauerkraut), gravy, vegetables, and potatoes.
 All good cuts of meat are roasted, as in any cuisine. Side dishes vary with season and what goes with the meat. Roast leg of lamb is an Easter classic, roast beef is not very common and game is often roasted for festive occasions.
 
   Lobscouse 
 Lobscouse  –  stew: A stew consisting of cooked meat and various vegetables like potatoes, carrots, swede and onion. Lobscouse is often served with flatbrød.
 Fårikål  – mutton stew: the national dish of Norway. Preparation is very simple: cabbage and mutton are layered in a big pot
along with black peppercorns and salt (and, in some recipes, wheat flour to thicken the sauce), covered with water and simmered until the meat is very tender. Potatoes are served on the side.
 Stekte pølser  – fried sausages: fresh sausages are fried and served with vegetables, potatoes, peas and perhaps some gravy.
 Syltelabb  is usually eaten around and before Christmas time, made from boiled, salt-cured  pig's trotter . They are traditionally eaten using one's fingers, and served as a snack and sometimes served with beetroot, mustard, and fresh bread or with  lefse  or flatbread. Historically  syltelabb  is served with the traditional Norwegian  juleøl  (English: Christmas ale), beer and liquor (like  aquavit ). This is because  Syltelabb  is very salty food.
 
   Pinnekjøtt with  swede   purée  and  potatoes 
 Pinnekjøtt  is a main course dinner dish of  lamb  or mutton ribs, and this dish is largely associated with the celebration of  Christmas  in Western Norway and is rapidly gaining popularity in other regions as well. 31% of Norwegians say they eat  pinnekjøtt  for their family Christmas dinner.  Pinnekjøtt  is often served with puréed swede (rutabaga) and potatoes, beer and  akevitt .
 Smalahove  is a traditional dish, but really more of a local oddity, usually eaten around Christmas time, made from a sheep's head. The skin and fleece of the head are torched, the brain removed, and the head is salted, sometimes smoked, and dried. The head is boiled for about 3 hours and served with mashed swede and potatoes.
 Sodd  is a traditional Norwegian soup-like meal with mutton and meatballs. Usually, vegetables such as potatoes or carrots also are included.
 Gryterett  (a.k.a. gryte, lit. saucepan meal) are stews with ground meat from cow or lamb, rice (sometimes replaced with pasta), tomato, mild spices, and small amounts of other vegetables like paprika, onion, kidney beans or champignon. The meal was popularised in the 1970s by  Toro  powderbag meals [2]  with often inaccurate geographical monickers (e.g. Mexican, American), but is now also found in homemade varieties.
 
 Game [ edit ] 
   Reinsdyrsteik  (reindeer roast) served with  lingonberry jam 
 High cuisine is very reliant on  game , such as  moose ,  reindeer  (strictly speaking not game, as nearly all Norwegian reindeer are semi-domesticated),  mountain hare ,  duck ,  rock ptarmigan  and  fowl . These meats are often hunted and sold or passed around as gifts, but are also available at shops nationwide, and tend to be served at social occasions. Because these meats have a distinct, strong taste, they will often be served with rich sauces spiced with crushed  juniper berries , and a sour-sweet jam of  lingonberries  on the side.
 
 Joika  – Meatballs made from a mixture of meat from cow, reindeer, lamb, and pork rind, [3]  served with mashed potatoes in very thick gravy. The gravy includes  brunost  or  goat milk . The term most commonly refers to a commercial brand with airsealed (prev. canned) packaging, with homemade varieties being uncommon. 
 Offal [ edit ] 
 Offal is eaten extensively,  leverpostei  (liver pâté) being one of the most common spreads for sandwiches, along with cold cuts such as  sylte  (brawn) and  tunge  (beef tongue).
 
 Seafood [ edit ] 
   Salmon dishes :  gravlax  in the middle, cold-smoked on the left and warm-smoked on the right. 
 The one traditional Norse dish with a claim to international popularity is  smoked salmon . It is now a major export, and could be considered the most important Scandinavian contribution to modern international cuisine. Smoked salmon exists traditionally in many varieties, and is often served with scrambled eggs, dill, sandwiches and mustard sauce. Another traditional salmon product is  gravlaks , (literally "buried salmon"). Traditionally,  gravlaks  would be cured for 24 hours in a mix of sugar and salt and herbs (dill). The salmon may then be frozen or kept in a chilled area.  Since  grav  means "buried" it is a common misunderstanding that the salmon is buried in the ground, (similar to how  rakfisk  is still prepared). This was the case in the medieval ages because the fermenting process was important, however, this is not the case today.  Gravlaks  is often sold under more sales-friendly names internationally. A more peculiar Norwegian fish dish is  Rakfisk , which consists of  fermented   trout , similar to Swedish  surströmming .
 Until the 20th century,  shellfish  were not eaten to any extent. This was partly due to the abundance of fish and the time involved in catching shellfish as compared to its nutritional value, as well as the fact that such food spoils rather quickly, even in a northern climate. However, prawns, crabs, and mussels have become quite popular, especially during summer. Lobster is, of course, popular, but restrictions on the catch (size and season) limit consumption. Lobster has become rather rare and expensive.
 People gather for  krabbefest , which translates to "crab party" feasts, either eating readily cooked crabs from a fishmonger or cooking live crabs in a large pan. This is typically done outdoors, the style being rather rustic with only bread, mayonnaise, and wedges of lemon to go with the crab. Crabs are caught in pots by both professionals and amateurs, prawns are caught by small trawlers and sold ready cooked at the quays. It is popular to buy half a kilogram of pie prawns and to eat it on the quay, feeding the waste to seagulls. Beer or white wine is the normal accompaniment.
 The largest Norwegian food export (in fact the main Norwegian export of any kind for most of the country's history) in the past has been  stockfish  ( tørrfisk  in Norwegian). The Atlantic cod variety known as  skrei  because of its migrating habits, has been a source of wealth for millennia, fished annually in what is known as the  Lofotfiske  named for the island chain of  Lofoten . Stockfish has been a staple food internationally for centuries, in particular on the Iberian peninsula and the African coast. Both during the age of sail and in the industrial age, stockfish played a part in world history as an enabling food for cross-Atlantic trade and the slave trade triangle.
 A large number of fish dishes are popular today, based on such species as salmon, cod, herring, sardine, and mackerel. Seafood is used fresh, smoked, salted or pickled. Variations on  creamed  seafood soups are common along the coastline.
 Due to seafood's availability, seafood dishes along the coast are usually based on fresh produce, typically poached (fish) and very lightly spiced with herbs, pepper, and salt. While coastal Norwegians may consider the head, roe, and liver an inseparable part of a seafood meal, most inland restaurants do not include these in the meal. In  Northern Norway  a dish called  mølje , consisting of poached fish, roe, and liver, is often considered a "national dish" of the region, and it is common for friends and family to get together at least once during winter for a  møljekalas  (loosely translated, "mølje feast"). A number of the fish species available have traditionally been avoided (especially those perceived as scavengers, due to a fear of indirectly eating friends or family members who had died at sea) or reserved for bait, but most common seafood is part of the modern menu.
 Because of industrial whaling,  whale meat  was commonly used as a cheap substitute for beef early in the 20th century. Consumption has been declining over time, but it is still widely available in all parts of the country and most Norwegians eat it occasionally. It is not considered controversial in Norway.
 Other fish dishes include:
 
   Lutefisk 
 Rakfisk  – Norwegian fish dish made from trout or sometimes char, salted and fermented for two to three months, or even up to a year, then eaten without further cooking. Rakfisk must be prepared and stored very hygienically, due to the risk of developing  Clostridium botulinum  (which causes  botulism ) if the fish contain certain bacteria during the fermentation process.
 Torsk  – Cod: poached, simply served with boiled potatoes and melted butter. Carrots, fried
bacon, roe and cod liver may also accompany the fish.  A delicacy which is somewhat popular in Norway is  torsketunger , cod's tongue.
 
   Fish Market in Oslo. Fish is an important part of Norwegian cuisine 
 Lutefisk  – lyed fish: a modern preparation made of stockfish (dried cod or ling) or  klippfisk  (dried and salted cod) that has been steeped in  lye . It was prepared this way as a way to preserve the fish for longer periods prior to refrigeration. It is somewhat popular in the United States as a heritage food. It retains a place in Norwegian cuisine (especially on the coast) as a traditional food around Christmas time.
 Preparation and accompaniment is as for fresh cod, although beer and aquavit is served on the side.
 Stekt fisk  – braised fish: almost all fish are braised, but as a rule, the larger specimens tend to be poached and the smaller braised. The fish is filleted, dusted with flour, salt and pepper and braised in butter. Potatoes are served on the side, and the butter from the pan used as a sauce or food cream is added to the butter to make a creamy sauce.
 Fatty fish like herring and brisling are given the same treatment. Popular accompaniments are sliced and fresh-pickled cucumbers and sour cream.
 Fiskesuppe  – fish soup: A white, milk-based soup with vegetables, usually carrots, onions, potato and various kinds of fish.
 Spekesild  – salt cured  herring  which for centuries was used to fight hunger, along with boiled potatoes, beets, raw onions, dill, butter and flatbrød.
 Sursild  –  pickled herring : a variety of pickle-sauces are used, ranging from simple vinegar-
sugar-based sauces with tomato, mustard, and sherry-based sauces. Pickled herring is served as an  hors-d'oeuvre  or on rye bread as a lunch buffet. This dish is a popular Christmas and New Year's Eve/holiday lunch in Norway.
 
 Curing [ edit ] 
 The basic methods of curing are used: drying, salting, smoking and fermenting. Stockfish is fish (mainly cod) dried on racks, meats are dried, salt curing is common for both meats and fish. Fermenting (as in the preparation of  sauerkraut ) is used for trout. Smoking is mainly used on the west coast as an addition to drying and salting, perhaps due to the wet climate.
 
 Spekemat  (lit. cured food) is Norwegian flatbread with scrambled eggs, cured ham, margarine and  sour cream ; usually served alongside  rømmegrøt  (Sourcream porridge) for dinner. 
 Sauces and marinades [ edit ] 
 Along with the rest of Scandinavia, Norway is one of the few places outside Asia where sweet and sour flavoring is used extensively. The sweet and sour flavor goes best with fish. There is also a treatment called "graving", literally burying, a curing method where salt and sugar are used as curing agents. Although salmon or trout are the most common, other fish and meat also get a treatment similar to  gravlaks .
 Sandefjordsmør  – a traditional butter and cream sauce typically served with fish dishes such as  salmon , garnished with fresh dill and peppercorn. This sauce was reputedly first concocted in  Sandefjord , a coastal city in  Vestfold , in 1959. [4] 
 Gravlaks  – sweet and salty cured salmon: a filleted side of salmon or trout that has been frozen for at least 24 hours to kill off  parasites , is cured with the fillet and is covered with a half-salt, half-sugar mixture, spiced with black pepper, dill and  akevitt , covered with  clingfilm , and cured in the refrigerator for three days, turned once a day.
 Gravet elg  – sweet and salt-cured moose: this treatment may be used for all red meat, but works best with game and beef. It is the same procedure as for  gravlaks , but aquavit is often substituted for brandy, and juniper berries for dill.
 Pickled herring : a pickle is made with vinegar, sugar, herbs and spices like dill, mustard seed, black peppercorns, onion and so on. The pickle must be acidic enough to prevent bacterial growth. Rinsed, salt-cured herring is added and allowed to stand for at least 24 hours.
 Tomato pickled herring : this pickle features a thick sauce: 4 Tablespoons tomato paste, 3 Tablespoons sugar, and 3 Tablespoons vinegar are mixed and thinned with about 4 Tablespoons water, flavoured with black pepper and bay leaf. Salt-cured herring is rinsed, cut in 1 cm (1/3in) thick slices and a raw, sliced onion added. Let stand for at least 24 hours.
 
 Fruit and desserts [ edit ] 
 See also:  List of Norwegian desserts 
   Krumkaker  is a traditional pastry 
 Fruits and berries mature slowly in the cold climate. As a result, they are smaller with a more intense taste. Strawberries,  bilberries ,  lingonberries , raspberries and apples are popular and are part of a variety of desserts, as are cherries in the parts of the country where they are grown. Wild  cloudberry  is regarded as a delicacy. A typical Norwegian dessert on special occasions is cloudberries with whipped or plain cream. Strawberry-apple pie is also popular because of its rich flavour.  Rhubarb  pie ( rabarbrapai  in Norwegian) is another favoured dish in Norway. [ citation needed ] 
 German and Nordic-style cakes and pastries, such as sponge cakes and  Danish pastry  (known as  wienerbrød , literal translation: " Viennese  bread") share the table with a variety of homemade cakes,  waffles  and biscuits.  Cardamom  is a common flavoring. Another Norwegian cake is  Krumkake , a paper-thin rolled cake filled with whipped cream. (Krumkake means 'Curved Cake' or 'Crooked Cake'). Baked  meringues  are known as  pikekyss , literally translated as "girl's kiss". [ citation needed ] 
 During  Christmas  ( jul ), the traditional Norwegian holiday season, many different  dessert  dishes are served including  Julekake , a heavily spiced leavened loaf often coated with sugar and cinnamon, and  Multekrem  (whipped cream with  cloudberries ). [ citation needed ] 
 
 Breads [ edit ] 
   A Norwegian peasant making  flatbread  in the 1910s 
 Bread is an important staple of the Norwegian diet and bakeries, supermarkets, accommodations such as hotels in Norway offer a rich selection of breads. Breads containing a large proportion of whole grain flour ( grovbrød , or "coarse bread") are popular, likely because bread makes up such a substantial part of the Norwegian diet and are therefore expected to be nutritious. 80% of Norwegians regularly eat bread, in the form of open-top sandwiches with butter for breakfast and lunch. [5]  A soft flat bread called  lefse  made out of potato, milk or cream (or sometimes lard) and flour is also very popular.
 The variety of bread available in a common supermarket is rather large:  wittenberger  (crisp-crusted wheat bread),  grovbrød  (whole-wheat bread, often with syrup),  loff  (soft wheat bread), sourdough bread and other German-style breads. Baguettes, ciabatta, bagels and so on are also popular. During the Hanseatic era, cereals were imported in exchange for fish by the  Hanseatic League . Both the German Hanseatic League and the Danish colonizers influenced Norwegian cuisine, bringing continental habits, taste and produce. Norwegians are particularly fond of a crisp crust, regarding a soft crust as a sign of the bread being stale. Oats are used in addition to wheat and rye and constitute perhaps the most unusual cereal employed in bread-making, as compared to continental Europe and the UK. Nuts and seeds (such as sunflower seeds and walnuts) are rather common ingredients, along with olives and sun-dried pickles, used to improve the texture of the bread. [ citation needed ] 
 
 Cheese [ edit ] 
 See also:  List of Norwegian cheeses 
   Gamalost  with some of the granular texture visible 
 Cheese is still extremely popular in Norway, though the variety of traditional products available and commonly in use is severely reduced.  Norvegia  is a common yellow cheese (produced since the 1890s) as is  Jarlsberg cheese  which is also known as a Norwegian export (produced since the 1850s). The sweet  brunost  (lit. brown cheese; not a true cheese, but rather caramelized lactose from goat milk or a mix of goat and/or cow milk) is very popular in cooking and with bread. More sophisticated, traditional, or strong cheeses include  gammalost  (lit. "old cheese"), an over-matured, highly pungent cheese made from sour milk,  Pultost , made from sour milk and  caraway  seeds, and  Nøkkelost , flavored with  cumin  and  cloves .
 
 Beverages [ edit ] 
 Coffee [ edit ] 
 Norway has a particularly strong affinity for  coffee  and is the second highest per capita consumer of coffee in the world, with the average Norwegian drinking 142 L (31 imp gal; 38 US gal), or 9.5 kg (21 lb) of coffee in 2011. In 2018 Norway had the fourth highest per capita coffee consumption in the world, [6]  and it plays a large role in Norwegian culture. It is common to invite people over for coffee and cakes and to drink coffee with dessert after the main courses in get-togethers. Coffee is traditionally served black, usually in a mug, rather than a cup. As in the rest of the West, Italian-style coffee bars have become popular. Coffee is included in one of the most traditional alcoholic beverages in Norway, commonly known as  karsk , from Trøndelag. [7] 
 
 Alcohol [ edit ] 
 Both industrial and small-scale brewing have long traditions in Norway.  In recent years, microbreweries and  craft beer  have become increasingly popular. Despite restrictive alcohol policies, there is a large community of brewers, and a colorful variety of beverages, some legal, some less so. The most popular industrial beers are usually pilsners and red beers ( bayer ), while traditional beer is much richer, with a high alcohol and malt content. The ancient practice of brewing  Juleøl  (Christmas beer) persists even today, and imitations of these are available before Christmas, in shops and, for the more potent versions, at  state monopoly outlets . Many Norwegians brew their own beer, and there are also a large number of  breweries and microbreweries .  Cider brewing has faced tough barriers to commercial production due to alcohol regulations. The famous honey wine,  mjød  (mead), is mostly a drink for connoisseurs, Norse and medieval historical re-enactors, and practitioners of  åsatru  and other Norse neopagan religions. The climate has not been hospitable to grapes for millennia, and wines and more potent drinks are available only from the wine monopolies.
 Distilled beverages include  akevitt , a yellow-tinged liquor spiced with  caraway seeds , also known as  akvavit  or other variations on the Latin  aqua vitae  – water of life. The Norwegian  linie  style is distinctive for its maturing process, crossing the equator in sherry casks stored in the hull of a ship, giving it more taste and character than the rawer styles of other Scandinavian  akevittar . Norway also produces some vodkas, bottled water and fruit juices.
 In rural Norway, it is still common to find  hjemmebrent  ( moonshine , literally "home burnt"). Even for personal consumption, it is illegal by Norwegian law to produce distilled alcohol. If the product has more than 60% alcohol by volume, it is defined as a narcotic by the law and the punishments are even harsher than for other drugs. The traditional home distiller is mostly left alone by the law enforcers, but those who produce on a larger scale and sell the product are not. [8] 
 In Norway beer is available in stores from 09:00 to 20:00 on weekdays and from 09:00 to 18:00 on Saturdays. Wine and spirits can be bought until 18:00 on weekdays and until 15:00 on Saturdays in government-owned and run liquor shops ( Vinmonopolet ). Only "true" grocery stores are allowed to sell beer; gas stations and so-called "Fruit & Tobacco" marts ( Frukt og Tobakk  or  kiosk  in Norwegian) are not. [7] 
 
   Solo soda water in a glass bottle 
 Soda water [ edit ] 
 Local sodas include  Urge  and  Solo , which was the first soda to be released in Norway, introduced in 1934. [9]  Other sodas from Norway that is popular includes  E. C. Dahls Brewery 's  ginger beer , which was created as a drink for  sodd , and sodas from  Oskar Sylte Mineral Water Factory , such as «Brus med ananassmak» (soda with pineapple taste) and «Brus med pæresmak» (soda with pear taste).
 
 People [ edit ] 
 Significant writers on Norwegian cuisine include  Janet Laurence  and  Ingrid Espelid Hovig .
 
 See also [ edit ] 
 List of Norwegian dishes 
 References [ edit ] 
 
 
 ^   Laurence, Janet (2007).  The food and cooking of Norway : traditions, ingredients, tastes, techniques and over 60 classic recipes . London: Aquamarine.  ISBN   978-1-903141-47-2 .  OCLC   76798967 . 
 
 ^   "Ingen stor suksess for Toros "Meksikansk gryte" i Mexico"  (in Norwegian Bokmål). 15 April 2016 . Retrieved  10 January  2021 . 
 
 ^   "Reinsdyrkaker 500 g"  (in Norwegian Bokmål) . Retrieved  23 April  2021 . 
 
 ^   "Sandefjordsmør brings salmon to life" . 6 April 2016. 
 
 ^   storbyuniversitetet, OsloMet-.  "Forbruksforskningsinstituttet SIFO" .  www.oslomet.no . 
 
 ^   Jones, Lora (13 April 2018).  "Coffee: Who grows, drinks and pays the most?" .  BBC News . Retrieved  13 May  2018 . 
 
 ^  a   b   Drink your way through Norway  www.visitnorway.com 
 
 ^   "Lovdata – Sender deg til riktig side"  (in Norwegian). Lovdata.no. 2 June 1989 . Retrieved  14 November  2013 . 
 
 ^   "Fun facts om brus og vann – Drikkeglede: Bryggeri- og Drikkevareforeningen" . 
 
 
 External links [ edit ] 
 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons has media related to  Cuisine of Norway . 
 
 The Norwegian cuisine  visitnorway.com 
 Seafood from Norway  (Norwegian Seafood Export Council) 
 Norse Food in historical sources   – From the Society for Creative Anachronism 
 All Scandinavia – Traditional Norwegian Cuisine 
 10 Best recommendations for restaurants serving traditional food in Oslo 
 Norwegian Food Blog: Thanks For The Food – Norwegian Cuisine Explained (in English with pictures) 
 Food Norway – Recipes on how to make all the Norwegian classics at home 
 North Norwegian Cuisine 
 v t e Norway  articles History 
 Stone Age 
 Bronze Age 
 Petty kingdoms 
 Viking Age 
 Unification 
 High Middle Ages 
 Kingdom of Norway (872–1397) 
 Hereditary Kingdom of Norway 
 Kalmar Union 
 Denmark–Norway 
 Kingdom of Norway (1814) 
 Sweden–Norway 
 End of the union 
 World War II 
 Reichskommissariat 
 Quisling regime 
 Norwegian government-in-exile 
 1945–2000 
 21st century 
 Geography 
 Climate 
 Districts 
 Extreme points 
 Islands 
 Lakes 
 Mammals 
 Mountains 
 Municipalities 
 Cities 
 Protected areas 
 Rivers 
 World Heritage Sites 
 Politics 
 Administrative divisions 
 National budget 
 Constitution 
 Courts 
 Elections 
 Foreign relations 
 Governments 
 Incarceration 
 Military 
 Monarchy 
 Parliament 
 Police 
 Political parties 
 Prime Minister 
 Membership of International organizations 
 Economy 
 Energy 
 Fisheries 
 Government Pension Fund 
 Industry 
 Mining 
 Natural gas 
 Krone  (currency) 
 National bank 
 Norwegian paradox 
 Oil 
 Renewable energy 
 Stock Exchange 
 Taxation 
 Tourism 
 Trade unions 
 Transport 
 Whaling 
 Society 
 Crime 
 Demographics 
 Education 
 Ethnic groups 
 Immigration 
 Languages 
 language conflict 
 Norwegians 
 Pensions 
 Religion 
 Culture 
 Architecture 
 Art 
 Bunad   (clothing) 
 Christmas   (season) 
 Cinema 
 Cuisine 
 Jante law 
 Music 
 Norwegian language 
 Literature 
 Media 
 Prostitution 
 Public holidays 
 Sport 
 Romantic nationalism 
 Symbols 
 Anthem 
 Coat of arms 
 Flags 
 national flag 
 Mottos 
 Name of Norway 
 Outline 
 Category 
 Portal 
 v t e European cuisine Sovereign states European Union 
 Austria 
 Belgium 
 Bulgaria 
 Croatia 
 Cyprus 
 Czech Republic 
 Denmark 
 Estonia 
 Finland 
 France 
 Germany 
 Greece 
 Hungary 
 Republic of Ireland 
 Italy 
 Latvia 
 Lithuania 
 Luxembourg 
 Malta 
 Netherlands 
 Poland 
 Portugal 
 Romania 
 Slovakia 
 Slovenia 
 Spain 
 Sweden 
 Other 
 Albania 
 Andorra 
 Armenia 
 Azerbaijan 
 Belarus 
 Bosnia and Herzegovina 
 Georgia 
 Iceland 
 Kazakhstan 
 Liechtenstein 
 Moldova 
 Monaco 
 Montenegro 
 North Macedonia 
 Norway 
 Russia 
 San Marino 
 Serbia 
 Switzerland 
 Turkey 
 Ukraine 
 United Kingdom 
 Vatican City 
 States with limited recognition 
 Abkhazia 
 Kosovo 
 Nagorno-Karabakh 
 Northern Cyprus 
 South Ossetia 
 Transnistria 
 Dependencies  and other territories 
 Faroe Islands 
 Gibraltar 
 Guernsey 
 Isle of Man 
 Jersey 
 
 v t e Cuisines Continental 
 African 
 North 
 West 
 list 
 Americas 
 Caribbean 
 North 
 South 
 list 
 Asian 
 Caucasian 
 Central 
 Indian subcontinent 
 Levantine 
 list 
 European 
 Balkan 
 Central 
 Eastern 
 list 
 Oceanic 
 Intercontinental
 Global 
 Latin American 
 Mediterranean 
 Middle Eastern 
 National  and regional 
 Afghan 
 Albanian 
 Algerian 
 American 
 Californian 
 Floribbean 
 Hawaiian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Lowcountry (South Carolina) 
 New England 
 New Mexico 
 Pacific Northwest 
 Pennsylvania Dutch 
 Puerto Rican 
 Southern US 
 Southwest US 
 Texas 
 Angolan 
 Argentine 
 Armenian 
 Australian 
 Austrian 
 Azerbaijani 
 Bahraini 
 Bangladeshi 
 Barbadian 
 Belarusian 
 Belgian 
 Belizean 
 Beninese 
 Bhutanese 
 Bolivian 
 Bosnian-Herzegovinian 
 Botswana 
 Brazilian 
 British 
 Channel Islands 
 English 
 Gibraltarian 
 Northern Irish 
 Saint Helena 
 Scottish 
 Welsh 
 Bruneian 
 Bulgarian 
 Burkinabé 
 Burmese 
 Burundian 
 Cambodian 
 Cameroonian 
 Canadian 
 Acadian 
 Québécois 
 Central African Republic 
 Chadian 
 Chilean 
 Chinese 
 Cantonese 
 Hong Kong 
 Macanese 
 Tibetan 
 Xinjiang 
 Colombian 
 Congolese 
 Corsican 
 Croatian 
 Cuban 
 Cypriot 
 Czech 
 Danish 
 Faroese 
 Greenlandic 
 Djiboutian 
 Dominican 
 Dominican Republic 
 Dutch 
 East Timorese 
 Ecuadorian 
 Egyptian 
 Emirati 
 Equatorial Guinean 
 Eritrean 
 Estonian 
 Ethiopian 
 Fijian 
 Filipino 
 Finnish 
 French 
 Occitan 
 French Guianan 
 Gabonese 
 Gambian 
 Georgian 
 German 
 Ghanaian 
 Greek 
 Cretan 
 Epirotic 
 Greek Macedonian 
 Heptanesean 
 Guatemalan 
 Guinea-Bissauan 
 Guinean 
 Haitian 
 Honduran 
 Hungarian 
 Icelandic 
 Indian 
 Arunachalese 
 Assamese 
 Bengali 
 Bihari 
 Goan 
 Gujarati 
 Himachal Pradesh 
 Kashmiri 
 Jharkhandi 
 Karnataka 
 Kerala 
 Maharashtrian 
 Manipuri 
 Meghalayan 
 Mizo 
 Naga 
 Odia 
 Punjabi 
 Rajasthani 
 Sikkimese 
 Sindhi 
 Tamil 
 Telangana 
 Telugu 
 Indonesian 
 Acehnese 
 Balinese 
 Banjar 
 Batak 
 Betawi 
 Indo 
 Javanese 
 Madurese 
 Makassar 
 Minahasan 
 Minangkabau 
 Palembangese 
 Sundanese 
 Iranian 
 Iraqi 
 Irish 
 Israeli 
 Italian 
 Abruzzese 
 Ligurian 
 Lombard 
 Lucanian 
 Neapolitan 
 Roman 
 Sardinian 
 Sicilian 
 Venetian 
 Ivorian 
 Jamaican 
 Japanese 
 Okinawan 
 Jordanian 
 Kazakh 
 Kenyan 
 Korean 
 North Korean 
 South Korean 
 Kosovan 
 Kuwaiti 
 Kyrgyz 
 Lao 
 Latvian 
 Lebanese 
 Lesotho 
 Liberian 
 Libyan 
 Liechtensteiner 
 Lithuanian 
 Luxembourg 
 Macedonian 
 Malagasy 
 Malawian 
 Malaysian 
 Sabahan 
 Sarawakian 
 Maldivian 
 Malian 
 Maltese 
 Mauritanian 
 Mauritian 
 Mexican 
 Moldovan 
 Monégasque 
 Mongolian 
 Montenegrin 
 Moroccan 
 Mozambican 
 Namibian 
 Nauruan 
 Nepalese 
 New Zealand 
 Nicaraguan 
 Niger 
 Nigerian 
 Niuean 
 Norwegian 
 Omani 
 Pakistani 
 Palestinian 
 Panamanian 
 Peruvian 
 Polish 
 Portuguese 
 Qatari 
 Romanian  (incl.  Transylvanian Saxon ) 
 Russian 
 Bashkir 
 Chechen 
 Circassian 
 Komi 
 Mordovian 
 Sakha 
 Tatar 
 Udmurt 
 Yamal 
 Rwandan 
 Saint Lucian 
 Salvadoran 
 Sammarinese 
 São Tomé and Príncipe 
 Saudi Arabian 
 Senegalese 
 Serbian 
 Seychellois 
 Sierra Leonean 
 Singaporean 
 Slovak 
 Slovenian 
 Somali 
 South African 
 Spanish 
 Andalusian 
 Asturian 
 Balearic 
 Basque 
 Canarian 
 Cantabrian 
 Catalan 
 Extremaduran 
 Galician 
 Manchegan 
 Valencian 
 Sri Lankan 
 Sudanese 
 Swazi 
 Swedish 
 Swiss 
 Syrian 
 Taiwanese 
 Tajik 
 Tanzanian 
 Zanzibari 
 Thai 
 Togolese 
 Tunisian 
 Turkish 
 Turkmen 
 Trinidadian and Tobagonian 
 Ugandan 
 Ukrainian 
 Uruguayan 
 Uzbek 
 Venezuelan 
 Vietnamese 
 Western Saharan 
 Yemeni 
 Zambian 
 Zimbabwean 
 Ethnic 
 Ainu 
 Arab 
 Indonesian 
 Aromanian 
 Assyrian 
 Balochi 
 Berber 
 Cajun 
 Chinese 
 American 
 Canadian 
 Chifa 
 Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Crimean Tatar 
 Greek American 
 Hazaragi 
 Indian 
 Anglo-Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Indigenous American 
 Inuit 
 Italian American 
 Kurdish 
 Livonian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Malay 
 Ossetian 
 Parsi 
 Pashtun 
 Peranakan 
 Romani 
 Sámi 
 Soul food 
 Sylheti 
 Transylvanian Saxon 
 Yup'ik 
 Religious 
 Buddhist 
 Christian 
 Goan Catholic 
 Mangalorean Catholic 
 Mennonite 
 Hindu 
 Islamic 
 Chinese 
 Ital 
 Jain 
 Jewish 
 American 
 Ashkenazi 
 Bukharan 
 Ethiopian 
 Mizrahi 
 Sephardic 
 Syrian 
 Ritual slaughter 
 Sikh 
 Historical 
 Ancient Egyptian 
 Ancient Greek 
 Ancient Israelite 
 Ancient Roman 
 Antebellum America 
 Aztec 
 Byzantine 
 Early modern European 
 Historical Chinese 
 Historical Indian subcontinent 
 Historical North Indian and Pakistani 
 History of agriculture 
 History of alcoholic drinks 
 History of bread 
 History of seafood 
 History of vegetarianism 
 Historical Argentine 
 Historical Japanese 
 Inca 
 Mayan 
 Muisca 
 Mughal 
 Medieval 
 Ottoman 
 Peasant 
 Soviet 
 Thirteen Colonies 
 Styles 
 Classique 
 Fast food 
 Fusion 
 New American 
 Eurasian 
 Haute 
 Molecular gastronomy 
 Note by Note 
 Nouvelle 
 Lists 
 List of cuisines 
 List of historical cuisines 
 Lists of prepared foods 
 Related 
 Cookbook 
 Cooking 
 Culinary arts 
 Drink 
 Food 
 history 
 Diet 
 Meal preparation 
 
   Food portal 
   Drink portal 
   Category 
   Commons 
   Cookbook 
   WikiProject 
   Outline 
 
 Authority control : National libraries  
 France 
 BnF data 
 Israel 
 United States 
 
  
NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw2275
Cached time: 20230310194441
Cache expiry: 1814400
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc, no‐toc‐conversion]
CPU time usage: 1.037 seconds
Real time usage: 1.300 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 18898/1000000
Post‐expand include size: 186222/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 21470/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 16/100
Expensive parser function count: 56/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 62279/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.480/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 12399441/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/400
 
 
Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1038.572      1 -total
 42.53%  441.714      3 Template:Navbox
 21.49%  223.238      1 Template:European_topic
 15.05%  156.297      1 Template:Culture_of_Norway
 14.82%  153.956      1 Template:Culture_of_region
 14.65%  152.139      1 Template:Reflist
 14.50%  150.550      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 13.50%  140.178     55 Template:Iso2country
 10.67%  110.846      1 Template:Norway_topics
 10.45%  108.499      1 Template:Country_topics
 
  Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:idhash:2215144-0!canonical and timestamp 20230310194439 and revision id 1143562099. Rendering was triggered because: page-view
  
 esi <esi:include src="/esitest-fa8a495983347898/content" />  
 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Norwegian_cuisine&oldid=1143562099 " 
 Category :  Norwegian cuisine Hidden categories:  CS1 Norwegian Bokmål-language sources (nb) CS1 Norwegian-language sources (no) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from March 2023 Articles needing additional references from April 2007 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2022 Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with BNF identifiers Articles with J9U identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  This page was last edited on 8 March 2023, at 14:25  (UTC) . 
 Text is available under the  Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0 ;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the  Terms of Use  and  Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the  Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. 
 
 
 Privacy policy 
 About Wikipedia 
 Disclaimers 
 Contact Wikipedia 
 Mobile view 
 Developers 
 Statistics 
 Cookie statement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
