
 
 
 Jump to content 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle sidebar 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Create account Log in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Personal tools 
 
 
 
 
   Create account   Log in 
 
 
 
 
		Pages for logged out editors  learn more 
 
 
 Contributions Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Navigation 
 
 
 Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate 
 
 
 
 
 Contribute 
 
 
 Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file 
 
 
 
 
 Tools 
 
 
 What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item 
 
 
 
 
 Print/export 
 
 
 Download as PDF Printable version 
 
 
 
 
 In other projects 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons 
 
 
 
 
 Languages 
 
 On this Wikipedia the language links are at the top of the page across from the article title.  Go to top . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CentralNotice  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Contents 
 move to sidebar 
 hide 
 
 
 
 
 (Top) 
 
 
 
 
 
 1 History 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 Regional cuisines 
 
 
				Toggle Regional cuisines subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 2.1 Galilee 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.2 West Bank 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.3 Gaza 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 Types of meals 
 
 
				Toggle Types of meals subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 3.1 Bread meals 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.2 Mahashi 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.3 Dips and side dishes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.4 Salads 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.5 Sweets 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.6 Snack foods 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4 Meal structure 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5 Dining out 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6 Beverages 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 7 Holiday cuisine 
 
 
				Toggle Holiday cuisine subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 7.1 Ramadan 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 7.2 Holiday sweets 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8 See also 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 9 References 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 10 Further reading 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 11 External links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
						Toggle the table of contents
					 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle the table of contents 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Palestinian cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 16 languages 
 
 
 
 العربية বাংলা Čeština Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Jawa ქართული Bahasa Melayu Türkçe Tiếng Việt 
 Edit links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Article Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 English 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Read View source View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 More 
 
 
 
 Read View source View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
 
 
 Types of food in Palestine culture 
 
 
 Part of a series on Palestinians 
 Demographics 
 Definitions 
 Palestine 
 History 
 Name 
 People 
 Nakba 
 Diaspora 
 
 Politics 
 Previous 
 Arab Higher Committee 
 Depopulated villages 
 All-Palestine Protectorate 
 Government 
 Fedayeen militias 
 PLO 
 National Authority (PNA) 
 ( political parties ) 
 
 Current 
 Fatah 
 Hamas 
 PFLP 
 Islamic Jihad 
 Politics of the Palestinian National Authority 
 Enclaves 
 Governorates 
 Cities 
 Gaza Strip governance  (Hamas) 
 Governorates of the Gaza Strip 
 National Council (PNC) 
 Legislative Council (PLC) 
 
 Flag 
 Law 
 Palestine 
 West Bank 
 Gaza Strip 
 E. Jerusalem 
 
Religion / religious sites 
 Christianity 
 Islam 
 Judaism 
 Al-Aqsa 
 Basilica of the Annunciation 
 Cave of the Patriarchs 
 Church of the Holy Sepulchre 
 Church of the Nativity 
 Dome of the Rock 
 Great Mosque of Gaza 
 Joseph's Tomb 
 Lot's Tomb 
 Nabi Samwil 
 Rachel's Tomb 
 
 Culture 
 Art 
 Cinema 
 Costume and embroidery 
 Cuisine 
 Dabke   (dance) 
 Handicrafts 
 Language 
 Literature 
 Music 
 
 List of Palestinians v t e 
 Palestinian cuisine  consists of foods from or commonly eaten by  Palestinians , whether in  Palestine ,  Israel ,  Jordan ,  refugee camps  in nearby countries, or by the  Palestinian diaspora . The cuisine is a diffusion of the cultures of civilizations that settled in the region of Palestine, particularly during and after the  Islamic era  beginning with the Arab  Ummayad  conquest, then the eventual  Persian -influenced  Abbasids  and ending with the strong influences of  Turkish cuisine , resulting from the coming of the  Ottoman   Turks . It is similar to other  Levantine cuisines , including  Lebanese ,  Syrian  and  Jordanian .
 Cooking styles vary, and types of cooking style and ingredients used are generally based on the climate and location of the particular region and on traditions. Rice and variations of  kibbee  are common in the  Galilee . The  West Bank  engages primarily in heavier meals involving the use of  taboon  bread , rice and meat, and coastal plain inhabitants frequent fish, other seafood, and  lentils . The  Gaza  cuisine is a variation of the Levant cuisine, but is more diverse in seafood and spices. Gaza's inhabitants heavily consume chili peppers too. Meals are usually eaten in the household but dining out has become prominent particularly during parties where light meals like salads, bread dips and skewered meats are served.
 The area is also home to many desserts, ranging from those made regularly and those that are commonly reserved for the holidays. Most Palestinian sweets are pastries filled with either sweetened cheeses, dates or various nuts such as almonds, walnuts or  pistachios . Beverages could also depend on holidays such as during  Ramadan , where  carob ,  tamarind  and  apricot  juices are consumed at sunset. Coffee is consumed throughout the day and liquor is not very prevalent among the population, however, some alcoholic beverages such as  arak  or  beer  are consumed by  Christians .
 
 
 History 
   Village oven,  taboun , in Palestine. Photo taken between 1898 and 1914 by  American Colony, Jerusalem . 
 The region of the southern  Levant  has a varied past and as such, its cuisine has contributions from various cultures.
 After the area originally inhabited by Jews, Edomites, Moabites and Ammonites was conquered by the  Muslims  in the 7th century CE, it became part of a  Bilad al-Sham  under the name  Jund Filastin . Therefore, many aspects of Palestinian cuisine are similar to the  cuisine of Syria —especially in the  Galilee . Modern Syrian-Palestinian dishes have been generally influenced by the rule of three major Islamic groups: the Arabs, the  Persian -influenced Arabs ( Iraqis ) and the  Turks . [1] 
 The Arabs that conquered Syria and Palestine initially had simple culinary traditions primarily based on the use of rice, lamb, yogurt and dates. [2]  This cuisine did not advance for centuries until the rise of the  Abbasid Caliphate , that established  Baghdad  as its capital and integrated elements of Persian cuisine into the existing  Arab cuisine . [1]  The Jerusalemite geographer  al-Muqaddasi  said this of Palestine's foods:
 
 
 From Palestine comes olives, dried figs, raisins, the carob fruit... from  Jerusalem  comes cheeses and the celebrated raisins of the species known as  Ainuni  and  Duri , excellent apples... also pine nuts of the kind called 'Kuraish-bite', and their equal is not found elsewhere... from Sughar and  Baysan  come dates, the treacle called  Dibs . [3] 
 
 
 The cuisine of the  Ottoman Empire —which incorporated Palestine in 1516—was partially made up of what had become, by then a "rich" Arab cuisine. After the  Crimean War , in 1855, many other communities including  Bosnians ,  Greeks ,  French  and  Italians  began settling in the area especially in urban centers such as  Jerusalem ,  Jaffa  and  Bethlehem . These communities' cuisines contributed to the character of Palestinian cuisine, especially communities from the  Balkans . [1] [4] 
 Until around the 1950s–60s, the main ingredients for rural Palestinian cuisine were olive oil, oregano and bread baked in a simple oven called a  taboon . [5]  Author G. Robinson Lees, writing in 1905, observed that "The oven is not in the house, it has a building of its own, the joint property of several families whose duty is to keep it always hot." [6] 
 
 Regional cuisines 
 See also:  List of Palestinian dishes by region 
 There are three primary culinary regions in historical Palestine - the Galilee,  Gaza  and the  West Bank  (which has its own culinary subregions ranging from north to south). [7]  In the Galilee, bulgur and meat (beef or lamb) are primary ingredients that are often combined to form several variations of dishes ranging from a family-sized meal to a side dish. However, in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip, the populations have a cooking style of their own. In the West Bank, meals are particularly heavy and contrast from the foods of the northern  Levant . Main dishes involve rice,  flatbreads  and roasted meats. The staple food of the inhabitants in the  Gaza Strip  is fish due to its location on the Mediterranean seacoast. Their culinary influences are also strongly affected by traditional  Egyptian cooking  and  chili peppers ,  dill seeds  and garlic the most common seasonings. Although the cuisine is diverse, generally Palestinians are not restricted to the foods of their specific region and there is constant culinary diffusion amongst them. Although, because of Gaza's isolation from other Palestinian and  Levantine  Arab areas, their cooking styles are less known in the region.
 
 Galilee 
 The Galilee is highly influenced by  Lebanese cuisine , due to extensive communication between the two regions before the establishment of Israel. The Galilee specializes in a number of meals based on the combination of  bulgur , spices and meat, known as  kibbee  by Arabs.  Kibbee bi-siniyyeh|Kibbee bi-siniyee  is a combination of minced lamb or beef mixed with pepper, allspice and other spices wrapped in a bulgur crust, then baked.  Kibee bi-siniyee  could serve as the main dish during a Palestinian lunch.  Kibbee neyee  is a variation of  kibee  that is served as raw meat mixed with bulgur and a variety of spices. It is mostly eaten as a side dish and pita or  markook  bread is used for scooping the meat. Its leftovers are usually cooked as a different meal the next day, such as fried  kibbee  balls. [4] [8] 
 A specific rice meal, called  pilaf , is common in the Galilee and consists of a mixture of rice with chopped lamb and pine nuts flavored with an assortment of spices, accompanied by a lamb leg or whole chickens. In addition, a variety of dishes made up of meatballs and potatoes are eaten during special occasions. [4]   Shish kebab  or  lahme mashwi  and  shish taouk  are grilled meats on skewers and are commonly eaten after an array of appetizers known as the  mezze . [8] 
 
 West Bank 
   Musakhan 
 Musakhan  is a common main dish that originated in the  Jenin  and  Tulkarm  area in the northern West Bank. It consists of a roasted chicken over a  taboon bread  that has been topped with pieces of fried sweet onions,  sumac ,  allspice  and  pine nuts . [8]   Maqluba  is an upside-down rice and baked eggplant  casserole  mixed with cooked  cauliflowers , carrots and chicken or lamb. The meal is known throughout the Levant but among Palestinians especially. It dates back to the 13th century. [9] 
 
   Mansaf 
 Mansaf  is a traditional meal in the central West Bank and  Naqab  region in the southern West Bank, having its roots from the  Bedouin  population of  Jordan . It is mostly cooked on occasions such as, during holidays, weddings or a large gathering.  Mansaf  is cooked as a lamb leg or large pieces of lamb on top of a taboon bread that has usually been smothered with yellow rice. A type of thick and dried cheesecloth yogurt from goat's milk, called  jameed , is poured on top of the lamb and rice to give it its distinct flavor and taste. [10]  The dish is also garnished with cooked pine nuts and  almonds . [4]  The classic form of eating  mansaf  is using the right hand as a utensil. For politeness, participants in the feast tear pieces of meat to hand to the person next to them. [10] 
 
   Maqluba with lamb 
 In addition to meals, the West Bank's many subregions have their own fruit-based jams. In the Hebron area, the primary crops are grapes. Families living in the area harvest the grapes in the spring and summer to produce a variety of products ranging from raisins, jams and a molasses known as  dibs . [8] [11]  The  Bethlehem  area ( Beit Jala  and  Jifna  in particular), are known regionally for their apricots and apricot jam as is the  Tulkarm  area for its olives and olive oil. [8] 
 
 Gaza 
 The cuisine of  Gaza Strip  is influenced by both neighboring  Egypt  and its location on the Mediterranean coast. The staple food for the majority of the inhabitants in the area is fish. The Gaza Strip has a major fishing industry and fish is often served either grilled or fried after being stuffed with  cilantro , garlic, red peppers and cumin and marinated in a mix of  coriander , red peppers, cumin, and chopped lemons. [12] [13]  Besides fish, as well as other types of seafood, Gazan cooking styles are affected by  Egyptian culinary influences . This generally includes using hot peppers, garlic and  chard  to flavor many of their meals. [8]   Zibdieh , is a clay pot dish that consists of shrimp baked in a stew of olive oil, garlic, hot peppers, and peeled tomatoes. [14]  Crabs are cooked and then stuffed with a red hot pepper paste called  shatta . [12] 
 
   Sumaghiyyeh 
 A dish native to the Gaza area is  Sumaghiyyeh . The meal consists of water-soaked ground  sumac  mixed with  tahina . The mixture is added to sliced chard and pieces of stewed beef and garbanzo beans and then additionally flavored with dill seeds, garlic and hot peppers. It is often eaten cool with khubz.  Rummaniyya  depends on the particular time of the year and it is made up of unripened  pomegranate  seeds, eggplant, tahina, garlic, hot peppers and lentils.  Fukharit adas  is a slow-cooked lentil stew flavored with red pepper flakes, crushed dill seeds, garlic, and cumin, traditionally made during winter and early spring. [12] 
 Qidra  is a rice dish named after the large clay vessel and clay oven that is used baked it. In the oven, the rice is cooked with pieces of meat, often lamb, whole garlic cloves, garbanzo beans,  cardamom  pods, and various other spices such as,  turmeric  — which gives it a yellow color —  cinnamon , allspice, nutmeg and cumin. Plain rice cooked in meat or chicken broth and flavored with mild spices including cinnamon is known as  fatteh ghazzawiyyeh . The rice is layered over a thin  markook  bread known as  farasheeh , smothered in  ghee  (an Egyptian variation of butter) and topped with stuffed chicken or lamb. The meal is eaten with green peppers and lemon sauce. [12] 
 
 Types of meals 
 Bread meals 
 See also  List of Palestinian breads 
   Sfiha 
 Palestinians bake a variety of different kinds of breads: they include  khubz , pita and  markook  and  taboon .  Khubz  is an everyday bread and is very similar to pita. It often takes the place of utensils; It is torn into bite size pieces and used to scoop various dips such as hummus or ful. [8]   Markook  bread is a paper-thin  unleavened bread  and when unfolded it is almost transparent. [15]   Taboon  receives its name from the ovens used to bake them. [8] 
 There are several types of sandwich and pizza-like foods eaten by the Palestinians, including  manaeesh ,  sfiha ,  fatayer  and  shawarma .  Manaeesh  is a baked flat bread, usually topped with  za'atar  and olive oil. [8]   simboseh  and  fatayer  are baked or sometimes fried doughs stuffed with minced meat and cooked onions or  snobar  (pine nuts). [8]   Fatayer  is usually folded into triangles and unlike  simboseh , it could be filled with spinach or  za'atar .
 Sfiha  is a baked miniature  flatbread , topped with lamb and cooked red peppers or tomatoes. Shawarma is mostly served in a long folded roll of  khubz  wrapped around shaved  lamb  or chicken accompanied by pickled turnips and cucumbers, tomatoes, onions and tahina. [8]  Shawarma could also be served as lamb slices on a plate with tahina as a side dish. [16]   Falafel  are fried peppered fava beans or sometimes hummus, parsley and onions fried together into small patties. They're usually served and eaten wrapped in  khubz . [8] 
 
 Mahashi 
   A family-sized serving of  waraq al-'ainib   Mahashi  dishes are composed of stuffed vegetables such as, eggplants, baby pumpkins, potatoes, carrots and marrows as well as a variety of leaf vegetables, primarily grape leaves, cabbage leaves and less often chard.  Mahashi  requires delicacy and time — the main reason it is prepared before the day it is cooked and served. Many female family members participate in the rolling and stuffing of the vegetables, relaxing the amount of individual effort required. [17] 
 Waraq al-'ainib  (grape leaves; known as dolma in Western and Balkan countries), is a  mahashi  meal reserved for large gatherings. It is grape leaves normally wrapped around minced meat, white rice and diced tomatoes, however meat is not always used. It is then cooked and served as dozens of rolls on a large plate usually accompanied by boiled potato slices, carrots and lamb pieces.  Kousa mahshi  are zucchinis stuffed with the same ingredients as  waraq al-'ainib  and usually served alongside it heavy meals. If made with a large number of zucchinis it is known as  waraq al-'ainib wa kousa . [8] 
 
 Dips and side dishes 
 See also  List of Palestinian dips  and  List of Palestinian cheeses 
   A plate of  hummus , garnished with paprika and olive oil and  pine nuts 
 Bread dips and side dishes such as,  hummus ,  baba ghanoush ,  mutabbel  and   labeneh  are frequented during breakfast and dinner.  Hummus , the Arabic word for garbanzo beans, is commonly made as  hummus bi tahini . Palestinians soak the garbanzo beans with water  overnight, then boil them in a pot for at least an hour. The resulting ground beans are mixed with  tahini  (sesame paste) and sometimes  lemon juice . [18]  It is often is lathered in  olive oil  and sometimes sprinkled with  paprika ,  oregano  and pine nuts — The latter is especially used in the West Bank. [19]  The town of  Abu Ghosh  west of  Jerusalem , is a popular hummus destination for  Israelis  and tourists. [20]  Hummus could also be mixed, boiled or cooked with  ful  ( fava beans ) and results in a completely different dish called  mukhluta  that has a distinct flavor and brownish color. [8] 
 Baba ghanoush is an  eggplant or aubergine salad  or dip with several variants. The root of all the variants is broiled and mashed eggplant and tahini lathered with olive oil, which can then be flavored with either garlic, onions, peppers, ground  cumin  seeds,  mint  and parsley. [21]  Mutabbel is one of the spicier variants that receives its zest from green chili peppers. [22] 
 
   Nabulsi cheese 
 Jibneh Arabieh  or  jibneh baida  is a white table cheese served with any of the above dishes. [8]  Ackawi cheese is a common variation of jibneh baida. Ackawi cheese has a smoother texture and a mild salty taste. [23]  It originated in the city of Akka ( Acre ) - hence the name  Ackawi  - in the Galilee. Labaneh is a pasty yogurt-like cream cheese either served on a plate with olive oil and  za'atar  - which is generally called  labeneh wa za'atar  - or in a khubz sandwich. [8] 
 
 Salads 
 See also  List of Palestinian salads 
   Tabbouleh  with lettuce and wedges of lemon 
 A  Mediterranean -style table salad made in the  Levant  is  tabbouleh . The salad is made from parsley pieces,  bulgur , diced tomatoes,  cucumbers  and is sautéed with lemon juice and  vinegar . In 2006, the largest bowl of  tabbouleh  in the world was prepared by Palestinian cooks in the  West Bank  city of  Ramallah . [24]   Fattoush  is a combination of  khubz  pieces and parsley with chopped cucumbers, radishes, tomatoes and scallions and flavored by sumac. [25]   Dagga  is a Gazan salad usually made in a clay bowl and is a mix of crushed tomatoes, garlic cloves, red hot peppers, chopped dill and olive oil. Its seasoned with lemon juice immediately before being served. [12] 
 
 Sweets 
   Kanafeh 
 Palestinian desserts include  baklawa ,  halawa  and  kanafeh , as well as other semolina and wheat pastries.  Baklawa  is a pastry made of thin sheets of unleavened flour dough, filled with  pistachios  and walnuts sweetened by honey. [8]   Halawa  is a block confection of sweetened sesame flour served in sliced pieces.  Muhalabiyeh  is a rice pudding made with milk and topped with  pistachios  or almonds. [8] 
 Kanafeh , a well-known dessert in the  Arab World  and  Turkey , originated in the city of  Nablus  in the northern West Bank. It is made of several fine shreds of pastry noodles with honey-sweetened cheese in the center. The top layer of the pastry is usually dyed orange with food coloring and sprinkled with crushed pistachios.  Nablus , to the present day is famed for its  kanafeh , partly due to its use of a white-brined cheese called  Nabulsi  after the city. Boiled sugar is used as a syrup for  kanafeh . [8] 
 
 Snack foods 
 It is common for Palestinian hosts to serve fresh and dried fruits, nuts, seeds and  dates  to their guests. Roasted and salted watermelon, squash  and  sunflower seeds  as well as, pistachios and  cashews  are common legumes. Watermelon seeds, known as  bizir al-bateekh  are eaten regularly during various leisurely activities: playing cards, smoking  nargila , conversing with friends or before and after meals. [13] 
 
 Meal structure 
 Palestinian culture and life revolves around food in every aspect, whether it is an ordinary day or a special occasion such as a wedding or holiday. [26]  Meals are structured in a cyclical order by Palestinians and span into two main courses and several intermediate ones like  coffee , fruits and sweets as well as dinner. Like in most  Arab cultures , meals are a time to spend with family and could last 1–2 hours depending on the specific time of the day. Unlike other cultures, lunch is the primary course and breakfast and dinner are lighter in contents. [23] 
 
 Iftur  (lit. 'break-fast') is a term for breakfast, usually consists of fried eggs,  olives , labaneh, olive oil or jams.  Hummus bi-tahini  is also eaten primarily during this time the day. [23] 
 Gheda  is a term for lunch, usually late in the afternoon. Lunch is the heaviest meal of the day and main ingredients could include rice, lamb, chicken, cooked vegetables and forms of  mahashi . [8] [23] 
 Asrooneh  Derives from the word ' Aasr  (lit. 'afternoon') is a term for the consumption of a variety of fruits and legumes after  gheda . [23] 
 ' Asha  is a term for dinner, usually eaten anytime from 8-10 pm. ' Asha  is simpler than  gheda  and some foods consumed include  fatayer ,  hummus bi-tahini , a variety of salads and a Levantine-style omelette called  ijee . [23] 
 ' Hilew  Sometimes after or just before ' asha  as well as when hosting guests come various sweets. Baklawa is common and is usually purchased from pastry shops instead of made at home like  muhallabiyeh . 
 Shay wa Kahwe  Tea and coffee are served in throughout the day in before, after and between  iftur ,  gheda  and ' asha . 
 Dining out 
   A  maqhah  in  Ottoman Jerusalem , 1858 
 Mata'im  — Offer a brilliant array of cold appetizers known as the  mezze . Notably,  hummus bi-tahini ,  mukhluta , sometimes nearly a dozen variations of aubergine salad,  tabbouleh ,  fattoush , chili pepper and red cabbage salads and dishes made up by the chef are served. Kibbee balls and  sfiha  are the primary hot appetizers available. Heavy meals are rarely provided by restaurants, instead however, the entrées include shish kebab,  shish taouk , rack of lamb and chicken breasts. [27] 
 al-Maqhah  — Serve hot beverages and soft drinks and are usually restricted to male customers — who take part in leisurely activities like playing cards or backgammon and smoking  nargileh . [27] 
 Mahal 'hilewayet  — Found in the souks of cities and major towns, they offer a wide range of sweets common with Palestinians, such as,  kanafeh , baklawa and anise-flavored cookies. Family-run shops often serve at least one type of sweet that they themselves created. [28] 
 Mahal falafel [29]  — Sandwich shops that offer mainly falafel and shawarma with several different contents. [30] 
 Beverages 
 See also  List of Palestinian beverages 
   Palestinian women grinding coffee, 1905 
 There are two hot beverages that Palestinians consume: Coffee is served in the morning and throughout the day, while tea is sipped in the evening. Tea is usually flavored with  na'ana  (mint) or  maramiyyeh  ( sage ). The coffee of choice is usually  Turkish  or  Arabic coffee . Arabic coffee is unsweetened but spiced with  cardamom . [8]  Homemade fruit juices are also a common household drink during warm days and during  Ramadan , the holy month for fasting by  Muslims . [8]  A warm drink made from sweetened milk with  salep  garnished with walnuts, coconut flakes and cinnamon, is known as  sahlab  and is primarily served during the winter season. [31] 
 A widely consumed liquor by  Palestinian Christians  and many less-stringently observant Muslims is  Arak .  Arak  is a clear  anise  flavored alcoholic drink that is mixed with water to soften it and give it a creamy white color. It is consumed during special occasions such as holidays, weddings, and gatherings or with the  mezze . [8]  Beer is also a consumed drink and the Palestinian town of  Taybeh  in the central West Bank contains the only  beer brewery  in the  Palestinian territories . In addition to regular beer, the brewery produces non-alcoholic beer for conservative Muslims. [32]  Soft drinks are also common in Palestinian homes and the city of Ramallah contains a  Coca-Cola  bottling plant, while  Gaza ,  Hebron  and Nablus have distribution centers. [33] 
 
 Holiday cuisine 
 There is a sharp difference of Palestinian courses eaten on a daily basis in comparison to those reserved for holidays - which include family and religious occasions for both Muslims and Christians.
 
 Ramadan 
 In the past, during the fasting month of Ramadan, the  Musaher  of a town would yell and beat his drum to wake up the town's residents for  suhoor  (lit. 'of dawn') - usually very early in the morning, ranging from 4-6 am. The meals eaten during this time are light and foods include labeneh, cheese, bread and fried or boiled eggs along with various liquids to drink. The  muezzin 's call to dawn prayers signaled the beginning of  sawm  or fasting. [26] 
 Breaking the day's fasting traditionally begins with the brief consumption of  dates  and a chilled beverage. Palestinians make a variety of fruit-based beverages, including the flavors,  tamar hindi  or  tamarind ,  sous  or  licorice ,  kharroub  or  carob  and  Qamar Eddine . [8]   Tamar hindi  is made by soaking tamarinds in water for a many hours, then straining, sweetening and mixing it with  rose water  and lemon juice. [26]   Kharroub  is made similarly except instead of tamarind, carob is used. [8]   Qamar Eddine  is made of dried apricots boiled into a liquid and chilled. [26] 
 The term  iftar  has a different meaning in Ramadan where it is used to describe the 'breaking of fasting' unlike its common meaning of breakfast in the morning.  Iftar  begins with soup, either made from  lentils , vegetables or  freekeh .  Freekeh  soup is made from cracked, green wheat cooked in chicken broth. There is a wide variety of meals served during  iftar , ranging from small plates or bowls vegetable-based courses or  saniyyehs  (large plates or trays) of a particular meat. Common small dishes on the dinner table are  bamia  — a name for okra in tomato paste,  mloukhiyeh  — a  corchorus  stew — or  maqali , an array of fried tomatoes, aubergines, potatoes, peppers and zucchini. Pilaf or plain  freekeh  are normally served alongside the dinner meat. Each household prepares extra food to provide for their neighbors and the less fortunate — who must receive an equal version of the food eaten at home. [26] 
 
 Holiday sweets 
   Palestinian style  ka'ak  with  ma'amoul 
 A common Palestinian dessert reserved only for Ramadan is  qatayef , which could be provided by the numerous street vendors in several major Palestinian cities or towns as well as typical Palestinian households. [34]  Qatayef is the general name of the dessert as a whole, but more specifically, the name of the batter that acts as a base. The  result of the batter being poured into a round hot plate appears similar to pancakes, except only one side is cooked, then folded. The pastry is filled with either unsalted goat cheese or ground walnuts and cinnamon. It is then baked and served with a hot sugar-water syrup or sometimes honey. [35] 
 Ka'ak bi 'awja  is a semolina  shortbread  pastry filled with ground dates called ' ajwa  or walnuts. The dessert is a traditional meal for Christians during  Easter , [36]  however, ka'ak bi awja is also prepared towards the end of Ramadan, to be eaten during  Eid al-Fitr  - a Muslim festival immediately following Ramadan, as well as during  Eid al-Adha . [26] [37]  During  Mawlid  — the holiday honoring the birth of the Islamic prophet  Muhammad  —  Zalabieh  which consists of small, crunchy deep fried dough balls in dipped in syrup, is served. The dough is made from flour, yeast and water. [36] 
 A special pudding called  mughli  is prepared for a new born child. The dessert is made of ground rice, sugar and a mixture of spices, garnished with almonds, pine nuts and walnuts. An infant's new tooth is celebrated with bowls of sweetened wheat or barley and sweets served after a child's circumcision include baklava and  Burma . Christian families in mourning serve a sweet bun known as  rahmeh . It is a food eaten in remembrance of the dead and as a gesture of blessing the soul of the deceased person. The  Greek Orthodox Church  offer a special tray with cooked wheat covered with sugar and candy after a memorial service. [36] 
 
 See also 
 
 Palestine portal Food portal 
 Culture of Palestine 
 List of Palestinian dishes 
 Lebanese cuisine 
 Levantine cuisine 
 Jordanian cuisine 
 Syrian cuisine 
 References 
 
 
 ^  a   b   c   Revisiting our table…   Archived  2013-11-27 at the  Wayback Machine  Nasser, Christiane Dabdoub,  This week in Palestine , Turbo Computers & Software Co. Ltd. June 2006, Accessed on 2008-01-08. 
 
 ^   ABC of Arabic Cuisine   Archived  2011-07-04 at the  Wayback Machine  ArabNet. Accessed on 2007-12-25. 
 
 ^   le Strange, Guy (1890),  Palestine Under the Moslems: A Description of Syria and the Holy Land from A.D. 650 to 1500 , Committee of the  Palestine Exploration Fund , pp. 18–19 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   An Introduction to Palestinian Cuisine: Typical Palestinian Dishes   Archived  2011-07-24 at the  Wayback Machine   This Week in Palestine , Turbo Computers & Software Co. Ltd. July 2001, Accessed on 2007-01-07. 
 
 ^   Modernity and Authenticity: The Evolution of the Palestinian Kitchen   Archived  2011-07-24 at the  Wayback Machine  Qleibo, Ali,  This week in Palestine , Turbo Computers & Software Co. Ltd. December 2006, Accessed on 2008-01-09. 
 
 ^   G. Robinson Lees (1905):  Village Life in Palestine , Longmans, Green, and Co., p. 95 
 
 ^   Palestinian Flavour   Archived  2014-02-21 at the  Wayback Machine , Mustafa, Sufian;  This Week in Palestine , Turbo Computers & Software Co. Ltd. August 2001, Accessed on 2008-01-08. 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   e   f   g   h   i   j   k   l   m   n   o   p   q   r   s   t   u   v   w   x   y   Cuisine   Archived  2007-08-04 at the  Wayback Machine  Institute for Middle East Understanding (IMEU) 2006-01-16. Accessed on 2007-12-18 
 
 ^   Upside-Down Rice and Eggplant Casserole Maqluba   Archived  2017-08-03 at the  Wayback Machine  Clifford A. Wright. Accessed on 2007-12-19. 
 
 ^  a   b   Aburish, Said K.  (1998).  Children of Bethany; The Story of a Palestinian Family . I. B. Taurus. pp. 69–70.  ISBN   1850431094 . 
 
 ^   Sample Area Background: Beit Ummar   Archived  2007-12-12 at the  Wayback Machine  Christian Peacemaker Teams. Accessed on 2007-07-22. 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   e   The Foods of Gaza   Archived  2011-07-24 at the  Wayback Machine   al-Haddad, Laila ,  This week in Palestine . Turbo Computers & Software Co. Ltd. June 2006, Accessed on 2008-01-07. 
 
 ^  a   b   The rich flavors of Palestine   Archived  2009-04-16 at the  Wayback Machine  Farsakh, Mai M. Institute for Middle East Understanding (IMEU), (Originally published by  This Week in Palestine   Archived  2017-06-26 at the  Wayback Machine ) 2006-06-21. Accessed on 2007-12-18 
 
 ^   Al Sammak Ghornata   Archived  2014-02-01 at the  Wayback Machine   This week in Palestine , Turbo Computers & Software Co. Ltd. December 2001 Accessed on 2008-01-07 
 
 ^   Our Arab American Story   Archived  2008-06-08 at the  Wayback Machine  Visionalist. Accessed on 2007-12-23 
 
 ^   Shawarma - The Arabian Taco   Archived  2004-01-11 at the  Wayback Machine  Campres, Lance. Gomideast. Accessed on 2007-12-19 
 
 ^   An In­troduction to Palestinian Cui­sine: Typical Palestinian Dishes   Archived  2011-07-24 at the  Wayback Machine  Nasser, Christiane Dabdoub. July 2001, Accessed on 2008-01-08 
 
 ^   Hummus, a Palestinian staple   Archived  2013-04-11 at the  Wayback Machine  Lalie Ibrahim. Institute for Middle East Understanding, 2006-03-31. 
 
 ^   Palestinian Hummus , The San Francisco Chronicle, Food Section, 2007-04-04. 
 
 ^   Abu Ghosh (Israel): Description   Archived  2008-01-19 at the  Wayback Machine  Gutterman, Dov. CRW Flags. 
 
 ^   Palestinian Cuisine & Recipes: Baba Ghanoush   Archived  2007-10-16 at the  Wayback Machine  Harvey, Brad. Whats 4 Eats, International Recipes & Cooking Around the World. Accessed on 2007-12-20. 
 
 ^   Recipe of the Month: Mutabbal (Eggplant salad)   Archived  2014-02-01 at the  Wayback Machine   This Week in Palestine , Turbo Computers & Software Co. Ltd. August 1999, Accessed on 2008-01-08. 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   e   f   Meals of the Day   Archived  2014-03-29 at the  Wayback Machine   This Week in Palestine , Turbo Computers & Software Co. Ltd. March 2002, Accessed on 2008-01-07. 
 
 ^   One for the record books   Archived  2007-10-22 at the  Wayback Machine   Institute for Middle East Understanding . 2006-06-14. Accessed on 2007-12-19. 
 
 ^   Fattoush   Archived  2007-09-10 at the  Wayback Machine  The New York Times Company. 2006-07-26. Accessed on 2007-12-23 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   e   f   The Palestinian kitchen: Foods of Ramadan   Archived  2007-10-10 at the  Wayback Machine  Mustafa, Sufian.  Institute for Middle East Understanding , (Extracted from  This Week in Palestine ). 2007-09-22. Accessed on 2007-12-23. 
 
 ^  a   b   Restaurants   Archived  2014-01-09 at the  Wayback Machine  Mustafa, Sufian.  This week in Palestine , Turbo Computers & Software Co. Ltd. November 2002 
 
 ^   Zalatimo Sweets   Archived  2014-01-09 at the  Wayback Machine   This week in Palestine , Turbo Computers & Software Co. Ltd. June 1998, Accessed on 2008-01-09. 
 
 ^   Kershul, Kristine K.  Arabic, a language map . Bilingual Books Incorporate. ISBN 0944502180 
 
 ^   Abu Shanab (Uncle Mustache) Falafel   Archived  2014-01-09 at the  Wayback Machine   This week in Palestine , Turbo Computers & Software Co. Ltd 
 
 ^   Culture and Attraction: Gastronomy   Archived  2008-02-22 at the  Wayback Machine  Centre for Cultural Heritage Preservation 
 
 ^   Where the West Bank meets Bavaria   Archived  2007-10-13 at the  Wayback Machine   BBC News  Martin Asser, September 2007 
 
 ^   Middle East Rumors   Archived  2012-02-11 at the  Wayback Machine  The  Coca-Cola Company . 2006-12-31. Accessed on 2007-12-19. 
 
 ^   Qatayef (Ramadan pancakes)   Archived  2011-07-24 at the  Wayback Machine   This Week in Palestine , Turbo Computers & Software Co. Ltd. 2007-07-09. Accessed on 2008-01-07. 
 
 ^   Ramadan in the Old City   Archived  2014-02-01 at the  Wayback Machine   This week in Palestine , Turbo Computers & Software Co. Ltd. November 2004, Accessed on 2008-01-08. 
 
 ^  a   b   c   Dishes for Special Occasions   Archived  2014-02-01 at the  Wayback Machine  Khoury, Samia,  This Week in Palestine , Turbo Computers & Software Co. Ltd. June 2006, Accessed on 2008-01-07 
 
 ^   A tale of two Easters:Easter Cookies with Dates (Kaak bi Ajwa)   Archived  2007-10-10 at the  Wayback Machine  Saekel, Karola.  Institute for Middle East Understanding  (IMEU), (originally published by the  San Francisco Chronicle ). 2007-04-04. Accessed on 2007-12-18 
 
 
 Further reading 
 Christiane Dabdoub Nasser,  Classic Palestinian Cookery,  Saqi Books, London, 2001,  ISBN   0-86356-548-4 
 Christiane Dabdoub Nasser,  Classic Palestinian Cuisine,  Saqi Books, London, 2008,  ISBN   0-86356-618-9 
 Aziz Shihab ,  A Taste of Palestine: Menus and Memories,  Corona Publishing Co.  ISBN   0-931722-93-4 
 External links 
 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons has media related to  Cuisine of Palestine . 
 
 The rich flavors of Palestine  Mai M. Farsakh, This Week in Palestine, Jun 21, 2006 
 Palestinian Cuisine  IMEU, JAN 16, 2006 
 Hummus, a Palestinian staple  by Lailie Ibrahim, Mar. 31, 2006 
 Ramadan in Palestine at the Institute for Middle East Understanding 
 Falafel balls filled with French cheese 
 Kitchen of Palestine: A Food Blog about Palestinian Cooking 
 Jack’s Palestinian Comfort Food: Snack Attack! 
 Zaher, Yasmin.  The Evolution of Palestinian Cuisine , Haaretz, 08-07-2020. 
 v t e Asian cuisine Sovereign states 
 Afghanistan 
 Armenia 
 Azerbaijan 
 Bahrain 
 Bangladesh 
 Bhutan 
 Brunei 
 Burma (Myanmar) 
 Cambodia 
 China 
 Cyprus 
 East Timor (Timor-Leste) 
 Egypt 
 Georgia 
 India 
 Indonesia 
 Iran 
 Iraq 
 Israel 
 Japan 
 Jordan 
 Kazakhstan 
 North Korea 
 South Korea 
 Kuwait 
 Kyrgyzstan 
 Laos 
 Lebanon 
 Malaysia 
 Maldives 
 Mongolia 
 Nepal 
 Oman 
 Pakistan 
 Philippines 
 Qatar 
 Russia 
 Saudi Arabia 
 Singapore 
 Sri Lanka 
 Syria 
 Tajikistan 
 Thailand 
 Turkey 
 Turkmenistan 
 United Arab Emirates 
 Uzbekistan 
 Vietnam 
 Yemen 
 States with limited recognition 
 Abkhazia 
 Artsakh 
 Northern Cyprus 
 Palestine 
 South Ossetia 
 Taiwan 
 Dependencies and other territories 
 British Indian Ocean Territory 
 Christmas Island 
 Cocos (Keeling) Islands 
 Hong Kong 
 Macau 
 
 v t e Middle Eastern cuisine 
 Bahrain 
 Cyprus 
 Egypt 
 Iran 
 Iraq 
 Israel 
 Jordan 
 Kuwait 
 Lebanon 
 Oman 
 Palestine 
 Qatar 
 Saudi Arabia 
 Syria 
 Turkey 
 United Arab Emirates 
 Yemen 
 
 v t e Mediterranean cuisine Regions Southern Maghrebi 
 Algerian 
 Chakhchoukha 
 Berber 
 Libyan 
 Bazin 
 Moroccan 
 Méchoui 
 Tajine 
 Tunisian 
 Shakshouka 
 Regional
 Couscous 
 Egyptian 
 Duqqa 
 Ful medames 
 Kushari 
 Mulukhiyah 
 Levant 
 Israeli 
 Hamin 
 Lebanese 
 Kibbeh 
 Palestinian 
 Musakhan 
 Syrian 
 Regional 
 Baba ghanoush 
 Hummus 
 Northern Turkish 
 Cheeses 
 Desserts 
 Kebabs 
 Rakı 
 Turkish tea 
 Greek 
 Gyros 
 Greek salad 
 Stifado 
 Feta 
 Skordalia 
 Loukaniko 
 Melomakarono 
 Ionian Islands 
 Bourdeto 
 Pastitsada 
 Crete 
 Dakos 
 Paximadi 
 Other Balkan 
 Albanian 
 Aromanian 
 Bosnia and Herzegovina 
 Croatian 
 Montenegrin 
 Slovenian 
 Regional
 Pita 
 Shish kebab 
 Yogurt 
 Baklava 
 Moussaka 
 Italian 
 Regional
 Pasta 
 Pizza 
 Abruzzese 
 Arrosticini 
 Mortadella di Campotosto 
 Maccheroni alla chitarra 
 Pizzelle 
 Timballo 
 Bocconotto 
 Parrozzo 
 Apulian 
 Arbëreshë 
 Ligurian 
 Ciuppin 
 Focaccia 
 Pesto 
 Ravioli 
 Lombard 
 Mantuan 
 Lucanian 
 Neapolitan 
 Neapolitan ragù 
 Pasta e fagioli 
 Roman 
 Carbonara 
 Sardinian 
 Pane carasau 
 Malloreddus 
 Mirto (liqueur) 
 Abbamele 
 Pecorino sardo 
 Culurgiònes 
 Bottarga 
 Seada 
 Sicilian 
 Cannoli 
 Caponata 
 Pasta alla Norma 
 Scaccia 
 Tuscan 
 Ribollita 
 Venetian 
 Carpaccio 
 Polenta 
 Risotto 
 French 
 Corsican 
 Brocciu 
 Occitan 
 Cassoulet 
 Brandade 
 Provencal 
 Bouillabaisse 
 Ratatouille 
 Salade niçoise 
 Spanish 
 Andalusian 
 Gazpacho 
 Sherry 
 Balearic 
 Caldereta 
 Tombet 
 Catalan 
 Escalivada 
 Escudella 
 Ollada 
 Valencian 
 Paella 
 Other 
 Gibraltarian 
 Monégasque 
 Islands 
 Cypriot 
 Afelia 
 Halloumi 
 Maltese 
 Staples 
 Wheat 
 Bread 
 Couscous 
 Pasta 
 Pizza 
 Semolina 
 Olive 
 Olive oil 
 Grape 
 Wine 
 Shared 
 Anise spirits 
 Bottarga 
 Lamb 
 Exemplars 
 Elizabeth David 
 A Book of Mediterranean Food 
 
 Category 
 
 v t e Cuisines Continental 
 African 
 North 
 West 
 list 
 Americas 
 Caribbean 
 North 
 South 
 list 
 Asian 
 Caucasian 
 Central 
 Indian subcontinent 
 Levantine 
 list 
 European 
 Balkan 
 Central 
 Eastern 
 list 
 Oceanic 
 Intercontinental
 Global 
 Latin American 
 Mediterranean 
 Middle Eastern 
 National  and regional 
 Afghan 
 Albanian 
 Algerian 
 American 
 Californian 
 Floribbean 
 Hawaiian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Lowcountry (South Carolina) 
 New England 
 New Mexico 
 Pacific Northwest 
 Pennsylvania Dutch 
 Puerto Rican 
 Southern US 
 Southwest US 
 Texas 
 Angolan 
 Argentine 
 Armenian 
 Australian 
 Austrian 
 Azerbaijani 
 Bahraini 
 Bangladeshi 
 Barbadian 
 Belarusian 
 Belgian 
 Belizean 
 Beninese 
 Bhutanese 
 Bolivian 
 Bosnian-Herzegovinian 
 Botswana 
 Brazilian 
 British 
 Channel Islands 
 English 
 Gibraltarian 
 Northern Irish 
 Saint Helena 
 Scottish 
 Welsh 
 Bruneian 
 Bulgarian 
 Burkinabé 
 Burmese 
 Burundian 
 Cambodian 
 Cameroonian 
 Canadian 
 Acadian 
 Québécois 
 Central African Republic 
 Chadian 
 Chilean 
 Chinese 
 Cantonese 
 Hong Kong 
 Macanese 
 Tibetan 
 Xinjiang 
 Colombian 
 Congolese 
 Corsican 
 Croatian 
 Cuban 
 Cypriot 
 Czech 
 Danish 
 Faroese 
 Greenlandic 
 Djiboutian 
 Dominican 
 Dominican Republic 
 Dutch 
 East Timorese 
 Ecuadorian 
 Egyptian 
 Emirati 
 Equatorial Guinean 
 Eritrean 
 Estonian 
 Ethiopian 
 Fijian 
 Filipino 
 Finnish 
 French 
 Occitan 
 French Guianan 
 Gabonese 
 Gambian 
 Georgian 
 German 
 Ghanaian 
 Greek 
 Cretan 
 Epirotic 
 Greek Macedonian 
 Heptanesean 
 Guatemalan 
 Guinea-Bissauan 
 Guinean 
 Haitian 
 Honduran 
 Hungarian 
 Icelandic 
 Indian 
 Arunachalese 
 Assamese 
 Bengali 
 Bihari 
 Goan 
 Gujarati 
 Himachal Pradesh 
 Kashmiri 
 Jharkhandi 
 Karnataka 
 Kerala 
 Maharashtrian 
 Manipuri 
 Meghalayan 
 Mizo 
 Naga 
 Odia 
 Punjabi 
 Rajasthani 
 Sikkimese 
 Sindhi 
 Tamil 
 Telangana 
 Telugu 
 Indonesian 
 Acehnese 
 Balinese 
 Banjar 
 Batak 
 Betawi 
 Indo 
 Javanese 
 Madurese 
 Makassar 
 Minahasan 
 Minangkabau 
 Palembangese 
 Sundanese 
 Iranian 
 Iraqi 
 Irish 
 Israeli 
 Italian 
 Abruzzese 
 Ligurian 
 Lombard 
 Lucanian 
 Neapolitan 
 Roman 
 Sardinian 
 Sicilian 
 Venetian 
 Ivorian 
 Jamaican 
 Japanese 
 Okinawan 
 Jordanian 
 Kazakh 
 Kenyan 
 Korean 
 North Korean 
 South Korean 
 Kosovan 
 Kuwaiti 
 Kyrgyz 
 Lao 
 Latvian 
 Lebanese 
 Lesotho 
 Liberian 
 Libyan 
 Liechtensteiner 
 Lithuanian 
 Luxembourg 
 Macedonian 
 Malagasy 
 Malawian 
 Malaysian 
 Sabahan 
 Sarawakian 
 Maldivian 
 Malian 
 Maltese 
 Mauritanian 
 Mauritian 
 Mexican 
 Moldovan 
 Monégasque 
 Mongolian 
 Montenegrin 
 Moroccan 
 Mozambican 
 Namibian 
 Nauruan 
 Nepalese 
 New Zealand 
 Nicaraguan 
 Niger 
 Nigerian 
 Niuean 
 Norwegian 
 Omani 
 Pakistani 
 Palestinian 
 Panamanian 
 Peruvian 
 Polish 
 Portuguese 
 Qatari 
 Romanian  (incl.  Transylvanian Saxon ) 
 Russian 
 Bashkir 
 Chechen 
 Circassian 
 Komi 
 Mordovian 
 Sakha 
 Tatar 
 Udmurt 
 Yamal 
 Rwandan 
 Saint Lucian 
 Salvadoran 
 Sammarinese 
 São Tomé and Príncipe 
 Saudi Arabian 
 Senegalese 
 Serbian 
 Seychellois 
 Sierra Leonean 
 Singaporean 
 Slovak 
 Slovenian 
 Somali 
 South African 
 Spanish 
 Andalusian 
 Asturian 
 Balearic 
 Basque 
 Canarian 
 Cantabrian 
 Catalan 
 Extremaduran 
 Galician 
 Manchegan 
 Valencian 
 Sri Lankan 
 Sudanese 
 Swazi 
 Swedish 
 Swiss 
 Syrian 
 Taiwanese 
 Tajik 
 Tanzanian 
 Zanzibari 
 Thai 
 Togolese 
 Tunisian 
 Turkish 
 Turkmen 
 Trinidadian and Tobagonian 
 Ugandan 
 Ukrainian 
 Uruguayan 
 Uzbek 
 Venezuelan 
 Vietnamese 
 Western Saharan 
 Yemeni 
 Zambian 
 Zimbabwean 
 Ethnic 
 Ainu 
 Arab 
 Indonesian 
 Aromanian 
 Assyrian 
 Balochi 
 Berber 
 Cajun 
 Chinese 
 American 
 Canadian 
 Chifa 
 Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Crimean Tatar 
 Greek American 
 Hazaragi 
 Indian 
 Anglo-Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Indigenous American 
 Inuit 
 Italian American 
 Kurdish 
 Livonian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Malay 
 Ossetian 
 Parsi 
 Pashtun 
 Peranakan 
 Romani 
 Sámi 
 Soul food 
 Sylheti 
 Transylvanian Saxon 
 Yup'ik 
 Religious 
 Buddhist 
 Christian 
 Goan Catholic 
 Mangalorean Catholic 
 Mennonite 
 Hindu 
 Islamic 
 Chinese 
 Ital 
 Jain 
 Jewish 
 American 
 Ashkenazi 
 Bukharan 
 Ethiopian 
 Mizrahi 
 Sephardic 
 Syrian 
 Ritual slaughter 
 Sikh 
 Historical 
 Ancient Egyptian 
 Ancient Greek 
 Ancient Israelite 
 Ancient Roman 
 Antebellum America 
 Aztec 
 Byzantine 
 Early modern European 
 Historical Chinese 
 Historical Indian subcontinent 
 Historical North Indian and Pakistani 
 History of agriculture 
 History of alcoholic drinks 
 History of bread 
 History of seafood 
 History of vegetarianism 
 Historical Argentine 
 Historical Japanese 
 Inca 
 Mayan 
 Muisca 
 Mughal 
 Medieval 
 Ottoman 
 Peasant 
 Soviet 
 Thirteen Colonies 
 Styles 
 Classique 
 Fast food 
 Fusion 
 New American 
 Eurasian 
 Haute 
 Molecular gastronomy 
 Note by Note 
 Nouvelle 
 Lists 
 List of cuisines 
 List of historical cuisines 
 Lists of prepared foods 
 Related 
 Cookbook 
 Cooking 
 Culinary arts 
 Drink 
 Food 
 history 
 Diet 
 Meal preparation 
 
   Food portal 
   Drink portal 
   Category 
   Commons 
   Cookbook 
   WikiProject 
   Outline 
 
 Authority control : National libraries  
 Israel 
 United States 
 
  
NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw2274
Cached time: 20230310195632
Cache expiry: 1814400
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [no‐toc‐conversion, vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.872 seconds
Real time usage: 1.094 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 19387/1000000
Post‐expand include size: 178908/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 7462/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 9/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 87743/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.356/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 8974177/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/400
 
 
Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  796.569      1 -total
 29.88%  238.002      7 Template:Navbox
 23.18%  184.609      1 Template:Asian_topic
 19.94%  158.856      1 Template:Reflist
 12.65%  100.769     52 Template:Iso2country
 10.18%   81.068      1 Template:Palestinians
  9.89%   78.754      1 Template:Sidebar
  9.37%   74.612      1 Template:Citation
  8.19%   65.258      1 Template:Short_description
  5.93%   47.215      1 Template:Commons_category
 
  Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:idhash:11146241-0!canonical and timestamp 20230310195631 and revision id 1136333547. Rendering was triggered because: page-view
  
 esi <esi:include src="/esitest-fa8a495983347898/content" />  
 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Palestinian_cuisine&oldid=1136333547 " 
 Categories :  Palestinian cuisine Arab cuisine Cuisine by ethnicity Levantine cuisine Mediterranean cuisine Middle Eastern cuisine Hidden categories:  Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia extended-confirmed-protected pages Good articles Commons category link is on Wikidata Region topic template using suffix Articles with J9U identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  This page was last edited on 29 January 2023, at 21:21  (UTC) . 
 Text is available under the  Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0 ;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the  Terms of Use  and  Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the  Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. 
 
 
 Privacy policy 
 About Wikipedia 
 Disclaimers 
 Contact Wikipedia 
 Mobile view 
 Developers 
 Statistics 
 Cookie statement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
