
 
 
 Jump to content 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle sidebar 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Create account Log in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Personal tools 
 
 
 
 
   Create account   Log in 
 
 
 
 
		Pages for logged out editors  learn more 
 
 
 Contributions Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Navigation 
 
 
 Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate 
 
 
 
 
 Contribute 
 
 
 Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file 
 
 
 
 
 Tools 
 
 
 What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item 
 
 
 
 
 Print/export 
 
 
 Download as PDF Printable version 
 
 
 
 
 In other projects 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons Wikibooks 
 
 
 
 
 Languages 
 
 On this Wikipedia the language links are at the top of the page across from the article title.  Go to top . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CentralNotice  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Contents 
 move to sidebar 
 hide 
 
 
 
 
 (Top) 
 
 
 
 
 
 1 History 
 
 
				Toggle History subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 1.1 Middle Ages 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.2 Renaissance 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.3 The Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.4 After World War II 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.5 Modern era 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 Holiday meals 
 
 
				Toggle Holiday meals subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 2.1 Christmas dishes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.2 Fat Thursday 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.3 Easter breakfast 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 Regional cuisines 
 
 
				Toggle Regional cuisines subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 3.1 Greater Poland 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.2 Lesser Poland 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.3 Lubelszczyzna 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.4 Kashubia and Pomerania 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.5 Masovia 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.6 Podlachia 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.7 Silesia 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.8 Warmia–Masuria 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4 Soups 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5 Meat and fish 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6 Flour or potato-based 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 7 Side dishes and salads 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8 Bread 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 9 Desserts and sweets 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 10 Beverages 
 
 
				Toggle Beverages subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 10.1 Alcoholic 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 10.2 Non-alcoholic 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 11 Lists of common Polish dishes found on a national level 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 12 See also 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 13 References 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 14 External links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
						Toggle the table of contents
					 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle the table of contents 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Polish cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 34 languages 
 
 
 
 Afrikaans Azərbaycanca Беларуская Български Català Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Español فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa ქართული Kurdî Magyar Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Română Русский Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 
 Edit links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Article Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 English 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 More 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
 
 
 Culinary traditions of Poland 
 Complementary traditional Polish farmers food ( bigos  stew,  pierogi  dumplings,  gołąbki  cabbage rolls,  skwarki  cracklings) Various kinds of Polish  kielbasa . From the top down: biała,  kabanos , wiejska with  mustard Oscypek , a Polish smoked cheese and traditional food of the  Goral  people in the  Tatra Mountains Bagels  originated in Poland and became widespread during migration of  Polish Jews . 
 Part of  a series  on the Culture of Poland 
 History 
 Middle Ages 
 Renaissance 
 Baroque 
 Enlightenment 
 Romanticism 
 Positivism 
 Young Poland 
 Interbellum 
 World War II 
 Polish People's Republic 
 Modern-day 
 
 People 
 Languages 
 Polish 
 Yiddish 
 German 
 Lithuanian 
 Ruthenian 
 Romani  ( Baltic Romani 
 North Central Romani 
 Sinte Romani 
 Vlax Romani ) 
 Silesian 
 Kashubian 
 Vilamovian 
 
 Traditions 
 Mythology 
 Cuisine 
 Festivals 
 Religion 
 Art 
 Artists 
 Painters 
 Architecture 
 
 Literature 
 Authors 
 Poets 
 
 Music  and  Performing arts 
 Theatre 
 Composers 
 Musicians 
 
 Media 
 Radio 
 Television 
 Cinema 
 
 Sport 
 Football 
 Handball 
 Horse Racing 
 Motorsport 
 Volleyball 
 Winter sports 
 
 Monuments 
 World Heritage Sites 
 Castles 
 
 Symbols 
 Flag 
 Coat of arms 
 National anthem 
 
   Poland portal v t e 
 Polish cuisine  ( Polish :  kuchnia polska ) is a style of cooking and food preparation originating in or widely popular in  Poland . Due to  Poland's history , Polish cuisine has evolved over the centuries to be very eclectic, and it shares many similarities with other regional cuisines. Polish-styled cooking in other cultures is often referred to as  à la polonaise .
 Polish cuisine is rich in meat, especially pork, chicken and game, in addition to a wide range of vegetables, spices, mushrooms, and herbs. [1]  It is also characteristic in its use of various kinds of  noodles ,  cereals , and  grains . [2]  In general, Polish cuisine is hearty and heavy in its use of butter, cream, eggs, and extensive seasoning. The traditional dishes are often demanding in preparation. Many  Poles  allow themselves a generous amount of time to serve and enjoy their festive meals, especially  Christmas Eve  supper ( Wigilia ) on December 24, or  Easter  breakfast, both of which could take a number of days to prepare in their entirety.
 Among the well-known Polish national dishes are  bigos   [ˈbiɡɔs] ,  pierogi   [pʲɛˈrɔɡʲi] ,  kiełbasa ,  kotlet schabowy   [ˈkɔtlɛt sxaˈbɔvɨ]  (pork loin breaded cutlet),  gołąbki   [ɡɔˈwɔ̃pkʲi]  (cabbage roll),  zrazy   [ˈzrazɨ]  (roulade),  zupa ogórkowa   [ˈzupa ɔɡurˈkɔva]  (sour  cucumber soup ),  zupa grzybowa   [ˈzupa ɡʐɨˈbɔva]  (mushroom soup),  zupa pomidorowa   [ˈzupa pɔmidɔˈrɔva]  ( tomato soup ), [3]   rosół   [ˈrɔsuw]  (meat broth),  żurek   [ˈʐurɛk]  (sour rye soup),  flaki   [ˈflakʲi]  ( tripe soup ), and red beetroot  barszcz   [barʂt͡ʂ] . [4] 
 A traditional Polish dinner is composed of three courses, beginning with a soup like the popular  rosół  broth and  tomato soup . At restaurants, the soups are followed by an appetizer such as  herring  (prepared in either cream, oil, or in  aspic ), or other cured meats and vegetable salads. The main course usually includes a serving of meat, such as  roast ,  breaded pork cutlet , or chicken, with a  coleslaw -like  surówka  ( [suˈrufka] ), shredded root vegetables with lemon and sugar (carrot, celeriac,  seared  beetroot),  sauerkraut , or  mizeria  salad. The side dishes are usually boiled  potatoes ,  kasza , or less commonly,  rice . Meals often conclude with a dessert including  makowiec , a  poppy seed  pastry,  napoleonka  cream pie, or  sernik  ( cheesecake ).
 Internationally, if a Polish culinary tradition is used in other cuisines, it is referred to as  à la polonaise , from French meaning 'Polish-style.' In  French cooking , this term is used for techniques like using butter instead of cooking oil; frying vegetables with buttered breadcrumbs; using minced parsley and boiled eggs ( Polonaise garnish ); and adding  horseradish , lemon juice, or sour cream to sauces like  velouté . [5] [6] 
 
 
 History [ edit ] 
 Middle Ages [ edit ] 
   Flaki  (or  flaczki ) is a tripe soup, known since the  Middle Ages  and favourite dish of king  Jogaila . 
 Polish cuisine in the  Middle Ages  was based on dishes made of agricultural produce and cereal crops ( millet ,  rye ,  wheat ), meats of wild and farm animals, fruits, forest berries and game, honey, herbs, and local spices. It was known above all for abundant use of salt from  Wieliczka  and permanent presence of  groats  ( kasza ). A high calorific value of dishes and drinking  beer  or  mead  as a basic drink was typical of Middle Ages Polish cuisine.
 During the Middle Ages the cuisine of Poland was heavy and spicy. Two main ingredients were meat (both  game  and beef) and cereal. The latter consisted initially of  proso millet , but later in the Middle Ages other types of cereal became widely used. Most commoners did not eat bread and instead consumed cereals in the forms of  kasza  or various types of  flatbread , some of which (for instance  kołacz ) are considered traditional recipes even in the 21st century. Apart from cereals, a large portion of the daily diet of mediaeval Poles consisted of beans, mostly  broad beans  and  peas . As the territory of Poland was densely forested, usage of  mushrooms , forest berries, nuts, and wild honey was also widespread. Among the delicacies of the Polish nobility were honey-braised  bear  paws served with  horseradish -flavoured salad, smoked bear tongue, and bear  bacon  (bears are now protected in Poland) [ citation needed ] . [7] [8] 
 
   Pierniki  (Polish gingerbread) from  Toruń , 14th-century recipe 
 Thanks to close trade relations with Turkey and the countries in the Caucasus, the price of  spices  (such as  black pepper  and  nutmeg ) was much lower in Poland than the rest of  Europe , hence spicy sauces became popular. The usage of two basic sauces, the  jucha czerwoná  and  jucha szará  (meaning "red" and "gray blood" in  Old Polish ), remained widespread at least until the 18th century. [9] 
 The daily beverages included milk,  whey ,  buttermilk , and various herb  infusions . The most popular alcoholic beverages were  beer  and  mead ; however, in the 16th century, upper classes began to import  Hungarian  and  Silesian   wines . Mead was so widespread that in the 13th century Prince  Leszek I the White  explained to the  Pope  that Polish knights could not participate in a  crusade  as there was no mead in the  Holy Land . [10]  Also,  vodka  became popular, possibly among the lower classes first. There is written evidence suggesting that vodka originated in Poland. The word "vodka" was recorded for the first time ever in 1405 in  Akta Grodzkie , [11]  the court documents from the  Palatinate of Sandomierz  in Poland. [11]  At that time, the word  wódka  (vodka) referred to chemical compounds such as  medicines  and  cosmetic  cleansers, while the popular beverage was called  gorzałka   [ɡɔˈʐawka]  (from the  Old Polish   gorzeć ).
 
 Renaissance [ edit ] 
 Along with the Italian queen  Bona Sforza  (second wife of  Sigismund I of Poland ), many Italian cooks came to Poland after 1518. Although native vegetable foods were an ancient and intrinsic part of Polish cuisine, this began a period in which vegetables like  lettuce ,  leeks ,  celeriac , and  cabbage  were more widely used. Even today, some of those vegetables are referred to in  Polish  as  włoszczyzna , a word derived from  Włochy , the Polish name of  Italy . During this period, the use of spices—which arrived in Poland via Western Asian trade routes—was common among those who could afford them, and dishes considered elegant could be very spicy. However, the idea that Queen Bona was the first to introduce vegetables to Poland is false. While her southern cooks may have helped elevate and expand the role of various vegetables in royal Polish cuisine, records show that the court of king  Jogaila  ( Polish :  Władysław II Jagiełło , who died in 1434, over 80 years before her reign) enjoyed a variety of vegetables including lettuce, beets, cabbage, turnip, carrots, peas, and cauliflower.
 
   Ogórki kiszone  (brine-pickled cucumbers) 
 Polish-style  pickled cucumber  ( ogórek kiszony ) is a variety developed in the northern part of  Central Europe . It has been exported worldwide and is found in the cuisines of many countries. It is usually preserved in wooden barrels. A cucumber only pickled for a few days is different in taste (less sour) than one pickled for a longer time and is called  ogórek małosolny  ( lit.   'lightly salted cucumber'). Another kind of pickled cucumber popular in  Poland  is  ogórek konserwowy  ( lit.   'preserved cucumber'), which is preserved with vinegar rather than pickled and uses different spices creating a sweet and sour taste.
 The only indisputable fact is that the court of Queen Bona was fed in an Italian fashion, because she exclusively employed Italian cooks, some of whom were originally hired to prepare parties for aristocratic families but who were soon serving typical Italian dishes as part of the court's daily menus. Court records show that Queen Bona imported large volumes of southern European, American, and Western Asian fruits (oranges, lemons, pomegranates, olives, figs, tomatoes), vegetables (potatoes and corn), nuts (chestnuts, raisins, and almonds, including  marzipan ), along with grains (such as rice), cane sugar, and Italian olive oil. The court also imported various herbs and spices including black pepper, fennel, saffron, ginger, nutmeg, cloves, and cinnamon. [12] 
 
 The Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth [ edit ] 
   Compendium ferculorum, albo Zebranie potraw  ("Collection of Dishes") is the oldest extant Polish cookbook, from 1682. 
 Until the  Partitions  perpetrated by the neighboring empires,  Poland  was one of the largest countries in the world, and encompassed many regions with its own, distinctive culinary traditions. [12]  Two consecutive Polish kings,  Władysław IV  and  John II Casimir  ( Polish :  Jan II Kazimierz Waza ) married the same French Duchess,  Marie Louise Gonzaga  ( Polish :  Ludwika Maria ), daughter of  Charles I, Duke of Mantua ; she was persecuted by King  Louis XIII of France  for her affiance to his opponent  Gaston, Duke of Orléans . Marie Louise arrived in Warsaw in 1646, was widowed, and married again in 1649. [ relevant? ]  Ludwika brought along with her a court full of Frenchmen including courtiers, secretaries, army officers, physicians, merchants, craftsmen, as well as many cooks. [13] 
 Records show that her visiting guests were entertained with forest game, fowl ( waxwings ,  fieldfares ,  snow bunting ,  hazel grouse ,  partridges ,  black grouse ,  capercaillies ), fish and mollusks ( loach , various  trout ,  grayling , fresh and smoked  salmon ,  flounder , salted  herring ,  lampreys  in vinegar,  oysters ,  snails ), and Genoese  pâté , not to mention fresh fruit and  chestnuts . French and Italian wines were served, as well as  mead  and local beers. The dishes were made only according to French recipes. The royal court, with all its innovations, exerted a broad influence over the rest of aristocratic residences and noble palaces across Poland. French cuisine was in fashion and many families willingly employed French cooks and pâté makers. In the mid-18th century, French  champagne  appeared on Polish tables. [12] 
 Among the most influential cuisines under the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth were  Lithuanian ,  Jewish ,  German , and  Hungarian cuisine , as well as  Armenian cuisine , which arrived in Poland before the 17th century along with many settlers, especially in the south-eastern part of the  Commonwealth . [12]  Signature dishes of the Western Asia reached Polish tables thanks to the Armenian trade and cultural exchange with Poland's neighbor: the  Ottoman Empire . Rare delicacies were brought to royal court as gifts from sultans and royal envoys. The strongest influences were noted in the cities of  Lwów ,  Kraków ,  Kamieniec Podolski , and  Zamość  due to many Armenians living there permanently. [12]  Also, because of the close contact with the Ottoman Empire,  coffee  ( kawa ) and  boza  became popular.
 With the subsequent decline of Poland, and the grain production crisis that followed  The Deluge , potatoes began to replace the traditional use of cereal. The oldest surviving Polish cookbook,  Compendium ferculorum, albo Zebranie potraw  ("Collection of Dishes") by  Stanisław Czerniecki  was published in Kraków in 1682. [14] [15]  Under the Partitions, the cuisine of  Poland  became heavily influenced by cuisines of the surrounding empires. This included  Russian  and  German  cuisines, but also the culinary traditions of most nations of the  Austro-Hungarian  empire. The 19th century also saw the creation of many Polish cookbooks, by Jan Szyttler,  Anna Ciundziewicka , Wincenta Zawadzka,  Lucyna Ćwierczakiewiczowa , and others. [16] [17] 
 
 After World War II [ edit ] 
   Most enduring of Polish culinary traditions are the  pierogi , a national dish of Poland, originating in the ancient culinary traditions of the former Polish eastern territories ( Kresy ). [18] 
 After the end of  World War II , Poland became a communist country which joined the  Warsaw Pact . Some restaurants were  nationalized . The communists envisioned a net of  lunch rooms  called "bufet" for the workers at various companies, and  milk bars  for the public. The majority of restaurants that survived the 1940s and 1950s were state-owned. Workplace lunch rooms promoted mostly inexpensive meals, including many soups, meatballs and pork chops, and staples such as  placki ziemniaczane  /  kartoflane  (potato pancakes),  placki z jablkami  (apple pancakes),  kopytka  (potato gnocchi),  leniwe  (farmer's cheese gnocchi served sweet), and  pierogi . A typical second course consisted of meat cutlet served with potatoes or buckwheat and  surówka  (raw, julienned vegetables). The popular Polish  kotlet schabowy  is a  breaded cutlet  similar to the Austrian  Wiener schnitzel  and the Italian and Spanish  Milanesa . [19] [20] 
 With time, the  shortage economy  led to scarcity of  meat ,  coffee ,  tea , and other basic ingredients. Many products like  chocolate ,  sugar , and meat were rationed, with a specific limit depending on social class and health requirements. Physical workers and pregnant women were generally entitled to more food products. Imports were restricted, so much of the food supply was domestic. Cuisine became homogeneous, to be a chef was no longer a prestigious profession, and for decades the country became basically disconnected from any foreign cuisine. [21]  Tropical fruits (such as citrus,  banana , and  pineapple ) were available during holidays, while local fruits and vegetables were mostly seasonal but were available at private stands. For most of the year, people had to get by with only domestic winter fruit and vegetables: apples, plums, currants, onions, potatoes,  cabbage , root vegetables, and frozen products. Other food products (of foreign origins) were available at markets at high prices.
 This situation led in turn to gradual replacement of traditional Polish cuisine with food prepared from anything available at the moment. Among the popular dishes introduced by the public restaurants was  kotlet mielony  (meatball), a sort of a  hamburger  often served with beet puree and fresh carrots. The traditional recipes were mostly preserved during the  Wigilia  feast ( Christmas Eve ), for which many families tried to prepare 12 traditional courses. [22] 
 A popular form of fish dish was, and still is, the  paprikash  ( paprykarz szczeciński ) from the port city of  Szczecin , usually added to sandwiches as a spread. [23] 
 
   Zapiekanka , a baguette with melted cheese, meat, mushrooms, onions, and ketchup. A popular  street food  to this day which originated in the 1970s. 
 Modern era [ edit ] 
 With the  fall of communism in Poland  in 1989, a wave of new restaurants opened, and the basic foodstuffs were once again easily obtainable. This led to a gradual return of rich traditional Polish cuisine, both in home cooking and in restaurants. At the same time, restaurants and supermarkets promoted the use of ingredients typical of other cuisines of the world. Among the most notable foods that started to become common in Poland were  cucurbits ,  zucchini , and many kinds of fish. During communist times, fresh fish was available essentially only in the seaside regions.
 Recent years have seen the advent of a  slow food  movement, and a number of TV programs devoted to cuisine, both traditional and otherwise, have gained popularity. In 2011, a nostalgic cookbook (written in English) combining a child's memories growing up in the  Gierek  era with traditional Polish recipes was published in  London . [24] [25] 
 American food in Poland, most commonly  McDonald's ,  KFC , and  Pizza Hut , are declining in popularity as  Polish  people prefer their own cuisine, including  fast food . [ citation needed ]  Meanwhile,  doner kebabs  are gaining popularity. Nonetheless, in most of Poland one can still get traditional and very popular Polish street food such as the  zapiekanka , a pizza-like baguette with cheese, mushrooms, onion,  ketchup , and sometimes meat. There are also many small-scale, quick-service restaurants which serve  kebabs , hamburgers, hot dogs, and Polish  kiełbasa  (sausage). In the southern mountainous region,  oscypek  served with cranberry jam is a popular street food.
 
 Holiday meals [ edit ] 
 Christmas dishes [ edit ] 
 See also:  Wigilia 
   Barszcz  z  uszkami , one of the traditional  Wigilia  dishes 
 Traditional  Christmas Eve  supper called  Wigilia  is meatless (except for fish) and usually consists of  barszcz  ( borscht ) with  uszka  (small dumplings)—a classic Polish Christmas Eve starter—followed by dishes such as fried  carp , carp or cod with apple and leeks, fresh salad, or carp in  aspic . Traditionally, carp (fried or Jewish style) provides a main component of the Christmas Eve meal across Poland. Other popular dishes, eaten the next day, include pickled  matjas herring ,  rollmops ,  pierogi  with  sauerkraut  and forest  mushrooms ,  fish soup ,  kielbasa ,  hams ,  bigos  (savory stew of cabbage and meat), and vegetable salads. Among popular desserts are  gingerbread , cheesecake, various fruits such as  oranges , poppy seed cake,  makowiec  ( makówki  in  Silesia ), fruit  kompot , and  kluski  with poppyseed and gingerbread. Regional dishes include  żurek ,  siemieniotka  (in  Silesia ), and  kołduny , stuffed dumplings with mushrooms or meat from the eastern regions. [26] 
 
 Fat Thursday [ edit ] 
   Pączki  or  kreple , filled doughnut 
 Tłusty Czwartek , or "Fat Thursday", is a Polish culinary custom on the last Thursday before  Lent , equivalent to  Pancake Day . Traditionally, it is an occasion to enjoy sweets and cakes before the forty days of abstinence expected of Catholics until  Easter Day . [27] 
 The most popular sweetmeats on Fat Thursday are  pączki , Polish doughnuts, and  faworki  (sometimes called  chrust ), equivalent to the French  beignet . Traditional Polish doughnuts are filled with rose petal jam, plum jam, or apple and covered with icing with orange peel or powdered with  icing sugar . Fat Thursday used to mark the beginning of a "Fat Week", a period of great gluttony during which Polish ancestors consumed dishes served with  smalec  (lard), bacon, and all kinds of meat. [ citation needed ] 
 The original doughnuts, popular until the 16th century, were made of the same dough as bread, would be filled with pork and fried on  smalec . Only later were they made as patisserie. [ citation needed ] 
 
 Easter breakfast [ edit ] 
 See also:  Święconka 
 A typical  Easter  breakfast often consists of cold-cuts served with horseradish sauce and beet salads, breads,  bigos ,  żurek ,  kiełbasa ,  smoked salmon  or  herring , marinated vegetable salads, Easter salad (chopped boiled eggs,  green peas ,  ćwikła ,  carrot ,  apple ,  potato ,  parsley , and  mayonnaise ),  coffee ,  tea  and cakes (such as chocolate cake),  makowiec ,  mazurek , and  sernik .
 
 Regional cuisines [ edit ] 
 Poland has a number of unique regional cuisines with regional differences in preparations and ingredients. For an extensive list of the dishes typical to  Galicia ,  Kresy ,  Podlachia ,  Masovia  (including  Warsaw ),  Masuria ,  Pomerania ,  Silesia ,  Lesser Poland , the  Tatra mountains , and  Greater Poland , see the  List of Polish cuisine dishes .
 
 Greater Poland [ edit ] 
 Typical for Greater Poland are various dishes from potatoes – especially  pyry z gzikiem  (potatoes with quark cheese mixed with sour cream, onions and chieves). Popular are also poultry dishes like  kaczka po poznańsku  (duck meat with red cabbage and steam-cooked dumplings),  czernina  (duck blood soup) and goose meat eaten on the on the Saint Martin’s Day.
 Other famous products include also  rogale świętomarcińskie  (croissants filled with white poppy seeds),  fried cheese  and a beer  Grodziskie /Grätzer (made from oak-smoked wheat malt and with a low alcohol content).
 
 Lesser Poland [ edit ] 
 The city of  Kraków  is famous for its sausage  kiełbasa krakowska  and meat sandwich  maczanka krakowska . Typical are also some Austrian influences due to the fact, that the city belonged in the second half of the 19th century and at the beginning of the 20th century to  Austria-Hungary . They include  Pischinger  cake and pork cutlet  kotlet schabowy  (today popular in the whole Poland). Popular street foods are bagels  obwarzanki  and baked sandwiches  zapiekanki  sold on the Plac Nowy square.
 The area near  Nowy Sącz  and  Limanowa  is rich in quality plums; popular are dried ones called  suska sechlońska  and plum brandy  slivovitz .
 The mountain areas of Lesser Poland, especially Podhale, are famous for its sheep milk cheeses like  bundz , creamy  bryndza  or smoked  oscypek . Other popular dishes include a milk drink  żętyca , a sauerkraut soup  kwaśnica ,  placek po zbójnicku  (potato pancakes with goulash on top) and a góral tea (tea with alcohol).
 
 Lubelszczyzna [ edit ] 
 Many dishes in  Lublin  cuisine have Jewish roots, like  cebularz  (flatbread topped with onion and poppy seads) and  forszmak  (soup with various types of meat).
 Important local ingredient is groat – typical dish consisting of it is a pie called  pieróg biłgorajski .
 
 Kashubia and Pomerania [ edit ] 
 Because of the proximity to the sea, typical for the region are various forms of fish dishes like  śledź po kaszubsku  (herring in tomato marinade with onion) and fried cod or flounder.
 Other famous products include kashubian strawberry ( kaszëbskô malëna ), gingerbreads from  Toruń  and alcohol beverages from Gdańsk:  Goldwasser  (herbal liqueur with flakes of gold leaf) and  machandel  (juniper vodka).
 In  Szczecin , typical regional products are  paszteciki  (pastries with meat or vegetarian filling) and fish spread  paprykarz szczeciński .
 
 Masovia [ edit ] 
 Modern  Warsaw , as a capital, has a very cosmopolitan cuisine combining various international foods. However, there are also some typical traditional dishes like Warsaw tripe,  pyzy z mięsem  (potato dumpling with meat) and pork knuckles in jelly (popular as a vodka chaser).
 Famous are many desserts of Warsaw origin, like chocolate cream cake  wuzetka  (probably named after the  Warsaw W-Z Route ),  ptasie mleczko  (chocolate covered marshmallows) and  pańska skórka  (candies sold traditionally at cemeteries during the All Saints' Day).
 Out of Warsaw, typical regional products include apples from  Grójec  and  piwo kozicowe  from  Kurpie  region (low-alcohol juniper beverage).
 
 Podlachia [ edit ] 
 Podlachian cuisine has many Lithuanian, Belarussian and Tatar influences. Popular dishes, also known from the aforementioned cuisines, include  kartacze  (potato dumplings with meat),  babka ziemniaczana  (potato pie) and  pierekaczewnik  (meat pie).
 Besides, famous are cold beet or cucumber soup  chłodnik , cheese  koryciński  and desserts:  sękacz  (spit cake) and  marcinek  (layer cake with cream).
 Podlasie is also known from high-quality alcoholic beverages like vodka with bison grass  żubrówka  and home-made strong vodka  duch puszczy .
 
 Silesia [ edit ] 
 Silesian cuisine combines Polish, German, Czech and Austrian influences. The most iconic dish is  rolada  – rolled beef patty usually served with  silesian dumplings  and red cabbage. Other popular foods are sourdough soup  żur śląski , meatballs  karminadle  and blood sausage  krupniok .
 Typical desserts are cake  kołocz śląski , candies  kopalnioki  and wafers  oblaty śląskie .
 Traditional dishes from Lower Silesia include  śląskie niebo  (pork with dried fruits and spices), herbal liquer  Echt Stonsdorfer  (today produced in Germany, but similar product known as  Likier Karkonoski  is produced in Poland) and modern fast-food from  Wrocław  –  knysza .
 
 Warmia–Masuria [ edit ] 
 Cuisine of Warmia–Masuria connects German and Eastern influences (especially from the former  Eastern Borderlands ; thus it has some similarities to the Podlachian cuisine). Due to many lakes and forests, it is also rich in fishes, mushrooms, and honey. Typical traditional dishes include  kartacze  (potato dumplings with meat),  dzyndzałki  (dumplings filled with buckwheat groats),  klopsy królewieckie  (metaballs with caper sauce),  sękacz  (spit cake) and a honey liqueur  niedźwiedziówka .
 
 Soups [ edit ] 
 All soups have fresh stock—made from chicken, beef, pork ribs, vegetables, or a combination of several—combined with root vegetables. Meat is either chopped and eaten with soup, used to make the next dish, or eaten alone with bread. It is common to eat two dishes during dinner: (1) a soup, and (2) a starch (potato, rice, groats, pasta) with meat, stews, or sweet dishes. Although cream or purée soups are not common or traditional in Poland, they are still prepared because of the influence of other countries' cuisine. Often soups are whitened by adding a splash of sour or double cream.
 
   Zupa pomidorowa  ( tomato soup ) with rice or noodles is a popular dish as part of a Polish dinner. 
   Żurek , a sour rye soup with  biała kiełbasa  and egg 
   Dried apples, pears and plums – a traditional product of Poland, used, for example, to prepare Christmas compote. 
 Zupa pomidorowa  – Thin  tomato soup  made with tomato purée, root vegetables, and stock, usually served with pasta or rice; sour cream is often added. 
 Kartoflanka  – Potato soup with root vegetables. 
 Czarnina  (or  czernina ) – Duck soup made with duck broth or duck blood, the latter giving the soup a dark, almost black, colour. Recipes vary widely, but often sweet and sour ingredients are added, typically vinegar and often sugar, fruit juice, or fruit such as prunes or pears. It is usually served with the duck meat and  Kluski -style noodles. Nowadays, it is not commonly eaten. 
 Chłodnik litewski  – Cold soup made of soured milk or sour cream, young beet leaves, cucumbers, and chopped fresh dill. Sometimes chives and radishes are added. 
 Botwinka  – Beet leaves soup with potatoes and root vegetables, served hot. 
 Barszcz czerwony  (red borscht) – Clear beetroot soup made out of stock,  beetroots , and beetroot sourdough; served with  uszka ,  krokiet  made from  naleśniki ,  pasztecik ,  pierogi , and rarely with white beans, red kidney beans, or mashed potatoes. It is a very important dish during Christmas Eve. 
 Zupa buraczkowa  – Beetroot soup with grated beetroots, cubed potatoes, and root vegetables. Sometimes it is called "red borscht", like the one cooked during Christmas Eve, even though it does not contain beetroot sourdough. It is slightly sweet but not sour. 
 Barszcz ukraiński  (Ukrainian borscht) – Beetroot soup with addition of sliced white cabbage, white or red kidney beans, and diced or puréed tomatoes. In Ukraine, beans are not used in this dish. 
 Zupa szczawiowa  –  Sorrel soup  made of sorrel leaves and rice, served with hard-boiled egg. 
 Flaki  (or  flaczki ) – Beef or pork  tripe  stew with  marjoram  and spices. Vegetarians make this soup with oyster mushrooms. 
 Rosół  – Clear chicken soup served with noodles, usually short vermicelli. The stock is made of root vegetables and whole chicken, beef, or both. 
 Zupa grzybowa / pieczarkowa  –  Mushroom  soup made of white or wild mushrooms with potatoes or pasta. During Christmas Eve it is instead served with  łazanki pasta  or  uszka . 
 Zupa ogórkowa  – A  sour cucumber soup  made of  sour, salted cucumbers . 
 Żur  – Fermented cereal soup made of wholemeal rye sourdough, although oat sourdough is used in  Lesser Poland  and  Podlachia , and buckwheat sourdough is used in  Lublin Voivodeship . [28]  Like  żurek  and  zalewajka , it is served with mashed potatoes, hard-boiled eggs, cooked and smoked bacon, and  biała kiełbasa  (white kielbasa). 
 Żurek  – Fermented cereal soup, more delicate than  żur  because it is made of wheat flour sourdough. Colloquially (but improperly) it is often called  barszcz biały  (white bortscht). [28] 
 Zalewajka  ( rye soup ) – Fermented cereal soup made with sour rye. Served with sliced smoked pork sausage, cooked and smoked bacon, and separately cooked and diced potatoes. 
 Barszcz biały  – Fermented cereal soup made with wheat flour. Traditionally, cabbage sourdough (sauerkraut juice) or cucumber sourdough (sour pickled cucumbers juice) is used. Still, they can be replaced by using citric acid. [28] 
 Grochówka  –  Pea soup  with split peas, potato, carrot, parsley root, kielbasa or fried bacon, and marjoram. 
 Kapuśniak  –  Sauerkraut  soup with potatoes, root vegetables (parsley root, carrots, celery root), bacon, and pork ribs. [29] 
 Kwaśnica  – Sauerkraut soup with potatoes and ribs. Similar to  kapuśniak , but omits other vegetables and tastes sourer. [29] 
 Forszmak lubelski  – Pork or beef, smoked bacon, white mushrooms, sour pickled cucumbers, red bell pepper, tomato puree, spices, onion, and garlic. 
 Chłodnik  – Cold soup made of raw, partially blended, or cooked and chilled vegetables with yoghurt or sour cream (such as cucumber  chłodnik  or tomato  chłodnik ). Often served with cooked potatoes, hard-boiled eggs, or both. 
 Zupa fasolowa  (bean soup) – Made with white beans, root vegetables, smoked sausage (kielbasa), fried bacon, and marjoram. 
 Zupa kapuściana  (cabbage soup) – Made with stock, chopped white cabbage, root vegetables, tomato puree and potatoes. 
 Zupa jarzynowa  (vegetable soup) – Made with potatoes, green beans, root vegetables, cauliflower, peas, and sometimes brussels sprouts. 
 Zupa ryżowa  (rice soup) – Made with rice, potatoes, and root vegetables with chicken. 
 Zupa koperkowa  (dill soup) – Made with chicken stock, root vegetables, a big amount of dill, spring onion, potatoes or baby potatoes, and sometimes with sour or double cream. 
 Zupa chrzanowa  (horseradish soup) – Made with white kielbasa, smoked bacon or pork ribs, sour cream, horseradish, garlic, potatoes, and root vegetables for stock; can be served with hard-boiled eggs. 
 Zupa gołąbkowa  – Soup with minced meat, cabbage, tomato puree, tomatoes, rice, and spices. 
 Zupa meksykańska  (Mexican soup) – Made with minced pork or beef, garlic, red kidney beans, corn kernels, canned tomatoes, tomato puree, and onion. Potatoes and root vegetables may be added or not. 
 Zupa kalafiorowa  (cauliflower soup) – Made with stock, potatoes,  cauliflower  florets, and root vegetables. 
 Zupa brokułowa  (broccoli soup) – Made with stock, potatoes,  broccoli  florets, and root vegetables. 
 Zupa gulaszowa  (goulash soup) – Made with pork, beef, potatoes, onion or leek, passata, tomato puree, paprika, and red bell pepper. It is similar to Hungarian goulash, whilst Polish goulash is similar to  pörkölt . 
 Zupa soczewicowa  (or  soczewicy ) (lentil soup) – Made with green or red lentils, garlic, tomatoes, tomato puree, onion, and double or sour cream. May be served with pasta or potatoes. 
 Zupa owocowa  (fruit soup) – Served cold with different fruits and pasta during hot summer. 
 Meat and fish [ edit ] 
   A typical Polish meal:  kotlety mielone  (minced pork cutlet), potatoes, beets and tea with lemon 
   Rolmopsy  ( rollmops ), rolled pickled herring fillets, served during Christmas. Traditional to Polish,  German  and  Jewish  cuisines. 
 Baranina  – Roasted, stewed, or grilled mutton. 
 Bigos  – Stew of mainly  sauerkraut , cabbage, and meats such as smoked  kielbasa  and bacon. Also contains mushrooms, onions, and sometimes tomato puree. It is known as a "hunter's stew" due to the addition of game and scraps of other meats. 
 Bitki wołowe z pieczarkami / grzybami  – Thin slices of beef braised with mushrooms. 
 Bitki wieprzowe w sosie własnym  – Thin slices of pork in gravy, braised with onions. 
 Golonka  – Stewed pork knuckle or hock. 
 Gołąbki  – Cabbage rolls with ground meat and rice or groats, served with mushroom, dill, or tomato sauce. For Christmas Eve, meat may be substituted with mushrooms. A variety with mushroom and potato filling is mostly found in Eastern Poland due to influence from Ukraine. Cabbage leaves used are from  savoy cabbage  or  white cabbage . Rarely, it can be made with  red cabbage  or sauerkraut leaves. Modern versions include use of  chinese cabbage  or filling wrapped in zucchini slices. This dish is either cooked or baked. 
 Gołąbki bez zawijania  ( gołąbki  without wrapping) – Large meatballs filled with chopped cabbage, onion and rice. 
 Gulasz  – Meat stew originated from Hungarian  pörkölt  with onions, tomatoes, red bell peppers, and paprika. 
 Karkówka  – Pork neck, roasted, grilled, or braised with onions. 
 Kiełbasa  – Sausage, smoked or boiled, usually made with pork. It is a staple of Polish cuisine and comes in dozens of varieties. 
 Kotlet mielony  – Minced meat (pork, pork-beef, or turkey) patty made with egg, breadcrumbs, chopped onions, wet bread, and spices, often rolled in breadcrumbs. Sometimes filled with cheese, mushrooms, or both. 
 Kotlet schabowy  – Thinly pounded pork loin cutlet coated in breadcrumbs. It is a variation of  schnitzel . 
 Kurczak Pieczony  – Roasted chicken. 
 Pieczeń cielęca  – Roasted veal. 
 Pieczeń wieprzowa z winem  – Roasted pork in wine gravy. 
 Polędwiczki wołowe  – Braised beef sirloin slices. 
 Pulpety or Klopsiki w sosie  – Polish style  meatballs  in tomato, mushroom, or dill sauce. 
 Rolada z mięsa mielonego z pieczarkami  – Minced meat  roulade  with mushrooms. 
 Schab Faszerowany  – Stuffed pork loin. 
 Wołowina Pieczona  – Roasted beef. 
 Zrazy  zawijane  – Thin beef fillets rolled and filled with bacon, mushrooms, mustard, gherkins, and onions. 
 Roladki  schabowe/z kurczaka  – Thin pork/chicken fillets rolled with filling including version with cheese. 
 Żeberka wędzone  – Smoked  spare ribs . 
 Filet z dorsza  – Cod fillet with or without batter. Can be steam cooked or baked. 
 Łosoś  – Steamed or baked salmon fillet. 
 Pstrąg  – Poached or baked trout. 
 Rolmopsy  – Rolled pickled herring fillets stuffed with pickled onion or cucumbers. 
 Ryba Smażona  – Fried breaded  fish fillet . 
 Śledzie  –  Herring  marinated in oil or vinegar with onions. 
 Śledzie w śmietanie  – Herring marinated in sour cream with onions. Sour pickled cucumbers, apples, and mushrooms can also be added. 
 Zimne nogi  – Polish savoury jelly based on bone broth made from pork legs and served with chopped meat and vegetables, like peas or carrots. Served with a drizzle of vinegar or lemon juice. Dish originates from Jewish cuisine. If using meat other than pork leg, it is called  galareta . 
 Flour or potato-based [ edit ] 
 Pierogi  – Half-moon-shaped dumplings with various fillings. Savoury pierogi may be filled with sauerkraut and mushrooms, potato,  quark  and fried onion ( pierogi ruskie ,  Ruthenian   pierogi ), minced meat, or buckwheat groats and quark or mushrooms. Sweet pierogi can be made with sweet quark or with fruits such as blueberries, strawberries, cherries, plums, raspberries, apples, or even chocolate. [30] 
 Uszka  – Tiny dumplings traditionally filled only with mushrooms and onions. Other fillings used are mushrooms with sauerkraut or rarely cooked [ clarification needed ]  and minced meat with onions. When filled with meat, they are served with clear  borscht ,  clear mushroom soup , or  broth . 
 Kołduny  – Stuffed dumplings with raw minced beef and mutton, beef dripping, fried onions, and spices. Potato  kalduny  is a different dish from  Subcarpathia  made from potato dough filled with  twaróg  ( quark ), potatoes, and onions. 
 Placki ziemniaczane / kartoflane  – Potato pancakes with grated potatoes, onions, eggs, wheat flour, and marjoram. 
 Pyzy  – Potato dumplings made with raw, grated potatoes, egg, flour, and sometimes filled with minced meat; then cooked. 
 Knedle  – Potato dumplings made with cooked potatoes and starch. Usually filled with fruits, most popular being plums and strawberries. 
 Kopytka  – Hoof-shaped potato dumplings made of cooked potatoes, egg, and flour. Often served with breadcrumbs, sugar, and melted butter or fried bacon. 
 Pierogi / kluski leniwe  – Hoof-shaped dumplings made of flour or potatoes, eggs, and quark. 
 Kluski śląskie  – Dumplings in small donut-like shape made with boiled potatoes and potato starch. Often served with gravy or meat stew. 
 Czarne / szare kluski  – Dumplings black or gray in colour, made of raw grated potatoes and potato starch. 
 Pampuchy / kluski na parze / pyzy drozdżowe  – Steamed yeast wheat flour dumplings served with fruit yoghurt or jam. They can be also served savoury with gravy or filled with chocolate. 
 Kluski kładzione  (laid dumplings) – Dumplings made of thick batter with flour and eggs laid in boiling water. 
 Lane Kluski  (poured dumplings) – Dumplings made of thin batter with flour, milk, and eggs, usually poured straight into soup. 
 Zacierki  (grated dumplings) – Grated or chopped dough into tiny balls and cooked. 
 Naleśniki  – Thicker and plumper version of  crêpes , served with sweet or savoury filling. 
 Krokiety  (croquettes) – In Poland, they are made of  naleśniki , often filled with either sauerkraut and mushrooms or ham and cheese, then folded like a burrito, breaded, and fried. Commonly served with clear  borscht . 
 Racuchy  – Yeast pancakes often stuffed with apples and served with  powdered sugar  or  jam . 
 Łazanki  – Pasta shaped like small squares. This Polish version is served with sauerkraut, onion, and fried  kielbasa  or fried bacon. 
 Zapiekanka  – Open faced sandwich made from a  veka roll  sliced in half and topped with tomato sauce, mushrooms, and cheese.  Zapiekanka  can also be anything baked in casserole dish with added egg and cream mixture, so it holds together when removed. It usually involves meats, vegetables with potatoes or pasta, and melted cheese on top. A baked Polish fast food. 
 Knysza  – Polish fast food with yeast bread roll filled with red and white cabbage, tomato, cucumber, pickled cucumber, onion, fried onion, corn, and sometimes fried chicken with garlic mayonnaise sauce. It originated in  Wrocław . 
 Smażone ziemniaki / bratkartofle  – Fried slices of potatoes (often previously cooked) usually (1) eaten with a fried egg, (2) mixed in scrambled eggs, onions, and grilled, or (3) mixed with fried, sliced  kielbasa . Whole dish and serving with eggs ( German :  bratkartoffeln mit ei ) or sausage ( bratkartoffeln mit wurst ) comes from Germany. In Poland, it is often eaten with a glass of sour  buttermilk  or  kefir . 
 Makaron z jajkiem  – Fried (cooked) pasta with fried onions, scrambled eggs, and butter; sometimes cheese, bacon, or ham can be added. It is a version of Italian  spaghetti carbonara  ( Italian :  spaghetti con uova e cipolla ). 
 Side dishes and salads [ edit ] 
 Kasza  – Cooked  groats ; most popular are groats of buckwheat, barley, millet, and wheat. 
 Mizeria  – Traditional Polish salad made with sliced cucumbers, sour cream, and spices; served as a side. 
 Surówka z jabłka i marchewki  – Carrot salad made with peeled and grated carrots, apples, oil, and lemon juice. 
 Surówka z ogórków i pomidorów  – Salad made with cucumbers, tomatoes, onions, and oil or sour cream. 
 Ziemniaki gotowane  – Simple boiled potatoes sprinkled with dill. 
 Tłuczone ziemniaki  – Mashed potatoes. 
 Surówka z białej kapusty  – Salad with shredded cabbage, carrots, and spices, often with grated apples. 
 Surówka z kiszonej kapusty  – Salad with sauerkraut, carrots, parsley, apples, and lemon juice. 
 Sałatka warzywna  or  Jarzynowa  – Salad of cooked vegetables such as parsley root, carrot, potatoes, celery root, pickled cucumbers in brine, and hard-cooked eggs in mayonnaise and mustard. Also often contains corn, peas, apple, onion, leek, or even red kidney beans. A traditional Polish side dish. 
 Kapusta zasmażana  – Sauerkraut or white cabbage pan-fried with onions and spices, often with fried bacon. 
 Kapusta na gęsto  – Braised white cabbage with onions, dill, and double cream. 
 Surówka  – Any salad made of raw vegetables with drizzle of vinegar, oil, sour cream, or yoghurt. 
 Sałatka  – Any salad made of cooked vegetables, usually with mayonnaise. 
 Sałatka burakowa / buraczki tarte  – Cooked and grated beetroot salad; can be made warm or cold. 
 Ćwikła  – Cooked and grated beetroots with horseradish paste and lemon juice. 
 Fasolka szparagowa z czosnkiem  – Green beans with garlic and butter or oil; originated in Italy. 
 Kalafior / fasolka szparagowa / brukselka z bułką tartą  – Cooked cauliflower, green beans, or Brussels sprouts with a  polonaise sauce  made of fried breadcrumbs in butter. 
 Brokuł / kalafior z sosem czosnkowym  – Cooked broccoli or cauliflower with a  garlic sauce . 
 Ogórek kiszony  – Polish  pickled cucumber , fermented in brine consisting of dill and dill flower, garlic, salt, and spices. 
 Ogórek konserwowy  – Pickled cucumber in vinegar, which is rather sweet and vinegary in taste. 
 Grzyby marynowane  – Marinated  mushrooms . 
 Sałatka szwedzka  – Preserved salad made with cucumbers, onions, carrots, vinegar, and spices. 
 Sałatka ziemniaczana  – Potato salad made with cooked potatoes, onions, pickled cucumbers, dill, and mayonnaise; sometimes with added smoked bacon or herring fillets marinated in oil or vinegar. Originally from Germany. 
 Sałatka śledziowa  – Marinated herring salad with pickled cucumbers, onions, and sour cream; sometimes eggs and apples are added. 
 Bread [ edit ] 
   Bread stand in  Sanok , Poland 
 Bread ( chleb ) and bread rolls ( bułka  (bread roll),  bajgiel ,  rogal ,  bułka paryska ) have been an essential part of Polish cuisine and tradition for centuries. Today, bread remains one of the most important foods in the Polish cuisine. The main ingredient for Polish bread is  rye  or  wheat . Traditional bread has a crunchy crust, a soft interior, and an unforgettable aroma. Such bread is made with  sourdough , which lends it a distinctive taste. It can be stored for a week or so without getting too hard and is not crumbly when cut.
 In Poland, welcoming with bread and salt (" chlebem i solą ") is often associated with the traditional hospitality (" staropolska gościnność ") of the Polish nobility ( szlachta ), who prided themselves on their hospitality. A 17th-century  Polish poet ,  Wespazjan Kochowski , wrote in 1674: "O good bread, when it is given to guests with salt and good will!" Another poet,  Wacław Potocki , mentioned this custom. The custom was, however, not limited to the nobility, as Polish people of all classes observed this tradition, reflected in old Polish  proverbs . [31]  Nowadays, the tradition is mainly observed on wedding days, when newlyweds are greeted with bread and salt by their parents on returning from the church  wedding .
 
 Desserts and sweets [ edit ] 
 Main article:  List of Polish desserts 
   Makowiec  ( poppy seed roll ) 
   Sernik  ( cheesecake ) 
 Beza  – Type of sweet  meringue  in biscuit form, occasionally with topping. 
 Makowiec  – Sweet poppy-seed  swiss roll , with raisins, dried fruits, and walnuts. 
 Pączek  – Closed donuts filled with rose petal jam, other fruit conserves,  custard , chocolate, or  quark  with sugar. 
 Pierniki  – Soft gingerbread biscuit forms of  pryanik , unfilled or filled with marmalade of different fruit flavours, and sometimes covered with chocolate. 
 Sernik  ( cheesecake ) – One of the most popular desserts in Poland. It is a cake made primarily of  twaróg , a type of fresh cheese similar to quark. It can be baked or refrigerated. It might be flavoured with vanilla, lemon peel, or orange peel. Sometimes raisins or various fresh fruits are added. Commonly topped with a chocolate topping or sprinkled with coconut-flakes or nuts. It is very popular to garnish it with a sweet jelly topping with a variety of fresh fruits when it is unbaked. 
 Mazurek  –  Pie  baked particularly at  Christmas Eve  and  Easter , made with  shortcrust pastry . There are variations with different fillings, such as walnut paste,  dulce de leche  or  ganache  with  dried fruits ,  candied fruit , and  nuts . 
 Chałka  – Sweet white wheat bread of Jewish origin ( challah ). 
 Kogel mogel  ( eggnog ) – Made from egg yolks, sugar, and flavourings such as honey, vanilla, or cocoa. Traditional for Polish Jews. 
 Krówki  – Polish  fudge ; soft milk  toffee  candies. 
 Napoleonka  – Polish type of  cream pie  made of two layers of  puff pastry , filled with vanilla pastry cream, usually sprinkled with  powdered sugar . A close relative of the French  millefeuille . An alternative but less popular version is  kremówka , often filled with whipped cream instead of custard cream. 
 Keks  – Cake with candied and dried fruit. 
 Babka  – Polish version of a  pound cake , made with or without yeast. It is served with powdered sugar or icing. Can be made as a  marble cake . 
 Miodownik  – Layered honey cake filled with vanilla pastry cream and  ganache  on top. 
 Orzechowiec  – Layered nut cake filled with vanilla pastry cream and  kajmak , topped with chopped nuts. 
 Ciasto marchewkowe  – Carrot cake with added nuts and honey, sometimes layered with whipped cream. 
 Ciasto bez pieczenia / na zimno  – Various types of unbaked and refrigerated cakes made of biscuits,  ladyfingers , crackers, or sponge cake with vanilla, whipped cream, coconut, jelly, mascarpone, semolina, or poppy seed filling. Often topped with ganache. 
 Karpatka  – Cream pie made of two layers of choux pastry filled with vanilla pastry cream. 
 Wuzetka  – Layered chocolate sponge cake filled with jam and whipped cream, associated with  Warsaw . 
 Ptasie mleczko  – Chocolate-covered candy filled with soft  meringue  (or milk  soufflé ). 
 Kisiel  – Clear, jelly-like sweet fruit liquid, made with starch, sugar, and fruits or fruit juice. 
 Budyń  – Pudding that usually comes in many different flavours, such as sweet cream, vanilla, chocolate, cherry, and more. 
 Faworki  – Light fried pastry covered with powdered sugar. 
 Pańska Skórka ,  Miodek  – Hard  taffy  sold at cemeteries during  Zaduszki  and at  Stare Miasto  (Old Town) in  Warsaw . 
 Kutia  – Grain dish made with wheat, poppy seeds, nuts, raisins, and honey. Not traditionally Polish, but served during Christmas in the eastern regions like  Białystok  and  Podlachia . 
 Prince Polo  - Polish chocolate bar. 
 Mieszanka Wedlowska  – Assorted chocolate covered candy. 
 Torcik Wedlowski  – Large, circular, chocolate covered wafer with hand-made decorations. 
 Pawełek  – Chocolate bar with a flavoured filling, most popular contains  advocaat . 
 Śliwka w czekoladzie  –  Chocolate-covered prune . 
 Ryż z jabłkami  – Type of a rice pudding baked or cooked with apples and cinnamon. 
 Beverages [ edit ] 
 Tyskie  beer. Poland is Europe's third largest beer producer, producing 36.9 million  hectolitres . Mead   Półtorak , made from natural  honey  and grape fruit, 16% alc. 750 ml (26 imp fl oz; 25 US fl oz). 
 See also:  Beer in Poland  and  Polmos 
 Alcoholic [ edit ] 
 Traditional Polish alcoholic beverages include  mead ,  beer ,  vodka  ( Old Polish :  okowita ,  gorzała ), and to a lesser extent,  wine . In recent decades,  beer  has become very common, while  wine  is less frequently drunk; however, in recent years, the consumption of wine has risen along with increasing production of local grape wines in small vineyards in  Lesser Poland ,  Subcarpathia ,  Silesia , and  West Pomerania  regions. Among alcoholic beverages, Polish vodka—traditionally prepared from grain or potatoes—has essentially displaced the formerly widespread  mead . [32] 
 
   Polish  cider 
 Some sources suggest that the first production of vodka took place in Poland as early as the 8th century, becoming more widespread in the 11th century. [33]  The world's first written mention of the drink and of the word "vodka" was in 1405 from  Akta Grodzkie   recorder of deeds , [11] [ clarification needed ]  the court documents from the  Palatinate of Sandomierz  in Poland. [11] 
 Vodka production on a much larger scale began in Poland at the end of the 16th century. By the 17th and 18th centuries, Polish vodka was known in the Netherlands, Denmark, England, Russia, Germany, Austria, Hungary, Romania, Ukraine, Bulgaria, and the Black Sea basin. [34]  Vodka was the most popular alcoholic drink in Poland until 1998, when it was surpassed by beer. [32] 
 Besides clear vodkas, flavoured vodka (known as  nalewka ) and liqueurs are also popular. The most important are  Żubrówka  (vodka with  bison grass  from  Podlasie ), herbal  Żołądkowa Gorzka , aged  starka , plum brandy  śliwowica  (especially from  Łącko ), honey liqueur  krupnik , as well as  Goldwasser  (herbal liqueur with flakes of gold leaf) and juniper vodka  machandel , both originating from  Gdańsk .
 
 Non-alcoholic [ edit ] 
 See also:  Kvass § Poland , and  Kefir 
 Traditionally,  kvass  ( kwas chlebowy ) was a  fermented beverage  first popular among the peasantry, but it later spread to the  szlachta  and become a universal Polish drink by the 14th-15th centuries. [35]  It is typically made from rye bread, usually known as  black bread , and is not classified as an alcoholic beverage in Poland, as its  alcohol content  usually ranges from 0% to 2%. [35]  There are many commercial and family variations of the beverage; however, traditional Polish recipes still exist. [36] [37]  Despite its production on an industrial scale in Poland during the  interbellum , [38]  it began to lose popularity to mass-produced  soft drinks  and carbonated water in the 20th century. [39]  It remained known primarily in rural areas of eastern Poland. [40]  However, kvass started making a comeback in the 21st century, with many new Polish brands being started. [41] 
 In contemporary times,  tea  is perhaps the most popular drink, usually served with a slice of lemon and sweetened with either sugar or honey. Tea came to Poland from England shortly after its appearance in  Western Europe , mainly due to the Dutch merchants. However, its prevalence is attributed to the Russians in the 19th century – at this time  samovars  imported from Russia become commonplace in Polish homes. Tea with milk is called  bawarka  ( lit.   'Bavarian style'). [42] 
 Coffee  has been widely drunk since the 18th century, when Poland bordered the  Ottoman Empire .
 Other frequently consumed beverages also include:  buttermilk ,  kefir ,  soured milk ,  instant coffee , various  mineral waters ,  juices , and numerous brands of  soft drink . A considerable number of Poles enjoy  carbonated water , and customers in restaurants are always offered both still and sparkling (carbonated) water to drink. [43] 
 
 Lists of common Polish dishes found on a national level [ edit ] 
 List of common Polish soups 
 Common main courses 
 Common desserts 
 Common beverages 
 Common folk medicine 
 See also [ edit ] 
 List of Polish desserts 
 List of Polish dishes 
 References [ edit ] 
 
 
 ^   Polish Meals – Polish Food – Polish Cuisine   Archived  28 March 2017 at the  Wayback Machine . Retrieved 6 June 2011. 
 
 ^   Kasha, extended definition   Archived  31 May 2013 at the  Wayback Machine  by  Webster's  Online Dictionary. Retrieved 6 June 2011. 
 
 ^   "Always home-made, tomato soup is one of the first things a Polish cook learns to prepare." [in:] Marc E. Heine. Poland. 1987 
 
 ^   "Tu się w lasy schroniły wygnane ze zbytkowych stołów, narodowe potrawy,  Barszcz ,  Bigos ,  Zrazy ,  Pirogi  i  Pieczeń " [in:] Jan N. de Bobrowicz. Maxymilian arcyksiąże Austryacki obrany Król polski. 1848. s. 74; " barszcz ,  rosół , sztuka mięsa, pieczenie huzarskie,  bigos ,  pierogi ,  kiełbasa  z kapustą, przede wszystkim zaś rozmaite kasze" Zbigniew Kuchowicz Obyczaje staropolskie XVII-XVIII wieku. 1975; "pieczeń cielęca pieczona (panierowana), pieczeń cielęca zapiekana w sosie beszamelowym, pieczeń huzarska (=pieczeń wołowa przekładana farszem), pieczeń rzymska (klops), pieczeń rzymska (klops z cielęciny) w sosie śmietanowym, pieczeń rzymska z królika " [in:] Stanisław Berger. Kuchnia polska. 1974.; Polish Holiday Cookery by Robert Strybel.  [1]  2003 
 
 ^   "À la Polonaise" .  CooksInfo . 
 
 ^   "Do You Know What Garnishing à la Polonaise Means? Read On" .  The Spruce Eats . 
 
 ^   Robert Strybel, Maria Strybel.  Polish Heritage Cookery  ( Wildfowl and Game ).  Hippocrene Books . 2005. p. 350. 
 
 ^   Maria Dembińska, William Woys Weaver.  Food and Drink in Medieval Poland: Rediscovering a Cuisine of the Past .  University of Pennsylvania Press . 1999 p. 95. 
 
 ^   Wojciech Staszewski (August 2006).  "Bycze jądra z grilla" .  Gazeta Wyborcza  (in Polish). Archived from  the original  on January 13, 2013 . Retrieved  25 August  2006 . 
 
 ^   History of Mead , a favored drink among the Polish-Lithuanian  szlachta . Retrieved 6 June 2011. 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   "History of vodka production, at the official page of Polish Spirit Industry Association (KRPS), 2007" . Archived from  the original  on 30 September 2007. 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   e   Jerzy Pasikowski (2011).  "Wpływy kuchni innych narodów na kształt kuchni polskiej (Influences of cuisines of other nations in Polish cuisine)" . Portal Gastronomiczny NewsGastro. Archived from  the original  on 27 March 2012 . Retrieved  16 July  2011 . 
 
 ^   "The ecclectic cuisine of Poland" . Retrieved  6 October  2022 . 
 
 ^   Robert Strybel, Maria Strybel.  Polish Heritage Cookery .  Hippocrene Books . 2005. p. 13. 
 
 ^   Jarosław Dumanowski: "Staropolskie książki kucharskie".  Mówią Wieki , 12/09 (December 2009), pp. 36–40.  ISSN   1230-4018 . 
 
 ^   "19th-Century Polish Women's Cookbooks: The Hatching of a Social Monster" . Retrieved  6 October  2022 . 
 
 ^   "Antique Cookbooks:The Meals of Poland's Past" . Retrieved  6 October  2022 . 
 
 ^   "Jako zakonnik Święty Jacek działał w Polsce i na Rusi, był także przeorem w Kijowie, a stamtąd właśnie przyszły do nas wigilijne pierogi, knysze, kulebiaki. ..." [in:] Helena Szymanderska. Polska wigilia. 2000 
 
 ^   "KOTLET SCHABOWY (POLISH PORK CUTLET)" . Retrieved  6 October  2022 . 
 
 ^   "Kotlet schabowy" . Retrieved  6 October  2022 . 
 
 ^   "10 Surprising Eating Habits from the Communist-Regime Era" .  Culture.pl . 
 
 ^   "Wigilia, A Polish Christmas Eve Tradition" . Retrieved  6 October  2022 . 
 
 ^   "Taste Szczecin" . Retrieved  6 October  2022 . 
 
 ^   Rose Petal Jam - Recipes and Stories from a Summer in Poland, by Beata Zatorska and  Simon Target , published by Tabula Books 2011 
 
 ^   Rzeczpospolita  "Dżem z płatków róży, czyli kuchnia polska po angielsku | rp.pl" . Archived from  the original  on 4 October 2012 . Retrieved  4 October  2012 . 
 
 ^   "The 12 Dishes of Polish Christmas" . Retrieved  6 October  2022 . 
 
 ^   "What is Poland's 'Fat Thursday'? Everything You Need to Know About Tłusty Czwartek" . Retrieved  6 October  2022 . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   "Żur, żurek i barszcz biały. Na czym polega różnica? | ArtKulinaria" . 
 
 ^  a   b   "Czym się różnią kwaśnica i kapuśniak?" . 
 
 ^   "How To Make Pierogi And Pierogi Recipes" .  Tasting Poland . Retrieved  8 March  2015 . 
 
 ^   " "Chlebem i solą. Dawne uczty polskie" - Kalendarz wydarzeń kulturalnych w Culture.pl - Culture.pl" . 17 May 2013. Archived from  the original  on 2013-05-17. 
 
 ^  a   b   "EJPAU 2004. Kowalczuk I. CONDITIONS OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES CONSUMPTION AMONG POLISH CONSUMERS" .  www.ejpau.media.pl . 
 
 ^   Origins & Development of Vodka . The Gin and Vodka Association. ginvodka.org 
 
 ^   Leszek Wiwała (2010).  Od gorzałki do wódki – zarys historii polskiej wódki (History of Polish vodka) . Wydawnictwo Leon.  ISBN   978-8392886105 . 
 
 ^  a   b   Snopkow, Paweł (2021-10-23).  "Kwas chlebowy. Zapomniany skarb polskiej kuchni" .  gazetaolsztynska.pl .  Gazeta Olsztyńska . Retrieved  2022-05-26 . 
 
 ^   S.A, Wirtualna Polska Media (8 January 2016).  "Historia kwasu chlebowego - Co warto wiedzieć o kwasie chlebowym" .  kuchnia.wp.pl . 
 
 ^   "Zdrowe orzeźwienie. Powraca moda na kwas chlebowy" .  gazetapl . 
 
 ^   Delorme, Andrzej (1–15 October 1999).  "Alternatywa dla Coca Coli?" .  Pismo Ekologów . Zielone Brygady (14(140)/99).  ISSN   1231-2126 . 
 
 ^   "Historia kwasu chlebowego" .  kwaschlebowy.eu . Eko-Natura . Retrieved  2022-05-26 .  W wieku XX kwas został zapomniany, wyparty przez wody gazowane i inne słodkie napoje. 
 
 ^   "Kwas chlebowy sapieżyński kodeński" .  Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development of Poland . 2 July 2018 . Retrieved  30 July  2021 . 
 
 ^   Mucha, Sławomir (2018-06-03).  "Kwas chlebowy" .  Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development of Poland . Retrieved  2022-05-26 . 
 
 ^   "Bawarka in English, translation, Polish-English Dictionary" .  Glosbe . 
 
 ^   "Pijemy ją na potęgę, a ma "żrące" działanie na nasz organizm. Badania pokazują, że jej kupno oznacza wyrok dla zdrowia" .  INNPoland.pl . 
 
 
 External links [ edit ] 
 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons has media related to  Cuisine of Poland . 
 
 
 
 
 Wikiquote has quotations related to  Food and drink in Pan Tadeusz . 
 
 Polish traditional meals with video recipes 
 Short summary of the Polish Cuisine 
 Polish Cuisine  on Culture.pl 
 v t e Poland  articles History Timeline 
 Prehistory and protohistory 
 Middle Ages 
 Monarchs 
 Early Modern  (1569–1795) 
 Partitions, duchies and kingdoms  (1795–1918) 
 World War I 
 Interwar years 
 World War II 
 Communist Poland 
 Poland since 1989 
 By topic 
 Cultural 
 Demographic 
 Economic 
 Military 
 Postal 
 Geography 
 Cities and towns 
 Forests 
 Islands 
 Lakes 
 Mountains 
 National parks 
 Poland A and B 
 Protected areas 
 Regions 
 Rivers 
 Politics 
 Administrative divisions 
 Constitution 
 Human rights 
 Judiciary 
 Law 
 Law enforcement 
 Military 
 Politicians 
 President 
 List 
 Prime Minister 
 List 
 Elections 
 Foreign relations 
 Parliament 
 Political parties 
 Central European Initiative 
 Visegrád Group 
 Economy 
 Agriculture 
 Balcerowicz Plan 
 Central bank 
 Zloty  (currency) 
 Economic history 
 EEZ 
 Energy 
 Exports 
 Regional GDP per capita 
 Merchant Navy 
 Mining 
 Stock exchange 
 Tourism 
 Transport 
 Poverty 
 Unemployment 
 Upper Silesian Industrial Region 
 Venture capital 
 Culture 
 Architecture 
 Art 
 Cinema 
 Polish cuisine 
 Folk beliefs 
 Folk dances 
 Literature 
 Media 
 Music 
 Name 
 Polish names 
 Public holidays 
 Religion 
 Sport 
 Theatre 
 Traditions 
 World Heritage Sites 
 Video games 
 Demographics 
 Poles 
 Ethnic minorities 
 Refugees 
 Education 
 Languages 
 Crime 
 Health care 
 Symbols 
 Anthem 
 Coat of arms 
 Flag 
 list 
 Polonia 
 Orders and decorations 
 Outline 
 Category 
 Portal 
 v t e Polish cheeses 
 Bryndza 
 Bryndza Podhalańska 
 Bundz 
 Gołka 
 Korycinski 
 Oscypek 
 Twaróg 
 Redykołka 
 Tylżycki 
 
 v t e European cuisine Sovereign states European Union 
 Austria 
 Belgium 
 Bulgaria 
 Croatia 
 Cyprus 
 Czech Republic 
 Denmark 
 Estonia 
 Finland 
 France 
 Germany 
 Greece 
 Hungary 
 Republic of Ireland 
 Italy 
 Latvia 
 Lithuania 
 Luxembourg 
 Malta 
 Netherlands 
 Poland 
 Portugal 
 Romania 
 Slovakia 
 Slovenia 
 Spain 
 Sweden 
 Other 
 Albania 
 Andorra 
 Armenia 
 Azerbaijan 
 Belarus 
 Bosnia and Herzegovina 
 Georgia 
 Iceland 
 Kazakhstan 
 Liechtenstein 
 Moldova 
 Monaco 
 Montenegro 
 North Macedonia 
 Norway 
 Russia 
 San Marino 
 Serbia 
 Switzerland 
 Turkey 
 Ukraine 
 United Kingdom 
 Vatican City 
 States with limited recognition 
 Abkhazia 
 Kosovo 
 Nagorno-Karabakh 
 Northern Cyprus 
 South Ossetia 
 Transnistria 
 Dependencies  and other territories 
 Faroe Islands 
 Gibraltar 
 Guernsey 
 Isle of Man 
 Jersey 
 
 v t e Cuisines Continental 
 African 
 North 
 West 
 list 
 Americas 
 Caribbean 
 North 
 South 
 list 
 Asian 
 Caucasian 
 Central 
 Indian subcontinent 
 Levantine 
 list 
 European 
 Balkan 
 Central 
 Eastern 
 list 
 Oceanic 
 Intercontinental
 Global 
 Latin American 
 Mediterranean 
 Middle Eastern 
 National  and regional 
 Afghan 
 Albanian 
 Algerian 
 American 
 Californian 
 Floribbean 
 Hawaiian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Lowcountry (South Carolina) 
 New England 
 New Mexico 
 Pacific Northwest 
 Pennsylvania Dutch 
 Puerto Rican 
 Southern US 
 Southwest US 
 Texas 
 Angolan 
 Argentine 
 Armenian 
 Australian 
 Austrian 
 Azerbaijani 
 Bahraini 
 Bangladeshi 
 Barbadian 
 Belarusian 
 Belgian 
 Belizean 
 Beninese 
 Bhutanese 
 Bolivian 
 Bosnian-Herzegovinian 
 Botswana 
 Brazilian 
 British 
 Channel Islands 
 English 
 Gibraltarian 
 Northern Irish 
 Saint Helena 
 Scottish 
 Welsh 
 Bruneian 
 Bulgarian 
 Burkinabé 
 Burmese 
 Burundian 
 Cambodian 
 Cameroonian 
 Canadian 
 Acadian 
 Québécois 
 Central African Republic 
 Chadian 
 Chilean 
 Chinese 
 Cantonese 
 Hong Kong 
 Macanese 
 Tibetan 
 Xinjiang 
 Colombian 
 Congolese 
 Corsican 
 Croatian 
 Cuban 
 Cypriot 
 Czech 
 Danish 
 Faroese 
 Greenlandic 
 Djiboutian 
 Dominican 
 Dominican Republic 
 Dutch 
 East Timorese 
 Ecuadorian 
 Egyptian 
 Emirati 
 Equatorial Guinean 
 Eritrean 
 Estonian 
 Ethiopian 
 Fijian 
 Filipino 
 Finnish 
 French 
 Occitan 
 French Guianan 
 Gabonese 
 Gambian 
 Georgian 
 German 
 Ghanaian 
 Greek 
 Cretan 
 Epirotic 
 Greek Macedonian 
 Heptanesean 
 Guatemalan 
 Guinea-Bissauan 
 Guinean 
 Haitian 
 Honduran 
 Hungarian 
 Icelandic 
 Indian 
 Arunachalese 
 Assamese 
 Bengali 
 Bihari 
 Goan 
 Gujarati 
 Himachal Pradesh 
 Kashmiri 
 Jharkhandi 
 Karnataka 
 Kerala 
 Maharashtrian 
 Manipuri 
 Meghalayan 
 Mizo 
 Naga 
 Odia 
 Punjabi 
 Rajasthani 
 Sikkimese 
 Sindhi 
 Tamil 
 Telangana 
 Telugu 
 Indonesian 
 Acehnese 
 Balinese 
 Banjar 
 Batak 
 Betawi 
 Indo 
 Javanese 
 Madurese 
 Makassar 
 Minahasan 
 Minangkabau 
 Palembangese 
 Sundanese 
 Iranian 
 Iraqi 
 Irish 
 Israeli 
 Italian 
 Abruzzese 
 Ligurian 
 Lombard 
 Lucanian 
 Neapolitan 
 Roman 
 Sardinian 
 Sicilian 
 Venetian 
 Ivorian 
 Jamaican 
 Japanese 
 Okinawan 
 Jordanian 
 Kazakh 
 Kenyan 
 Korean 
 North Korean 
 South Korean 
 Kosovan 
 Kuwaiti 
 Kyrgyz 
 Lao 
 Latvian 
 Lebanese 
 Lesotho 
 Liberian 
 Libyan 
 Liechtensteiner 
 Lithuanian 
 Luxembourg 
 Macedonian 
 Malagasy 
 Malawian 
 Malaysian 
 Sabahan 
 Sarawakian 
 Maldivian 
 Malian 
 Maltese 
 Mauritanian 
 Mauritian 
 Mexican 
 Moldovan 
 Monégasque 
 Mongolian 
 Montenegrin 
 Moroccan 
 Mozambican 
 Namibian 
 Nauruan 
 Nepalese 
 New Zealand 
 Nicaraguan 
 Niger 
 Nigerian 
 Niuean 
 Norwegian 
 Omani 
 Pakistani 
 Palestinian 
 Panamanian 
 Peruvian 
 Polish 
 Portuguese 
 Qatari 
 Romanian  (incl.  Transylvanian Saxon ) 
 Russian 
 Bashkir 
 Chechen 
 Circassian 
 Komi 
 Mordovian 
 Sakha 
 Tatar 
 Udmurt 
 Yamal 
 Rwandan 
 Saint Lucian 
 Salvadoran 
 Sammarinese 
 São Tomé and Príncipe 
 Saudi Arabian 
 Senegalese 
 Serbian 
 Seychellois 
 Sierra Leonean 
 Singaporean 
 Slovak 
 Slovenian 
 Somali 
 South African 
 Spanish 
 Andalusian 
 Asturian 
 Balearic 
 Basque 
 Canarian 
 Cantabrian 
 Catalan 
 Extremaduran 
 Galician 
 Manchegan 
 Valencian 
 Sri Lankan 
 Sudanese 
 Swazi 
 Swedish 
 Swiss 
 Syrian 
 Taiwanese 
 Tajik 
 Tanzanian 
 Zanzibari 
 Thai 
 Togolese 
 Tunisian 
 Turkish 
 Turkmen 
 Trinidadian and Tobagonian 
 Ugandan 
 Ukrainian 
 Uruguayan 
 Uzbek 
 Venezuelan 
 Vietnamese 
 Western Saharan 
 Yemeni 
 Zambian 
 Zimbabwean 
 Ethnic 
 Ainu 
 Arab 
 Indonesian 
 Aromanian 
 Assyrian 
 Balochi 
 Berber 
 Cajun 
 Chinese 
 American 
 Canadian 
 Chifa 
 Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Crimean Tatar 
 Greek American 
 Hazaragi 
 Indian 
 Anglo-Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Indigenous American 
 Inuit 
 Italian American 
 Kurdish 
 Livonian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Malay 
 Ossetian 
 Parsi 
 Pashtun 
 Peranakan 
 Romani 
 Sámi 
 Soul food 
 Sylheti 
 Transylvanian Saxon 
 Yup'ik 
 Religious 
 Buddhist 
 Christian 
 Goan Catholic 
 Mangalorean Catholic 
 Mennonite 
 Hindu 
 Islamic 
 Chinese 
 Ital 
 Jain 
 Jewish 
 American 
 Ashkenazi 
 Bukharan 
 Ethiopian 
 Mizrahi 
 Sephardic 
 Syrian 
 Ritual slaughter 
 Sikh 
 Historical 
 Ancient Egyptian 
 Ancient Greek 
 Ancient Israelite 
 Ancient Roman 
 Antebellum America 
 Aztec 
 Byzantine 
 Early modern European 
 Historical Chinese 
 Historical Indian subcontinent 
 Historical North Indian and Pakistani 
 History of agriculture 
 History of alcoholic drinks 
 History of bread 
 History of seafood 
 History of vegetarianism 
 Historical Argentine 
 Historical Japanese 
 Inca 
 Mayan 
 Muisca 
 Mughal 
 Medieval 
 Ottoman 
 Peasant 
 Soviet 
 Thirteen Colonies 
 Styles 
 Classique 
 Fast food 
 Fusion 
 New American 
 Eurasian 
 Haute 
 Molecular gastronomy 
 Note by Note 
 Nouvelle 
 Lists 
 List of cuisines 
 List of historical cuisines 
 Lists of prepared foods 
 Related 
 Cookbook 
 Cooking 
 Culinary arts 
 Drink 
 Food 
 history 
 Diet 
 Meal preparation 
 
   Food portal 
   Drink portal 
   Category 
   Commons 
   Cookbook 
   WikiProject 
   Outline 
 
 Portal :   Food 
 Authority control   National libraries 
 France 
 BnF data 
 Israel 
 United States 
 Latvia 
 Other 
 IdRef 
 
  
NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw2359
Cached time: 20230311143203
Cache expiry: 1814400
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc, no‐toc‐conversion]
CPU time usage: 1.562 seconds
Real time usage: 1.836 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 25804/1000000
Post‐expand include size: 326489/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 26699/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 16/100
Expensive parser function count: 68/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 146573/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.813/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 21982667/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/400
 
 
Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1450.979      1 -total
 26.73%  387.872    273 Template:Lang-pl
 23.61%  342.557      5 Template:Navbox
 16.39%  237.747      1 Template:Reflist
 11.94%  173.185      1 Template:European_topic
 10.97%  159.184     28 Template:Cite_web
  7.98%  115.802      1 Template:Culture_of_Poland
  7.83%  113.607      1 Template:Culture_of_region
  7.60%  110.251      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  7.37%  106.943     55 Template:Iso2country
 
  Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:idhash:418713-0!canonical and timestamp 20230311143201 and revision id 1141564051. Rendering was triggered because: page-view
  
 esi <esi:include src="/esitest-fa8a495983347898/content" />  
 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Polish_cuisine&oldid=1141564051 " 
 Category :  Polish cuisine Hidden categories:  Webarchive template wayback links CS1 Polish-language sources (pl) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Pages using multiple image with auto scaled images Articles containing Polish-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2022 All articles that may have off-topic sections Wikipedia articles that may have off-topic sections from December 2022 Articles with unsourced statements from March 2019 Articles containing Hungarian-language text Wikipedia articles needing clarification from December 2022 Articles containing German-language text Articles containing Italian-language text Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with BNF identifiers Articles with J9U identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers Articles with LNB identifiers Articles with SUDOC identifiers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  This page was last edited on 25 February 2023, at 18:06  (UTC) . 
 Text is available under the  Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0 ;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the  Terms of Use  and  Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the  Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. 
 
 
 Privacy policy 
 About Wikipedia 
 Disclaimers 
 Contact Wikipedia 
 Mobile view 
 Developers 
 Statistics 
 Cookie statement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
