
 
 
 Jump to content 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle sidebar 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Create account Log in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Personal tools 
 
 
 
 
   Create account   Log in 
 
 
 
 
		Pages for logged out editors  learn more 
 
 
 Contributions Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Navigation 
 
 
 Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate 
 
 
 
 
 Contribute 
 
 
 Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file 
 
 
 
 
 Tools 
 
 
 What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item 
 
 
 
 
 Print/export 
 
 
 Download as PDF Printable version 
 
 
 
 
 In other projects 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons Wikibooks Wikivoyage 
 
 
 
 
 Languages 
 
 On this Wikipedia the language links are at the top of the page across from the article title.  Go to top . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CentralNotice  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Contents 
 move to sidebar 
 hide 
 
 
 
 
 (Top) 
 
 
 
 
 
 1 Middle Ages 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 Meals 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 Fish and seafood 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4 Meat and poultry 
 
 
				Toggle Meat and poultry subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 4.1 Meat 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.2 Charcuterie 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.3 Poultry 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5 Vegetables and starches 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6 Fruits, nuts, and berries 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 7 Cheese 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8 Alcoholic beverages 
 
 
				Toggle Alcoholic beverages subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 8.1 Wines and beers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 9 Pastries and sweets 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 10 Influences on world cuisine 
 
 
				Toggle Influences on world cuisine subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 10.1 Madeira wine and early American history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 11 See also 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 12 References 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 13 External links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
						Toggle the table of contents
					 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle the table of contents 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Portuguese cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 31 languages 
 
 
 
 العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Català Čeština Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Jawa ქართული Kurdî Lietuvių Mirandés 日本語 Polski Português Română Русский Suomi Svenska Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 
 Edit links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Article Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 English 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 More 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
 
 
 
 
 Culinary tradition of Portugal 
 Part of  a series  on the Culture of Portugal 
 History 
 People 
 Languages 
 Mythology 
 Cuisine 
 Festivals 
 Religion 
 Art 
 Literature 
 Music 
 Media 
 Television 
 Cinema 
 
 Sport 
 Monuments 
 World Heritage Sites 
 
 Symbols 
 Flag 
 Coat of arms 
 National anthem 
 
   Portugal portal v t e 
 The oldest known book on  Portuguese cuisine , entitled  Livro de Cozinha da Infanta D. Maria de Portugal , from the 16th century, describes many popular dishes of meat, fish, poultry and others. [1] 
 Culinária Portuguesa , by António-Maria De Oliveira Bello, better known as Olleboma; was published in 1936. [2] 
Despite being relatively restricted to an  Atlantic ,  Celtic sustenance, [3] [4]  the Portuguese cuisine also has strong  French [2]  and  Mediterranean [5]  influences.
 The influence of Portugal's  spice trade  in the  East Indies ,  Africa , and Americas is also notable, especially in the wide variety of  spices  used. These spices include  piri piri  (small, fiery chili peppers),  white pepper ,  black pepper ,  saffron ,  paprika ,  clove ,  allspice ,  cumin ,  cinnamon  and  nutmeg  are used in meat, fish or multiple savoury dishes from  Continental Portugal , the  Azores  and  Madeira  islands.
 Cinnamon ,  vanilla ,  lemon zest ,  orange zest ,  aniseed , clove and allspice are used in many traditional desserts and some savoury dishes.
 Garlic  and  onions  are widely used, as are  herbs ;  bay leaf ,  parsley ,  oregano ,  thyme ,  mint ,  marjoram ,  rosemary  and  coriander  are the most prevalent.
 
   Broa was likely introduced by the  Suebi  as  brauþ  (bread) 
 Olive oil  is one of the bases of Portuguese cuisine, which is used both for cooking and flavouring meals. This has led to a unique classification of olive oils in Portugal, depending on their acidity: 1.5 degrees is only for cooking with (virgin olive oil), anything lower than 1 degree is good for dousing over fish, potatoes and vegetables (extra virgin). 0.7, 0.5 or even 0.3 degrees are for those who do not enjoy the taste of olive oil at all, or who wish to use it in, say, a mayonnaise or sauce where the taste is meant to be disguised.
 Portuguese dishes include meats (pork, beef, poultry mainly also  game  and others), seafood (fish,  crustaceans  such as lobster, crab, shrimps, prawns, octopus, and molluscs such as  scallops , clams and barnacles), vegetables and  legumes  and desserts (cakes being the most numerous). 
Portuguese often consume  rice ,  potatoes , and  bread  with their meals and there are numerous varieties of traditional fresh breads like  broa [6] [7] [8]  which may also have regional and national variations within the countries under  Lusophone  or Galician influence. [2] [9] 
In a wider sense, Portuguese and  Galician cuisine  share many traditions and features. [10] 
 
 
 Middle Ages [ edit ] 
 During the Middle Ages, the Portuguese cultivated cereal and legumes that they used as sustenance. Fishing and hunting were also common in certain regions. During this time, novel methods to conserve fish were introduced, along with plants like vines and olive trees. [11]  Bread made with rye or wheat was being widely consumed during this time. [11] 
 
 Meals [ edit ] 
 See also:  List of Portuguese dishes 
   Traditional  caldo verde  served in a bowl 
 A Portuguese breakfast often consists of fresh bread, with butter, ham, cheese or  jam , accompanied by coffee, milk, tea or hot chocolate. A small espresso coffee (sometimes called a  bica  after the spout of the coffee machine, or  Cimbalino  after the Italian coffee machine La Cimbali) is a very popular beverage had during breakfast or after lunch, which is enjoyed at home or at the many cafés in towns and cities throughout Portugal. Sweet pastries are also very popular, as well as  breakfast cereal , mixed with milk or yogurt and fruit. Portuguese love a fresh baked " Pastel de Nata " which is one of their unique pastries. They enjoy it together with a shot of espresso, for breakfast or even as an afternoon treat.
 Lunch, often lasting over an hour, is served between noon and 2 o'clock, typically around 1 o'clock and dinner is generally served around 8 o'clock. There are three main courses, with lunch and dinner usually including a soup. A common Portuguese soup is  caldo verde , which consists of a base of cooked, then pureed, potato, onion and garlic, to which shredded collard greens are then added. Slices of  chouriço  (a smoked or spicy Portuguese sausage) are often added as well, but may be omitted, thereby making the soup fully vegan.
 Among fish recipes, salted cod ( bacalhau ) dishes are pervasive. The most popular desserts are  caramel custard , known as  pudim de ovos  or  flã de caramelo ,  chocolate mousse  known as  mousse de chocolate , [12]   
 Crème brûlée  known as  leite-creme , [13]   rice pudding  known as  arroz doce [14]  decorated with cinnamon, and  apple tart  known as  tarte de maçã . Also a wide variety of cheeses made from sheep, goat or cow’s milk. These cheeses can also contain a mixture of different kinds of milk. The most famous are  queijo da serra  from the region of  Serra da Estrela ,  Queijo São Jorge  from the island of  São Jorge , and  Requeijão . [15]  A popular pastry is the  pastel de nata , a small custard tart often sprinkled with cinnamon.
 
 Fish and seafood [ edit ] 
   Pastéis de bacalhau  (literally "codfish pastries") 
   Amêijoas à Bulhão Pato (Bulhão Pato  clams ) 
 Portugal is a seafaring nation with a well-developed  fishing industry  and this is reflected in the amount of  fish  and  seafood  eaten. The country has Europe's highest fish consumption per capita, and is among the top four in the world for this indicator. [16] [17]  Fish is served  grilled ,  boiled  (including  poached  and  simmered ), fried or  deep-fried ,  stewed  known as   caldeirada   (often in  clay pot cooking ),  roasted , or even  steamed . 
 Foremost amongst these is  bacalhau  ( cod ), which is the type of fish most consumed in Portugal. It is said that there are more than 365 ways to cook cod, [18]  one for every day of the year. Cod is almost always used  dried  and  salted , because the Portuguese fishing tradition in the  North Atlantic  developed before the invention of  refrigeration —therefore it needs to be soaked in water or sometimes milk before cooking. The simpler fish dishes are often flavoured with virgin olive oil and  white wine vinegar .
 Portugal has been fishing and trading cod since the 15th century, and this  cod trade  accounts for its widespread use in the cuisine. Other popular seafoods includes fresh  sardines  (especially as  sardinhas assadas ), [19]   sea bass , snapper, swordfish,  mackerel , sole,  brill ,  halibut ,  John Dory , octopus, squid,  cuttlefish ,  crabs , shrimp and prawns,  lobster , spiny lobster, and many other  crustaceans , such as barnacles, hake,  horse mackerel  (scad),  scabbard  (especially in  Madeira ), and a great variety of other fish and  shellfish , as well as  molluscs , such as clams, mussels, oysters,  scallops  and  periwinkles .
 Caldeirada  is a stew consisting of a variety of fish and shellfish with potatoes, tomatoes, piripiri, bell peppers, parsley, garlic, onions and coriander.
 River  lamprey  and  eels  are considered fresh water delicacies. The  Coimbra  and  Aveiro  regions of central Portugal, are renowned for eel stews [20]  and lamprey seasonal dishes and festivals. [21]  Arganil and Penacova have popular dishes such as  Arroz de Lampreia  or  Lampreia à Bordalesa . [22] [23] 
 
   Grilled sardines  in Portugal 
 Sardines used to be preserved in  brine  for sale in rural areas. Later, sardine canneries developed all along the Portuguese coast.  Ray fish  is dried in the sun in  Northern Portugal .  Canned   tuna  is widely available in  Continental Portugal . Tuna used to be plentiful in the waters of the  Algarve . They were trapped in fixed nets when they passed the Portuguese southern coast on their way to spawn in the Mediterranean, and again when they returned to the Atlantic. Portuguese writer  Raul Brandão , in his book  Os Pescadores , describes how the tuna was hooked from the raised net into the boats, and how the fishermen would amuse themselves riding the larger fish around the net. Fresh tuna, however, is usually eaten in Madeira and the Algarve where tuna steaks are an important item in local cuisine. Canned sardines or tuna, served with boiled potatoes, black-eyed peas, collard greens and hard-boiled eggs, constitute a convenient meal when there is no time to prepare anything more elaborate.
 
 
 Meat and poultry [ edit ] 
   Cozido à portuguesa  with its variety of meats 
 Eating meat and  poultry  on a daily basis was historically a privilege of the upper classes.  Pork  and  beef  are the most common meats in the country. Meat was a staple at the nobleman's table during the  Middle Ages . A Portuguese Renaissance chronicler,  Garcia de Resende , describes how an entrée at a royal banquet was composed of a whole roasted  ox  garnished with a circle of  chickens . A common Portuguese dish, mainly eaten in winter, is  cozido à portuguesa , which somewhat parallels the  French   pot-au-feu  or the  New England boiled dinner . Its composition depends on the cook's imagination and budget. An extensive lavish cozido may include beef, pork,  salt pork , several types of  charcutaria  (such as cured  chouriço ,  morcela e chouriço de sangue ,  linguiça ,  farinheira , etc.), pig's feet,  cured ham , potatoes, carrots,  turnips ,  cabbage and rice. This would originally have been a favourite food of the affluent farmer, which later reached the tables of the urban bourgeoisie and typical restaurants.
 
 Meat [ edit ] 
   Bife com ovo a cavalo 
   Arroz de Pato  ( Duck  rice) often includes toucinho ( bacon ) and  chouriço  as a topping 
   Cured meats 
 Tripas  à moda do  Porto  ( tripe  with white beans) is said to have originated in the 14th century, when the Castilians laid siege to Lisbon and blockaded the  Tagus  entrance. The Portuguese chronicler  Fernão Lopes  dramatically recounts how starvation spread all over the city.  Food prices  rose astronomically, and small boys would go to the former wheat market place in search of a few grains on the ground, which they would eagerly put in their mouths when found. Old and sick people, as well as prostitutes, or in short anybody who would not be able to aid in the city's defence, were sent out to the Castilian camp, only to be returned to Lisbon by the invaders. It was at this point that the citizens of Porto decided to organize a supply fleet that managed to slip through the river blockade. Apparently, since all available meat was sent to the capital for a while, Porto residents were limited to tripe and other organs. Others claim that it was only in 1415 that Porto deprived itself of meat to supply the expedition that  conquered the city of Ceuta . Whatever the truth may be, since at least the 17th century, people from Porto have been known as  tripeiros  or tripe eaters. Another Portuguese dish with tripe is  dobrada .
 Nowadays, the Porto region is equally known for the toasted sandwich known as a  francesinha  (meaning " Frenchie ").
 Many other meat dishes feature in Portuguese cuisine. In the  Bairrada  area, a famous dish is  Leitão à Bairrada   [  pt ]  (roasted  suckling pig ). Nearby, another dish,  chanfana   [  pt ]  ( goat  slowly cooked in red wine, paprika and white pepper) is claimed by two towns,  Miranda do Corvo  ("Capital da Chanfana") [24]  and  Vila Nova de Poiares  ("Capital Universal da Chanfana"). [25] 
 Carne de porco à alentejana , fried pork with clams, is a popular dish with some speculation behind its name and its origin as clams wouldn't be as popular in  Alentejo , a region with only one sizeable fishing port,  Sines , and small fishing villages but would instead have a much popular usage in the  Algarve  and its seaside towns. One of the theories as to why the plate may belong to the Algarve is that pigs in the region used to be fed with fish derivatives, so clams were added to the fried pork to disguise the fishy taste of the meat. [26]  The dish was used in the Middle-ages to test  Jewish converts ’ new Christian faith; consisting of pork and shellfish (two non- kosher  items),  Cristãos-novos  were expected to eat the dish in public in order to prove they had renounced the Jewish faith. [27]  In  Alto Alentejo  (North Alentejo), there is a dish made with lungs, blood and liver, of either pork or  lamb . This traditional Easter dish is eaten at other times of year as well. A regional, islander dish, 
 alcatra , beef  marinated  in red wine, garlic and spices like cloves and whole allspice, then roasted in a clay pot, is a tradition of  Terceira Island  in the  Azores .
 The Portuguese steak,  bife , is a slice of fried beef or pork marinated in spices and served in a wine-based sauce with fried potatoes, rice, or salad. An egg,  sunny-side up , may be placed on top of the meat, in which case the dish acquires a new name,  bife com ovo a cavalo  (steak with an egg on horseback). This dish is sometimes referred to as  bitoque , to demonstrate the idea that the meat only "touches" the grill twice, meaning that it does not grill for too long before being served, resulting in a rare to medium-rare cut of meat. Another variation of  bife  is  bife à casa  (house steak), which may resemble the  bife a cavalo [28]  or may feature garnishing, such as  asparagus . [29] 
 Iscas  (fried liver) was a favourite request in old Lisbon taverns. Sometimes, they were called  iscas com elas , the  elas  referring to sautéed potatoes. Small  beef  or  pork steaks  in a roll ( pregos  or  bifanas , respectively) are popular snacks, often served at beer halls with a large mug of  beer . In modern days, a  prego  or  bifana   [  pt ] , eaten at a snack bar counter, may constitute lunch in itself. 
 Espetada  (meat on a skewer) is very popular in the island of Madeira.
 
 Charcuterie [ edit ] 
   Alheiras basket display,  Mirandela 
 Alheira , [30]  a yellowish sausage from Trás-os-Montes, traditionally served with fried potatoes and a fried egg, has an interesting story. In the late 15th century, King  Manuel of Portugal  ordered all resident Jews to convert to  Christianity  or leave the country.
The King did not really want to expel the Jews, who constituted the economic and professional élite of the kingdom, but was forced to do so by outside pressures. So, when the deadline arrived, he announced that no ships were available for those who refused conversion—the vast majority—and had men, women and children dragged to churches for a forced mass baptism. Others were even baptized near the ships themselves, which gave birth to a concept popular at the time:  baptizados em pé , literally meaning: "baptized while standing". It is believed that some of the  Jews  maintained their religion secretly, but tried to show an image of being good Christians. Since avoiding pork was a tell-tale practice in the eyes of the  Portuguese Inquisition , new Christians devised a type of sausage that would give the appearance of being made with pork, but only contained heavily spiced game and chicken. Over time, pork has been added to the  alheiras .
Alheira-sausage varieties with  PGI  protection status, include  Alheira de  Vinhais  and  Alheira de  Barroso - Montalegre . [31] [32] 
 Chouriço  or  Chouriça  (the latter usually denoting a larger or thicker version) is a distinct sausage and not to be confused with chorizo. It is made (at least) with pork, fat, paprika, garlic, and salt (wine and sometimes pepper also being common ingredients in some regions). It is then stuffed into natural casings from pig or lamb and slowly dried over smoke. [33]  The many different varieties differ in color, shape, spices and taste. White pepper, piri-piri, cumin and cinnamon are often an addition in Portuguese ex-colonies and islands. Traditional Portuguese cured chouriço varieties are more meaty, often use red wine and not many spices. [34]  Many Portuguese dishes use  chouriço , including  cozido à portuguesa  and  feijoada . [35] 
 Farinheira  is another Portuguese smoked sausage, which uses  wheat flour  as base ingredient. This sausage is one of the ingredients of traditional dishes like  Cozido à Portuguesa .  Borba ,  Estremoz  and  Portalegre  farinheiras all have a " PGI " in the European Union. [36] [37] 
 
   Presunto de  Chaves , cured prosciutto 
 Presunto  ( prosciutto ham ) comes in a wide variety in Portugal, the most famous presunto being from the  Chaves  region. Presunto is usually cut in thin slices or small pieces and consumed as aperitif, tea, or added as ingredient to different dishes.
 Several varieties of presunto are protected by European law with  protected designations of origin  ( PDO ) or  protected geographical indication  ( PGI ), such as Presunto de Barrancos or Presunto Bísaro de Vinhais. [38] [39] 
 Porco bísaro  is a prized native pig breed in Portugal with  PDO  status. [40]  Several products derived from this breed, such as «Bucho de Vinhais», «Chouriço de Ossos de Vinhais» and «Chouriça Doce de Vinhais» also have PGI status.
According to the General Cattle Census on the Continent of the Kingdom of Portugal (1870), "… bísaro is the name given to the tucked-up pig, more or less leggy, with loose ears to distinguish him from the good plump and pernicious pig of the Alentejo". The name  Celtic   is proposed and used by Sanson to express the antiquity of the race of this type, which was the only one that existed in the regions inhabited by the Celtic people, [41]  such as the north of Portugal and Galicia, the former Gaul and the British islands, before the introduction in these countries, of the Asian and Romanesque races.
 In 1878, Macedo Pinto described the bísaro pig as an animal belonging to the  Typo Bizaro  or  Celta , with the morphological characteristics mentioned above, distinguishing two varieties within the breed, according to the corpulence, color and greater or lesser amount of bristles. 
 
   Traditional Portuguese enchidos 
 He considered the existence of pigs from 200 to 250 kg of carcass and others between 120 and 150 kg; as for color, he says they are mostly black, also some spotted and those with white fur were called Galegos, as they come from Galicia. Molarinhos were spotted animals that had few bristles and smooth, smooth skin.
The same author also mentions that they are animals of slow and late growth, difficult to fatten (only completing their growth at the age of two), producing more lean meat than fat and accumulating more in the fat than in thick blankets of  bacon .
In 1946, Cunha Ortigosa classifies the  Bísara   breed, originally from the Celtic family, as one of the three national breeds. When describing the varieties within the breed, in addition to  Galega   and  Beirôa  which encompasses the  Molarinho  and  Cerdões  subtypes. [42] 
 Portuguese cold cuts and sausages ( charcutaria  and  enchidos , respectively) have long and varied traditions in meat preparation, seasoning, preservation and consumption: cured, salted, smoked, cooked, simmered, fermented, fried, wrapped, dried. Regional variations in form and flavour, specialities and names also occur. Further pork (and other meats) charcuterie products include  toucinho ,  paio ,  morcela ,  beloura ,  bucho ,  butelo ,  cacholeira ,  maranho , pernil,  salpicão  and others. [43] [44] 
 
 Poultry [ edit ] 
   Portuguese chicken  piri-piri  ( Frango assado ) 
 Chicken ,  duck ,  turkey ,  red-legged partridge  and  quail  are all elements of Portuguese cuisine. Dishes include  frango no churrasco  (chicken on  churrasco ), chicken  piri-piri ,  cabidela  rice ,  canja de galinha , and  arroz de pato  (duck rice), among others.
 Turkeys  were only eaten for Christmas or on special occasions, such as wedding receptions or banquets. Until the 1930s, farmers from the outskirts of Lisbon would come around Christmastime to bring herds of turkeys to the city streets for sale. Nowadays, mass production in poultry farms makes these meats accessible to all classes.  Bifes de peru , turkey steaks, have thus become an addition to Portuguese tables.
 
 Vegetables and starches [ edit ] 
   Brassica oleracea  var. viridis , known in Portugal as  couve-galega 
 Vegetables that are popular in Portuguese cookery include numerous  cabbage  and  collard  varieties, tomatoes, onions and  peas . There are many  starchy  dishes, such as  feijoada , a rich  black bean  stew with beef and pork, and  açorda , a Portuguese bread soup; ’’cozido’’ stews with  kale ,  white beans ,  red beans , Catarino and Bragançano,  fava beans , black eyed beans;  pumpkins  like  menina  and  porqueira [45]  varietals, are used in soups and soufflés. [46] 
One of numerous vegetable and starch rich soups and broths is  caurdo  or  caldo à Lavrador , a soup made of cabbage, red beans, potatoes, prosciutto chunks and wheat flour. [47] 
 Many dishes are served with salads often made from tomato, lettuce, shredded carrots and onion, usually seasoned with  olive oil  and  vinegar . Potatoes and rice are also extremely common in Portuguese cuisine. Soups made from a variety of vegetables,  root vegetables , meats and beans are commonly available, one of the most popular being  caldo verde , made from potato purée, thinly sliced  kale , and slices of   chouriço .
 
 Fruits, nuts, and berries [ edit ] 
   Pêra Rocha  (Pyrus communis L.) 
 Before the arrival of  potatoes  from the New World,  chestnuts  ( Castanea sativa ) were widely used as seasonal staple ingredients. There is a revival of chestnut dishes, desserts and compotes in Portugal and production is relevant in inland areas of central and northern Portugal. [48] [49] 
 Other seasonal fruits, nuts and berries such as pears, [50]  apples, [51]   table grapes , plums, peaches, cherries,  sour cherries , [52]  melons, watermelons, citrus, figs, [53]  pomegranates, apricots, walnuts, pine nuts, almonds, hazelnuts, strawberries, raspberries, blackberries, redcurrant and blueberries [54] [55]  are part of the Portuguese diet. These are consumed naturally or used as desserts, marmalades,  compotes , jellies and liqueurs. [56] [57] 
 
 Cheese [ edit ] 
   A plate of Portuguese cheeses 
 See also:  List of Portuguese cheeses with protected status 
 There are a wide variety of Portuguese cheeses, made from cow's, goat's or sheep's milk. Usually these are very strongly flavoured and fragrant. Traditional Portuguese cuisine does not include cheese in its recipes, so it is usually eaten on its own before or after the main dishes. The  Queijo da Serra da Estrela , which is very strong in flavour, can be eaten soft or more matured.  Serra da Estrela  is handmade from fresh sheep's milk and  thistle-derived   rennet . In the Azores islands, there is a type of cheese made from cow's milk with a spicy taste, the  Queijo São Jorge . Other well known cheeses with  protected designation of origin , such as  Queijo de Azeitão ,  Queijo de Castelo Branco .  Queijo mestiço de Tolosa   [  pt ] , is the only Portuguese cheese with  protected geographical indication [58]  and is made in the civil parish of  Tolosa , part of the municipality of  Nisa , which itself has another local variation within the  Portalegre District ,  Queijo de Nisa .
 
 Alcoholic beverages [ edit ] 
 Wines and beers [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Portuguese wine 
   A glass of tawny  Porto wine 
   Bunch of  Alvarinho  grapes 
 Wine  (red, white and "green") is the traditional Portuguese drink, the  rosé  variety being popular in non-Portuguese markets and not particularly common in Portugal itself.
 Vinho verde , termed "green" wine, is a specific kind of wine which can be red, white or rosé, and is only produced in the northwestern (Minho province) and does not refer to the colour of the drink, but to the fact that this wine needs to be drunk "young". A "green wine" should be consumed as a new wine while a "maduro" wine usually can be consumed after a period of ageing. Green wines are usually slightly sparkling.
 Traditionally grown on the schist slopes of the River Douro and immediate tributaries,  Port wine  is a fortified wine of distinct flavour produced in  Douro , which is normally served with desserts.
 Alvarinho  white wines from Minho are also highly sought after. [59] 
 Vinho da Madeira , is a regional wine produced in  Madeira , similar to  sherry .
From the  distillation  of grape wastes from wine production, this is then turned into a variety of  brandies  (called  aguardente , literally "burning water"), which are very strong-tasting. 
Typical liqueurs, such as  Licor Beirão  and  Ginjinha , are very popular alcoholic beverages in Portugal. In the south, particularly the Algarve, a distilled spirit called  medronho , which is made from the fruit of the  strawberry tree .
 Beer  was already consumed in Pre-Roman times, namely by the  Lusitanians  who drank beer much more than wine. The Latinised word ‘cerveja’ (from cerevisia < cervesia) derives from an older Celtic term used in Gaul. [60] [61]  During the Reconquista, many knights from Northern Europe preferred beer to the local wine. [62]  The ‘Biergarten’ culture, called  Cervejaria  in Portugal, is widespread in all regions and several local brands are popular with locals and visitors alike. Lisbon has a Beer Museum focusing on Portuguese and Lusophone countries’ beer traditions. [63] 
 
 Pastries and sweets [ edit ] 
   Pastéis de Nata  and other sweets at a shop in Lisbon 
   Tigelada  and Queijada de Requeijão 
 Portuguese sweets have had a large impact on the development of Western cuisines. Many words like  marmalade ,  caramel ,  molasses  and  sugar  have Portuguese origins.
 The Portuguese  sponge cake  called  pão de ló  [ pt ]  is believed to be based on the 17th century French recipe  pain de lof , which in turn derived from Dutch "loef". [64]  The French eventually called their cake  Genoise .
 Probably the most famous of the Portuguese patisseries are the  pastéis de nata , originally known as  Pastéis de Belém  in the Lisbon district with the same name in the early nineteenth century. It is unclear when and where the recipe was first started. 
Monks of the military-religious  Order of Christ  lived in a church on the same location and provided assistance to seafarers in transit since the early fourteenth century, at least. [65] 
 The  House of Aviz  and the  Jerónimos Monastery  followed, the monastery lastly being occupied by the  Hieronymite  monks. Following the 1820 liberal revolution, events led to the closure of all monastic orders. The  Pastéis de Belém  were first commercialised just outside the Jerónimos monastery by people who had lost their jobs there. The original patisserie, adjacent to the monastery still operates today. [66]   This pastry is now found worldwide, it is known in the UK by its original name or also as  Portuguese custard tart . In 2011, the Portuguese public voted on a list of over 70 national dishes. Eventually naming the pastel de nata one of the seven wonders of Portuguese gastronomy. [67] 
 Many of the country's typical  pastries  were created in the  Middle Ages  monasteries by  nuns  and  monks  and sold as a means of supplementing their incomes. The names of these desserts are usually related to monastic life;  barriga de freira  (nun's belly),  papos d’anjo  (angel's double chin), and  toucinho do céu  (bacon from heaven). 
For that reason, they are often referred to as  doçaria conventual  or  receitas monásticas  (monastic recipes). [68]  Their legacy dates back to the 15th century when sugar from overseas became easier to access by all classes. Nuns at the time, were often young nobles who inherited knowledge from their households and developed recipes. These recipes were passed and perfected from generation to generation, usually within the secrecy of convents. Many of today's Portuguese deserts originated in convents and monasteries. [69] 
 The  Andalusian  influence in Southern Portugal can be found in sweets that incorporate figs, almonds and honey, namely the  Algarve   marzipan  colourful sweets. [70] 
 Most towns have a local specialty, usually egg or cream-based pastry. Some examples are  leite-creme  (a dessert consisting of an egg  custard -base topped with a layer of hard  caramel , a variant of creme brûlée) and  pudim flã .
 Other very popular pastries found in most cafés, bakeries and pastry shops across the country are the  Bola de Berlim , the  Bolo de arroz , and the  Tentúgal pastries . [71] 
 Doce de Chila / Gila  (made from  squash ), wafer paper, and candied egg threads called  fios de ovos  or angel hair. [72] 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pão-de-Ló
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rabanadas, typical Christmas dessert
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Leite-creme  (Portuguese  Crème brûlée )
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Arroz Doce ( Rice pudding )
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bola de Berlim (a type of  Berliner )
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Salame de Chocolate ( Chocolate salami )
 
 
 
 
 Influences on world cuisine [ edit ] 
   Portuguese-influenced Brazilian  feijoada 
   Goan pork  vindalho  served alongside other Portuguese-Goan dishes 
   Pão de Castela  ( Kasutera ), a specialty of  Nagasaki , Japan 
 Portugal formerly had  a large empire  and the cuisine has been influenced in both directions. Portuguese influences are strongly evident in  Brazilian cuisine , which features its own versions of Portuguese dishes, such as  feijoada  and  caldeirada  (fish stew). Other Portuguese influences reside in the Chinese territory of  Macau  ( Macanese cuisine ) and territories who were part of the  Portuguese India , such as  Goa  or  Kerala , where  vindalho  (a spicy  curry ), shows the pairing of vinegar, chilli pepper and garlic.
 The Persian orange, grown widely in  southern Europe  since the 11th century, was bitter. Sweet oranges were brought from  India  to Europe in the 15th century by Portuguese traders. Some Southeast Indo-European languages name the  orange  after Portugal, which was formerly its main source of imports.
 Examples are  Albanian   portokall ,  Bulgarian   portokal  [портокал],  Greek   portokali  [πορτοκάλι],  Persian   porteghal  [پرتقال], and  Romanian   portocală . In  South Italian dialects  ( Neapolitan ), the orange is named  portogallo  or  purtualle , literally "the Portuguese ones". Related names can also be found in other languages:  Turkish   Portakal ,  Arabic   al-burtuqal  [البرتقال],  Amharic   birtukan  [ቢርቱካን], and  Georgian   phortokhali  [ფორთოხალი].
 The Portuguese imported spices, such as cinnamon ( Cinnamomum verum ) now liberally used in its traditional desserts and savoury dishes, from Asia. [73] 
 The Portuguese  " canja " ,  chicken soup  made with pasta or rice, is a popular food therapy for the sick, which shares similarities with the Asian  congee , used in the same way, indicating it may have come from the East. [74] 
 In 1543, Portuguese trade ships reached  Japan  and introduced refined sugar, valued there as a luxury good. 
 Japanese lords  enjoyed Portuguese confectionery so much it was remodelled in the now traditional Japanese  konpeitō  (candy),  kasutera  ( sponge cake ), and  keiran somen  (the Japanese version of Portuguese " fios de ovos ", also popular in  Thai cuisine  under the name of "kanom foy tong"), [75]  creating the  Nanban-gashi , or "New-Style  Wagashi ". During this  Nanban trade  period,  tempura  (resembling Portuguese  peixinhos da horta ) was introduced to Japan by early Portuguese missionaries.
 
   Catherine of Braganza  was responsible for the introduction of  tea  to the English court 
 Tea  was made fashionable in England in the 1660s after the marriage of  King Charles II  to the Portuguese princess  Catherine of Braganza  ( Catarina De Bragança ), who brought her liking for tea, originally from the colony of  Macau , to the court. [76]  When Catherine relocated up north to join King Charles, she is said to have packed loose-leaf tea as part of her personal belongings; it would also have likely been part of her dowry.
Queen Catherine also introduced  marmalade  to the English and made the habit of eating with a fork a part of the court's table etiquette. [77] 
 All over the world, Portuguese immigrants influenced the cuisine of their new "homelands", such as  Hawaii  and parts of  New England .  Pão doce  ( Portuguese sweet bread ),  malassadas ,  sopa de feijão  (bean soup), and Portuguese sausages (such as  linguiça  and  chouriço ) are eaten regularly in the Hawaiian islands by families of all ethnicities. Similarly, the " papo-seco " is a Portuguese bread roll with an open texture, which has become a staple of cafés in  Jersey , where there is a substantial Portuguese community.
 In  Australia  and  Canada , variants of "Portuguese-style" chicken, sold principally in  fast food  outlets, have become extremely popular in the last two decades. [78] [79] [80]  Offerings include conventional chicken dishes and a variety of chicken and beef burgers. In some cases, such as "Portuguese chicken sandwiches", the dishes offered bear only a loose connection to Portuguese cuisine, usually only the use of "Piri-piri sauce" (a Portuguese sauce made with  piri piri ).
 The Portuguese had a major influence on  African cuisine  and vice versa. They are responsible for introducing  corn  in the African continent. In turn, the  South African  restaurant chain  Nando's , among others, have helped diffusing Portuguese cuisine worldwide, in Asia for example, where the  East Timorese cuisine  also received influence. [81] 
 
 Madeira wine and early American history [ edit ] 
   The indoors of a wine house in  Funchal , Madeira, dedicated to the production and selling of Madeira wine 
 In the 18th century  Madeira wine  became extremely popular in  British America . Barrel-aged Madeira especially was a luxury product consumed by wealthy European colonists. The price continued to rise from £5 at the start of the 18th century to £43 by the early 19th century. It was even served as a toast during the  First Continental Congress  in 1775. [82] 
 Madeira was an important wine in the history of the United States of America. [83]  No wine-quality grapes could be grown among the 13 colonies, so imports were needed, with a great focus on Madeira. [84]  One of the major events on the road to revolution in which Madeira played a key role was the seizure of  John Hancock 's sloop the  Liberty  on 9 May 1768 by British customs officials. Hancock's boat was seized after he had unloaded a cargo of 25 casks (3,150 gallons) of Madeira wine, and a dispute arose over import duties. The seizure of the  Liberty  caused riots to erupt among the people of  Boston .
 Madeira wine was a favorite of Thomas Jefferson after  George Wythe  introduced him to it. [85]  It was used to toast The Declaration of Independence and  George Washington ,  Betsy Ross , [86]   Alexander Hamilton ,  Benjamin Franklin , and  John Adams  are also said to have appreciated the qualities of Madeira. The wine was mentioned in Benjamin Franklin's autobiography. On one occasion, Adams wrote to his wife, Abigail, of the great quantities of Madeira he consumed while a Massachusetts delegate to the Continental Congress. A bottle of Madeira was used by visiting Captain James Server to christen the USS  Constitution  in 1797. Chief Justice John Marshall was also known to appreciate Madeira, as did his fellow justices on the early U.S. Supreme Court.
 
 See also [ edit ] 
 Broa de Avintes , a bread from  Avintes 
 Mediterranean diet 
 Culinary arts 
 List of Portuguese dishes 
 Galician cuisine 
 Macanese cuisine 
 Mozambican cuisine 
 Seafood 
 Brazilian cuisine 
 Cape Verdean cuisine 
 Angolan cuisine 
 References [ edit ] 
 
 
 ^   "Livro de Cozinha da Infanta D. Maria de Portugal" .  Livro de Cozinha da Infanta D. Maria de Portugal . 24 March 2012. 
 
 ^  a   b   c   Guerreiro, Fábio Banza (January 2018).  ""Uma Cozinha Portuguesa, com certeza: A 'Culinária Portuguesa' de António Maria de Oliveira Bello", in Revista Trilhas da História, Vol.8, n.º15, Três Lagoas, 2018, pp. 221-236" .  Revista Trilhas da História  – via www.academia.edu. 
 
 ^   MacVeigh, Jeremy (26 August 2008).  International Cuisine . Cengage Learning.  ISBN   978-1111799700  – via Google Books. 
 
 ^   "Portugal's Past Can Be Seen In Its Cuisine" . 7 July 2017. 
 
 ^   "Why Portuguese Influence Is the Next Food Trend in Europe | host" .  host.fieramilano.it . 
 
 ^   Verbete "broa" no dicionario Priberam   (in Portuguese) . 
 
 ^   Vigo, Faro de (21 April 2014).  "Broa" .  Faro de Vigo  (in Spanish) . Retrieved  13 July  2020 . 
 
 ^   "Pão e Produtos de Panificação" .  Produtos Tradicionais Portugueses . 
 
 ^   "20 pratos da culinária portuguesa de fazer crescer água na boca | momondo Explorador" . 6 December 2018. 
 
 ^   "Cociña Galega Tradicional" .  O Concello de Lalín . 23 July 2020. 
 
 ^  a   b   Barroca, Mário Jorge (2017).  No tempo de D. Afonso Henriques: reflexões sobre o primeiro século português . CITCEM - Centro de Investigação Transdisciplinar Cultura, Espaço e Memória.  ISBN   978-989-8351-75-3  – via Sigarra. 
 
 ^   Les origines de la mousse au chocolat 
 
 ^   [1]  As 17 melhores sobremesas de Portugal 
 
 ^   Rice in Portugal 
 
 ^   Queijos portugueses . Infopédia [Online]. Porto: Porto Editora, 2003-2013. 
 
 ^   (in Portuguese)  PESSOA, M.F.; MENDES, B.; OLIVEIRA, J.S.  CULTURAS MARINHAS EM PORTUGAL   Archived  29 October 2008 at the  Wayback Machine , "O consumo médio anual em produtos do mar pela população portuguesa, estima-se em cerca de 58,5 kg/ por habitante sendo, por isso, o maior consumidor em produtos marinhos da Europa e um dos quatro países a nível mundial com uma dieta à base de produtos do mar." 
 
 ^   "Fish and seafood consumption per capita" .  Our World in Data . Retrieved  22 May  2021 . 
 
 ^   Irreverence and Recreation of 'Bacalhau', the Portuguese Faithful Friend . Brill. 2015. pp. 13–26.  doi : 10.1163/9781848884496_003 .  ISBN   9781848884496 . 
 
 ^   "Peixes Cozinha de Portugal Gastronomia Peixes Cozinha de Portugal Peixes Portal de Portugal © Top de Portugal" .  www.topdeportugal.com . 
 
 ^   Figueiredo, Lucia.  "Produtos Tradicionais Portugueses" .  Produtos Tradicionais Portugueses . 
 
 ^   "CM Penacova" .  www.cm-penacova.pt . 
 
 ^   "Pratos Típicos do Centro de Portugal" . 
 
 ^   Rosado, António (22 February 2020).  "Festival Gastronómico da Lampreia em Penacova no próximo fim de semana" . 
 
 ^   Administrator.  "Mas afinal...o que é a Chanfana?" .  www.bikeonelas.com . 
 
 ^   "Vila Nova de Poiares: Capital Universal da Chanfana" . 
 
 ^   Silva, Nuno M. (30 March 2019).  "História e origem da Carne de Porco à Alentejana" . clubevinhosportugueses.pt . Retrieved  27 December  2020 . 
 
 ^   Soderstrom, Mary (2010).  Making Waves: The Continuing Portuguese Adventure . Véhicule Press. p. 58.  ISBN   9781550652925 . 
 
 ^   "Bife a Casa (Portuguese House Steak)" . Kidbite Lunches. 16 October 2012. 
 
 ^   "Gloria's Restaurant Menu" . Gloria's Portuguese Restaurant. 
 
 ^   "Guia Enchidos Portugueses" . 14 September 2017. 
 
 ^   Alheira de Barroso-Montalegre  in the  DOOR  Data Base of the European Union. 
 
 ^   Alheira de Vinhais  in the  DOOR  Data Base of the European Union. 
 
 ^   Santos, Nina (23 July 2017).  "A Guide to Portugal's Different Sausages" .  Culture Trip . 
 
 ^   "Montalegre Special "Chouriça" (Fumeiro Barroso) - Portugal Nosso - Gastronomia, Vinhos & Artigos Diversos" . 
 
 ^   Poelzl, Volker (15 October 2009).  CultureShock! Portugal: A Survival Guide to Customs and Etiquette .  ISBN   9789814435628 . 
 
 ^   "Farinheira de Estremoz e Borba" .  European Commission Agriculture and Rural Development . Retrieved  11 July  2020 . 
 
 ^   "Farinheira de Portalegre" .  European Commission Agricultural and Rural Development . Retrieved  11 July  2020 . 
 
 ^   Presunto de Barrancos  in the  DOOR  database of the European Union. Accessed 16 March 2014. 
 
 ^   Presunto de Vinhais ou Presunto Bísaro de Vinhais  in the  DOOR  database of the European Union. Accessed 16 March 2014. 
 
 ^   "DOOR" . 
 
 ^   "Associação Nacional dos Criadores de Suínos de Raça Bísara" . 
 
 ^   "Carne de Bísaro Transmontano" . 
 
 ^   "Manual de Cozinha da Infanta Dona Maria" . 
 
 ^   "Arte Nova e Curiosa...se occupaõ em fazer doçes" . 1788. 
 
 ^   "Curcubitáceas de Trás-os-Montes"   (PDF) .  www.drapn.min-agricultura.pt . 2007 . Retrieved  5 April  2021 . 
 
 ^   "Abóbora – Portal do Jardim.com" .  Portal do Jardim.com – A Ferramenta Essencial do Verdadeiro Jardineiro  (in Portuguese). 9 December 2009 . Retrieved  5 April  2021 . 
 
 ^   "Caurdo à Lavrador" . 
 
 ^   Soares, Carmen (January 2018).  ""Um doce e nutritivo fruto: a castanha na história da alimentação e da gastronomia portuguesas"Mesas luso-brasileiras: alimentação, saúde & cultura" .  In Carmen Soares, Cilene Gomes Ribeiro (Eds.), Mesas Luso-brasileiras: Alimentação, Saúde & Cultura. Vol. 2. Série DIAITA: Scripta & Realia, Imprensa da Universidade de Coimbra, Coimbra, 103-176.  – via www.academia.edu. 
 
 ^   "Centro de Interpretação Vivo do Castanheiro e da Castanha de Aguiar da Beira (CIVCC AB)" .  www.cm-aguiardabeira.pt . 
 
 ^   Sousa, Rui M. Maia de.  "As variedades regionais de pereiras"   (PDF) . Instituto Nacional de Investigação Agrária e Veterinária . Retrieved  11 July  2020 . 
 
 ^   Pereira, Sónia Santos (6 February 2018).  "Recuperar as variedades tradicionais de fruta portuguesa" .  Vida Rural . Retrieved  11 July  2020 . 
 
 ^   "Ginja de Óbidos e Alcobaça" .  European Commission Agriculture and Rural Development . Retrieved  11 July  2020 . 
 
 ^   "Figo Seco de Torres Novas" .  Produtos Tradicionais Portugueses . Retrieved  11 July  2020 . 
 
 ^   "Desde 2012 a produção de mirtilos cresceu 700% em Portugal" .  Agronegocios . Retrieved  11 July  2020 . 
 
 ^   "Portugal destaca-se pela qualidade do mirtilo" .  Agrotec . Retrieved  11 July  2020 . 
 
 ^   Bijos, Pedro (8 July 2012).  Portugal Com Gosto . Mauad Editora.  ISBN   9788574784885 . Retrieved  11 July  2020 . 
 
 ^   Isabel M. R. Mendes Drumond, Braga (September 2012).  Bens de hereges: inquisição e cultura material . Coimbra University Press.  ISBN   9789892603070 . Retrieved  11 July  2020 . 
 
 ^   Registed cheeses from Portugal  in the  DOOR  database of the European Union. Retrieved 26 March 2014 
 
 ^   "EC wine evaluation Portugal"   (PDF) . 
 
 ^   "Cervoise : définition de CERVOISE, subst. fém. | La langue française" . 6 February 2019. 
 
 ^   GOUGENHEIM, Georges (14 January 2010).  Les mots français dans l'histoire et dans la vie . Place des éditeurs.  ISBN   9782258084179  – via Google Books. 
 
 ^   Aquino, Bruno (25 March 2019).  Uma Viagem pelo Mundo da Cerveja Artesanal portuguesa . Leya.  ISBN   9789897801129 . 
 
 ^   "Museu da Cerveja – Museu da Cerveja" . 
 
 ^   "Priberam Dicionário" . 
 
 ^   IGESPAR, ed. (2011).  "Séc. XVI"  (in Portuguese). Lisbon, Portugal: IGESPAR-Instituto de Gestão do Património Arquitectónico e Arqueológico . Retrieved  23 June  2011 . 
 
 ^   "História" . 23 January 2015. 
 
 ^   The National Dish of Portugal . wetravelportugal.com. Accessed 28 March 2021. 
 
 ^   "Sabores e segredos: receituários conventuais portugueses da Época Moderna"   (PDF) .  digitalis-dsp.uc.pt . Retrieved  13 July  2020 . 
 
 ^   Alves, Osvaldo.  "Saberes e Sabores: Memórias da Doçaria Conventual de Coimbra"  – via www.academia.edu.   {{ cite journal }} :  Cite journal requires  |journal=  ( help ) 
 
 ^   Roufs, Timothy G.; Roufs, Kathleen Smyth.  Sweet Treats Around the World . 
 
 ^   "The Prettiest Pastries of Portugal, and How to Recognize Them" .  Vogue . Retrieved  7 November  2018 . 
 
 ^   Fernandes, Daniel.  "Produtos Tradicionais Portugueses" .  Produtos Tradicionais Portugueses . 
 
 ^   "O Português que descobriu a canela" .  ncultura.pt . 16 March 2020. 
 
 ^   "Hearty Dish set King" .  newstatesman.com . 
 
 ^   "Wagashi: Angel Hair Keiran Somen (Fios de Ovos)" . kyotofoodie.com. 20 December 2008 . Retrieved  29 December  2020 . 
 
 ^   "The True Story Behind England's Tea Obsession" .  bbc.com . 
 
 ^   Brozan, Nadine (11 October 1990).  "Here's to the Queen who gave us a name" .  The New York Times . 
 
 ^   Bird on the wing  Sydney Morning Herald, 16 April 2004 
 
 ^   Hill, Megan (26 June 2019).  "Portuguese-Style Grilled Chicken Chain Makes Inroads in Western Washington" .  Eater Seattle . 
 
 ^   "Toronto's best Portuguese chicken" .  thestar.com . 12 November 2010. 
 
 ^   "Our Journey to East Timor" .  International Cuisine . 7 May 2015 . Retrieved  13 July  2020 . 
 
 ^   Phillips, Rod (13 October 2014).  Alcohol: A History . p. 156.  ISBN   9781469617619 . 
 
 ^   Tuten, James.  " "Have Some Madeira, M'Dear:" The Unique History of Madeira Wine and Its Consumption in the Atlantic World" .  academia.edu . Retrieved  11 July  2020 . 
 
 ^   Tuten, James H. (2006). "Liquid Assets: Madeira Wine and Cultural Capital among Lowcountry Planters, 1735–1900".  American Nineteenth Century History .  6  (2): 173–188.  doi : 10.1080/14664650500314513 .  S2CID   144093837 . 
 
 ^   "Thomas Jefferson and Madeira: A History and Tasting" . Smithsonian . Retrieved  11 July  2020 . 
 
 ^   Bortolot, Lana.  "How To Drink Like A President" .  Forbes . Retrieved  11 July  2020 . 
 
 
 External links [ edit ] 
 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons has media related to  Cuisine of Portugal . 
 
 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons has media related to  Desserts of Portugal . 
 
 
 
 
 Wikivoyage has a travel guide for  Portuguese cuisine . 
 
 v t e Portugal   articles History Timeline 
 Oestriminis 
 Ophiussa 
 Lusitanians 
 Lusitania 
 Gallaecia 
 Hispania 
 Suebi 
 Buri 
 Visigoths 
 Al-Andalus 
 County of Portugal 
 Treaty of Zamora 
 Manifestis Probatum 
 Kingdom of Portugal 
 Monarchs 
 1383–1385 interregnum 
 Treaty of Windsor 
 Consolidation 
 Portuguese golden age 
 Empire 
 Renaissance 
 Treaty of Tordesillas 
 Iberian Union 
 Restoration War 
 1755 Lisbon earthquake 
 1761 Lisbon earthquake 
 History of Portugal (1777–1834) 
 Peninsular War 
 United Kingdom of Portugal, Brazil and the Algarves 
 Liberal Revolution 
 Liberal Wars 
 Constitutional monarchy 
 Republican Revolution 
 First Republic 
 World War I 
 28 de Maio 
 Estado Novo 
 Overseas War 
 Carnation Revolution 
 Third Republic 
 By topic 
 Economy 
 Military 
 Language 
 Geography 
 Cities 
 Mountains 
 Islands 
 Lakes 
 Regions 
 Rivers 
 Earthquakes 
 Volcanoes 
 Politics 
 Administrative divisions 
 Constitution 
 Elections 
 Foreign relations 
 Government 
 Judiciary 
 Law 
 Law enforcement 
 Military 
 Parliament 
 Political parties 
 President 
 Economy 
 Agriculture 
 Central bank 
 Economic history 
 Energy 
 Exclusive Economic Zone  (EEZ) 
 Fishing 
 Mining 
 Science and technology 
 Stock Exchange 
 Telecommunications 
 Tourism 
 Transport 
 Society 
 Crime 
 Demographics 
 Education 
 Health 
 Housing 
 Immigration 
 Languages 
 People 
 Time 
 Culture 
 Architecture 
 Cinema 
 Cuisine 
 Icons 
 Literature 
 Media 
 Monuments 
 Music 
 Public holidays 
 Religion 
 Sport 
 Symbols 
 World Heritage Sites 
 Outline Index 
 Category 
 Portal 
 v t e European cuisine Sovereign states European Union 
 Austria 
 Belgium 
 Bulgaria 
 Croatia 
 Cyprus 
 Czech Republic 
 Denmark 
 Estonia 
 Finland 
 France 
 Germany 
 Greece 
 Hungary 
 Republic of Ireland 
 Italy 
 Latvia 
 Lithuania 
 Luxembourg 
 Malta 
 Netherlands 
 Poland 
 Portugal 
 Romania 
 Slovakia 
 Slovenia 
 Spain 
 Sweden 
 Other 
 Albania 
 Andorra 
 Armenia 
 Azerbaijan 
 Belarus 
 Bosnia and Herzegovina 
 Georgia 
 Iceland 
 Kazakhstan 
 Liechtenstein 
 Moldova 
 Monaco 
 Montenegro 
 North Macedonia 
 Norway 
 Russia 
 San Marino 
 Serbia 
 Switzerland 
 Turkey 
 Ukraine 
 United Kingdom 
 Vatican City 
 States with limited recognition 
 Abkhazia 
 Kosovo 
 Nagorno-Karabakh 
 Northern Cyprus 
 South Ossetia 
 Transnistria 
 Dependencies  and other territories 
 Faroe Islands 
 Gibraltar 
 Guernsey 
 Isle of Man 
 Jersey 
 
 v t e Cuisines Continental 
 African 
 North 
 West 
 list 
 Americas 
 Caribbean 
 North 
 South 
 list 
 Asian 
 Caucasian 
 Central 
 Indian subcontinent 
 Levantine 
 list 
 European 
 Balkan 
 Central 
 Eastern 
 list 
 Oceanic 
 Intercontinental
 Global 
 Latin American 
 Mediterranean 
 Middle Eastern 
 National  and regional 
 Afghan 
 Albanian 
 Algerian 
 American 
 Californian 
 Floribbean 
 Hawaiian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Lowcountry (South Carolina) 
 New England 
 New Mexico 
 Pacific Northwest 
 Pennsylvania Dutch 
 Puerto Rican 
 Southern US 
 Southwest US 
 Texas 
 Angolan 
 Argentine 
 Armenian 
 Australian 
 Austrian 
 Azerbaijani 
 Bahraini 
 Bangladeshi 
 Barbadian 
 Belarusian 
 Belgian 
 Belizean 
 Beninese 
 Bhutanese 
 Bolivian 
 Bosnian-Herzegovinian 
 Botswana 
 Brazilian 
 British 
 Channel Islands 
 English 
 Gibraltarian 
 Northern Irish 
 Saint Helena 
 Scottish 
 Welsh 
 Bruneian 
 Bulgarian 
 Burkinabé 
 Burmese 
 Burundian 
 Cambodian 
 Cameroonian 
 Canadian 
 Acadian 
 Québécois 
 Central African Republic 
 Chadian 
 Chilean 
 Chinese 
 Cantonese 
 Hong Kong 
 Macanese 
 Tibetan 
 Xinjiang 
 Colombian 
 Congolese 
 Corsican 
 Croatian 
 Cuban 
 Cypriot 
 Czech 
 Danish 
 Faroese 
 Greenlandic 
 Djiboutian 
 Dominican 
 Dominican Republic 
 Dutch 
 East Timorese 
 Ecuadorian 
 Egyptian 
 Emirati 
 Equatorial Guinean 
 Eritrean 
 Estonian 
 Ethiopian 
 Fijian 
 Filipino 
 Finnish 
 French 
 Occitan 
 French Guianan 
 Gabonese 
 Gambian 
 Georgian 
 German 
 Ghanaian 
 Greek 
 Cretan 
 Epirotic 
 Greek Macedonian 
 Heptanesean 
 Guatemalan 
 Guinea-Bissauan 
 Guinean 
 Haitian 
 Honduran 
 Hungarian 
 Icelandic 
 Indian 
 Arunachalese 
 Assamese 
 Bengali 
 Bihari 
 Goan 
 Gujarati 
 Himachal Pradesh 
 Kashmiri 
 Jharkhandi 
 Karnataka 
 Kerala 
 Maharashtrian 
 Manipuri 
 Meghalayan 
 Mizo 
 Naga 
 Odia 
 Punjabi 
 Rajasthani 
 Sikkimese 
 Sindhi 
 Tamil 
 Telangana 
 Telugu 
 Indonesian 
 Acehnese 
 Balinese 
 Banjar 
 Batak 
 Betawi 
 Indo 
 Javanese 
 Madurese 
 Makassar 
 Minahasan 
 Minangkabau 
 Palembangese 
 Sundanese 
 Iranian 
 Iraqi 
 Irish 
 Israeli 
 Italian 
 Abruzzese 
 Ligurian 
 Lombard 
 Lucanian 
 Neapolitan 
 Roman 
 Sardinian 
 Sicilian 
 Venetian 
 Ivorian 
 Jamaican 
 Japanese 
 Okinawan 
 Jordanian 
 Kazakh 
 Kenyan 
 Korean 
 North Korean 
 South Korean 
 Kosovan 
 Kuwaiti 
 Kyrgyz 
 Lao 
 Latvian 
 Lebanese 
 Lesotho 
 Liberian 
 Libyan 
 Liechtensteiner 
 Lithuanian 
 Luxembourg 
 Macedonian 
 Malagasy 
 Malawian 
 Malaysian 
 Sabahan 
 Sarawakian 
 Maldivian 
 Malian 
 Maltese 
 Mauritanian 
 Mauritian 
 Mexican 
 Moldovan 
 Monégasque 
 Mongolian 
 Montenegrin 
 Moroccan 
 Mozambican 
 Namibian 
 Nauruan 
 Nepalese 
 New Zealand 
 Nicaraguan 
 Niger 
 Nigerian 
 Niuean 
 Norwegian 
 Omani 
 Pakistani 
 Palestinian 
 Panamanian 
 Peruvian 
 Polish 
 Portuguese 
 Qatari 
 Romanian  (incl.  Transylvanian Saxon ) 
 Russian 
 Bashkir 
 Chechen 
 Circassian 
 Komi 
 Mordovian 
 Sakha 
 Tatar 
 Udmurt 
 Yamal 
 Rwandan 
 Saint Lucian 
 Salvadoran 
 Sammarinese 
 São Tomé and Príncipe 
 Saudi Arabian 
 Senegalese 
 Serbian 
 Seychellois 
 Sierra Leonean 
 Singaporean 
 Slovak 
 Slovenian 
 Somali 
 South African 
 Spanish 
 Andalusian 
 Asturian 
 Balearic 
 Basque 
 Canarian 
 Cantabrian 
 Catalan 
 Extremaduran 
 Galician 
 Manchegan 
 Valencian 
 Sri Lankan 
 Sudanese 
 Swazi 
 Swedish 
 Swiss 
 Syrian 
 Taiwanese 
 Tajik 
 Tanzanian 
 Zanzibari 
 Thai 
 Togolese 
 Tunisian 
 Turkish 
 Turkmen 
 Trinidadian and Tobagonian 
 Ugandan 
 Ukrainian 
 Uruguayan 
 Uzbek 
 Venezuelan 
 Vietnamese 
 Western Saharan 
 Yemeni 
 Zambian 
 Zimbabwean 
 Ethnic 
 Ainu 
 Arab 
 Indonesian 
 Aromanian 
 Assyrian 
 Balochi 
 Berber 
 Cajun 
 Chinese 
 American 
 Canadian 
 Chifa 
 Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Crimean Tatar 
 Greek American 
 Hazaragi 
 Indian 
 Anglo-Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Indigenous American 
 Inuit 
 Italian American 
 Kurdish 
 Livonian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Malay 
 Ossetian 
 Parsi 
 Pashtun 
 Peranakan 
 Romani 
 Sámi 
 Soul food 
 Sylheti 
 Transylvanian Saxon 
 Yup'ik 
 Religious 
 Buddhist 
 Christian 
 Goan Catholic 
 Mangalorean Catholic 
 Mennonite 
 Hindu 
 Islamic 
 Chinese 
 Ital 
 Jain 
 Jewish 
 American 
 Ashkenazi 
 Bukharan 
 Ethiopian 
 Mizrahi 
 Sephardic 
 Syrian 
 Ritual slaughter 
 Sikh 
 Historical 
 Ancient Egyptian 
 Ancient Greek 
 Ancient Israelite 
 Ancient Roman 
 Antebellum America 
 Aztec 
 Byzantine 
 Early modern European 
 Historical Chinese 
 Historical Indian subcontinent 
 Historical North Indian and Pakistani 
 History of agriculture 
 History of alcoholic drinks 
 History of bread 
 History of seafood 
 History of vegetarianism 
 Historical Argentine 
 Historical Japanese 
 Inca 
 Mayan 
 Muisca 
 Mughal 
 Medieval 
 Ottoman 
 Peasant 
 Soviet 
 Thirteen Colonies 
 Styles 
 Classique 
 Fast food 
 Fusion 
 New American 
 Eurasian 
 Haute 
 Molecular gastronomy 
 Note by Note 
 Nouvelle 
 Lists 
 List of cuisines 
 List of historical cuisines 
 Lists of prepared foods 
 Related 
 Cookbook 
 Cooking 
 Culinary arts 
 Drink 
 Food 
 history 
 Diet 
 Meal preparation 
 
   Food portal 
   Drink portal 
   Category 
   Commons 
   Cookbook 
   WikiProject 
   Outline 
 
 Portals :   Portugal   Food 
 Authority control   National libraries 
 France 
 BnF data 
 Israel 
 United States 
 Japan 
 Other 
 IdRef 
 
  
NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw2359
Cached time: 20230311125443
Cache expiry: 1814400
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc, no‐toc‐conversion]
CPU time usage: 1.223 seconds
Real time usage: 1.512 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 21802/1000000
Post‐expand include size: 274971/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 17797/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 16/100
Expensive parser function count: 60/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 250974/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.633/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 20259972/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/400
 
 
Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1201.838      1 -total
 32.55%  391.179      1 Template:Reflist
 27.41%  329.406      4 Template:Navbox
 19.69%  236.628     53 Template:Cite_web
 13.76%  165.333      1 Template:European_topic
 10.41%  125.128      1 Template:Culture_of_Portugal
 10.26%  123.335      1 Template:Culture_of_region
 10.01%  120.308      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  9.40%  113.015      1 Template:Portugal_topics
  9.26%  111.260      1 Template:Country_topics
 
  Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:idhash:918711-0!canonical and timestamp 20230311125441 and revision id 1133194948. Rendering was triggered because: page-view
  
 esi <esi:include src="/esitest-fa8a495983347898/content" />  
 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Portuguese_cuisine&oldid=1133194948 " 
 Categories :  Portuguese cuisine Mediterranean cuisine Hidden categories:  Articles with Portuguese-language sources (pt) CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) Webarchive template wayback links CS1 Portuguese-language sources (pt) CS1 errors: missing periodical Use dmy dates from June 2021 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Portuguese-language text Commons category link is on Wikidata Commons category link is locally defined Articles with BNF identifiers Articles with J9U identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers Articles with NDL identifiers Articles with SUDOC identifiers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  This page was last edited on 12 January 2023, at 17:08  (UTC) . 
 Text is available under the  Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0 ;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the  Terms of Use  and  Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the  Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. 
 
 
 Privacy policy 
 About Wikipedia 
 Disclaimers 
 Contact Wikipedia 
 Mobile view 
 Developers 
 Statistics 
 Cookie statement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
