
 
 
 Jump to content 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle sidebar 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Create account Log in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Personal tools 
 
 
 
 
   Create account   Log in 
 
 
 
 
		Pages for logged out editors  learn more 
 
 
 Contributions Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Navigation 
 
 
 Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate 
 
 
 
 
 Contribute 
 
 
 Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file 
 
 
 
 
 Tools 
 
 
 What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item 
 
 
 
 
 Print/export 
 
 
 Download as PDF Printable version 
 
 
 
 
 In other projects 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons 
 
 
 
 
 Languages 
 
 On this Wikipedia the language links are at the top of the page across from the article title.  Go to top . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CentralNotice  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Contents 
 move to sidebar 
 hide 
 
 
 
 
 (Top) 
 
 
 
 
 
 1 Ingredients 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 Method of cooking 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 Popular dishes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4 Common dishes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5 Beverages 
 
 
				Toggle Beverages subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 5.1 Non-alcoholic beverages 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5.2 Alcoholic beverages 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6 Cakes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 7 See also 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8 References 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 9 External links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
						Toggle the table of contents
					 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle the table of contents 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sarawakian cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 2 languages 
 
 
 
 Jawa Bahasa Melayu 
 Edit links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Article Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 English 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 More 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
 
 
 Regional cuisine of Malaysia 
 
 
   Laksa Sarawak  is the de facto state dish of  Sarawak [1] This article should  specify the language  of its non-English content, using {{ lang }}, {{ transliteration }} for transliterated languages, and {{ IPA }} for phonetic transcriptions, with an appropriate  ISO 639 code . Wikipedia's  multilingual support templates  may also be used.   See why .   ( August 2021 ) Nasi lemak on banana leaf.jpg This article is part of the series on Malaysian cuisine Masakan Malaysia 
 Regional and cultural cuisines 
 Chinese 
 Eurasian 
 Indian 
 Javanese 
 Malay 
 Peranakan 
 Sabah 
 Sarawak 
 
 Ingredients 
 Belacan 
 Budu 
 Gula Melaka 
 Kerisik 
 Kicap Manis 
 Pandan 
 Sambal 
 Santan 
 Tapai 
 Tempoyak 
 
 Types of food 
 Foods 
 Dishes 
 Soups 
 Kuih 
 Keropok 
 Kerepek 
 Drinks 
 Alcohol 
 
 Holidays and festivals 
 Chinese New Year 
 Hari Raya Puasa 
 Hari Raya Qurban 
 Deepavali 
 Christmas 
 Tadau Kaamatan 
 Gawai 
 
 Related cuisines 
 Bruneian 
 Chinese 
 Filipino 
 Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Singaporean 
 Thai 
 
 See also 
 History 
 Cookbook: Cuisine of Malaysia 
 
   Malaysia portal   Food portal v t e 
 Sarawakian cuisine  is a regional cuisine of  Malaysia .  Like the rest of  Malaysian cuisine , Sarawak food is based on staples such as rice. There is also a great variety of other ingredients and food preparations due to the influence of the state's varied geography and indigenous cultures quite distinct from the regional cuisines of the  Peninsular Malaysia .  Sarawak  is famous for its multi-ethnic population. [2]  As the homeland of many unique communities, Sarawak has a variety of cuisines rarely found elsewhere in Malaysia. The uniqueness of Sarawak well depends on its ethnic groups. Every native group in  Sarawak  has their own lifestyle, traditions, cultures and also foods. Sarawak cuisine is less spicy and has a subtle in taste. It uses fresh seafood and natural herbs like turmeric, lemongrass, ginger, lime and tapioca leaves. These ingredients are not only easily available, but also add a hint of aroma, texture and freshness to the delicacies. Food is one of the most cultural identities for native groups in Sarawak with each ethnic group having their own delicacies. Among the Iban, popular foods include  tubu  (stems),  tuak  (alcoholic beverage made from rice wine) and  pansuh  (dish cooked with bamboo). The  Malay  have  bubur pedas  (porridge) and  kek lapis Sarawak  (Sarawak layer cake); the  Bidayuh  have  asam siok  (chicken rice cooked in bamboo) and  sup ponas Bidayuh  (soup dish made of tapioca). The  Melanau  make  tebaloi  (Sago palm crackers),  sagu  (extracted from Sago palm) and  umai  (raw fish mixed with lime juice) and the  Orang Ulu  are known for  garam barrio  (Highlands salt),  kikid  (broth),  tengayen  (local young leaves), and  urum giruq  (pudding). 
 
 
 Ingredients [ edit ] 
   Sagu  or  Sago 
 Sarawak cuisine uses rice as a staple. It is most often steamed and always served with meat, fish and vegetable dishes. Rice is often enjoyed with the sauce or broth from the main dishes. Bario rice is a famous rice in Sarawak, which is named after the Sarawakian highlands where it is cultivated. It is regarded by the natives as the best and finest rice from the highlands of Sarawak. The rice, as per the natives, is known to be eaten only by the longhouse chief on special occasions although it is now available in Sarawak restaurants.  In Sarawak, rice is often fried.  Nasi aruk  is a traditional  Sarawakian Malay   nasi goring  or fried rice. Unlike common  nasi goreng ,  nasi aruk  does not use any oil to fry the rice. The rice must be fried for longer (compared to frying rice for  nasi goreng ) for the smokey/slightly-burnt taste to absorb into the rice. Sago or  sagu  is the traditional staple food of the  Melanau people  in Sarawak. The bud of the sago palm is cooked as a traditional dish in Sarawak. The bud is sliced or cut up and often stewed with coconut milk and dried anchovies with spices.  Linut  or sago porridge is made by pouring boiling water into a bowl of sago starch. Normally  linut  will be served together with the  sambal belacan  and other side dishes. The texture is very gooey and sticky and mostly eaten with a wooden fork.  Tebaloi  is a Sarawak sweet cracker made from sago starch, egg, coconut and sugar, flattened until thin and roasted until crisp. [3]   Tetubei  is another sago dish in Sarawak. It is a traditional Melanau food made from sago starch.
A variety of fruits and vegetables is often used in cooking.  Midin , also called  Stenochlaena palustris ,  paku midin,  or  lemidin , is a popular vegetable in Sarawak. It is a sun-loving plant that thrives in open areas, usually on swampy land. Common habitats are disturbed forests, secondary forests, rubber gardens, oil palm plantations, river banks and roadsides.  Midin  is usually served in two ways – fried with either garlic or  belacan  (shrimp paste). The most popular dish that uses  midin  is  midin goreng belacan .  Buah dabai , or  Canarium odontophyllum  in the family  Burseraceae , is a native fruit from Sarawak that is used in cooking. [4]   Dabai  is grown exclusively on the island of Borneo, in the Rajang River basin of central Sarawak, from the interior areas of Kapit all the way out to Sibu and Sarikei on the coast. It is one of the unique foods of Sarawak. The  dabai  fruit is slightly bigger than a kalamata olive, with a thin, bluish-black skin.  Nasi goreng dabai  is a Sarawak speciality fried rice in which the main ingredient is  buah dabai . The rice is fried with soy sauce, garlic, shallot, chilli, oyster sauce along with dabai and accompanied by other ingredients, particularly egg. The combination of tomatoes, garlic ( bawang putih ), and onions is found in many dishes in Sarawak. The most important spice in Sarawakian cuisine is pepper. Pepper is commercially produced on an industrial scale as a cash crop, and the preferred choice by local cooks when heat is wanted in a dish. Granted geographical indication (GI) status by the Malaysian Intellectual Property Organisation (MyIPO), Sarawak black pepper is highly regarded by international culinary figures such as  Alain Ducasse . Maize, pumpkins and yams are widely used in Sarawakian cuisine. Maize is grown around the same time as  padi  while pumpkins around the tilled rice and maize fields. Yams are also grown on the peripherals of  padi  farms. 
 Meat staples include chicken, pork, beef, and fish. Seafood is popular as a result of the bodies of water surrounding the archipelago. Popular catches include  semah ,  ikan keli ,  baong ,  empuarah  and prawns. Also popular are meat from deer, wild boars and even bears. Birds can be shot with blowpipes. Guns are not often used because cartridges are beyond the means of many indigenous people. Punai is another small bird the natives of Sarawak catch with sticky nets, and eat after roasting them over a small charcoal fire. Deep-fried punai is often available as part of  lelapan  (halal) in  Miri . Jungle vegetables are found up the hills and down the valleys, and some even by the riverbanks picked out by ancestors of the natives. Palms like  pantu ,  nipah ,  nibong ,  coconut  and  sago  continue to be important  umbut  or  upah  or shoots the indigenous people retain as delicacies. Native cuisine differs from other cuisines in its simplicity and directness of flavor. The use of wild ginger,  daun bungkang  and jungle leaves can bring subtle flavours to various dishes.
 
 Method of cooking [ edit ] 
 Commonly, cooking methods adopted in Sarawakian food are  menumis  (stir frying),  menggoreng  (frying),  bakar  (grilling) and  rebus  (boiling). Each ethnic group in  Sarawak  has different styles of preparing, cooking, preserving and eating styles of food. The Orang Ulu, for instance, use  garam barrio  to preserve meat, fish and vegetables, which is called  mengasam . The Iban cook and eat  lulun , rice which is cooked in bamboo. Other than that, the traditional cooking methods of the Iban people are also called  pansoh  or  pansuh , which is the preparation and cooking of food in bamboo tubes. Ingredients like poultry, fish, vegetables or rice are mixed with fragrant herbs like lemongrass, tapioca leaves and  bungkang  leaves (a species of myrtle from the Eugenia genus), then sealed within the bamboo tubes and placed directly over an open fire. The mixture needs to be stuffed into the bamboo logs and chopped tapioca leaves are stuffed at the opening of the logs. Cooking food this way will infuse it with aroma and flavour from the bamboo tubes while keeping it moist. Geographically, the large forest area and style of living have affected the ways native groups' traditional foods were created, prepared and cooked using natural resources. These food treasures, in turn, have contributed to the uniqueness of Sarawakian cuisine. 
 
 Popular dishes [ edit ] 
 Popular dishes in the state include Sarawak  laksa , [5]   kolo mee , [6]   sayur midin belacan ,  tomato mee ,  linut  and  ayam pansuh . [7] [8]  The state is also known for its  Sarawak layer cake  dessert. [9]  Each ethnic group has its own delicacies with different styles of preparing, cooking, and eating food. However, modern technology has altered the methods of cooking native dishes. Examples of ethnic foods are Malay  bubur pedas  (porridge), the Iban  tuak  (rice wine) and  manok pansoh  (bamboo chicken), Bidayuh  asam siok  (chicken rice)), Melanau  tebaloi  ( sago  palm crackers) and  umai  (raw fish mixed with lime juice), and Orang Ulu  urum giruq  (pudding). [10]  The traditional food of Sarawak has been marketed as a  culinary tourism  product. [11] 
 In September 2021, Sarawak Laksa was named the best dish in Asia according to readers' feedback on  TasteAtlas . [12] 
 
 Common dishes [ edit ] 
 Sarawak is notable for its rice; currently three varieties grown in Sarawak have been granted geographical indication status by MyIPO. [13] [14] 
Among the foods and beverages particular to Sarawak are:
 
   Kolo mee 
   Bubur pedas 
   Stir-fried "Midin" 
   A bowl of  umai . 
 Acar timun Sarawak  or  Sarawak acar timun  or pickled cucumber is a popular Malay dish in Sarawak. It is very different from West Malaysia's  acar .  It is preserved in vinegar and sugar for days, weeks or even months before being served. As such, the pickles are sweet and sour and full of turmeric and other spice flavours. The julienning of the cucumber is much thinner and longer than  nonya acar  and they usually do not use cabbage. Julienned carrot is usually used for the purpose of adding colour to the  acar . Another distinction of Sarawak  acar  is that it is eaten with  keropok ikan  or fish crackers. 
 Asam siok  is a  Bidayuh  chicken rice that is cooked in bamboo.  Asam siok  is a Bidayuh delicacy served normally during special occasions such as  Gawai  and gatherings. This combination includes whole chicken, steamed rice, salt, ginger, lemongrass, tapioca leaves and a small amount of water to boil. 
 Bee pang  is a Chinese traditional type of crispy rice cake that is popular in Sarawak. 
 Belacan bihun  is rice vermicelli dressed in a gravy made from ground chillies, belacan, tamarind, and dried shrimp. It is garnished with cured cuttlefish, julienned cucumber, bean sprouts and  century egg  wedges. [15] 
 Bubur kapu  is an Iban rice flour dessert or  chendol . 
 Bubur pedas  is a type of rice congee cooked with a specially prepared spice paste, or  rempah  made from turmeric, lemon grass,  galangal , chillies, ginger, coconut and shallots. A fairly complex and spicy dish compared to most typical congee preparations,  bubur pedas  is often prepared during the month of Ramadan and served during the breaking of the fast. [16] 
 Stir-fried  cangkuk manis  is  sayur manis  or sweet leaf stir-fried with red peppers, shallots, garlic, oyster sauce and egg. 
 Daun ubi tumbuk  or  pucuk ubi tumbuk  is a preparation of cassava leaves (known as  empasak  by the Iban) which has the consistency of pesto, and is widely eaten among Sarawak's native communities. [17]  The pounded leaves may be sauteed with seasonings like anchovies and chilli, [18]  stuffed into a bamboo tube and roasted over an open fire, or simply boiled with shallot, fat and salt. 
 Gula mitai  is Sarawak's candy floss. It is made by melting sugar and then pulling and folding it as the sugar cools – like hand-pulled noodles. 
 Ikan terubuk masin  is salt-preserved  toli shad , which is endemic to the coastal waters of Sarawak, stretching from Sematan to Lawas. [19]  It is considered an iconic delicacy in Sarawak, and thus a prized edible gift. [20] 
 Kasam ensabi  is a fermented vegetable pickle made from an indigenous cultivar of mustard greens ( ensabi ) and is traditional to the Iban community. [21] 
 Kolo mee  or  mee kolok  is a dish of springy egg noodles tossed in a sweet and savoury shallot, lard and vinegar dressing, and topped with seasoned minced pork and  char siu . It is similar to Peninsular-style  Hakka mee  or wonton  mee  in concept, but differs significantly in taste profile. A popular variant uses rendered oil from cooking  char siu  to flavour  kolo mee  instead of plain lard, which gives the noodles a reddish hue. Halal versions of  kolo mee  replace the pork components with beef (earning the moniker of  mee sapi ) or chicken, and lard with peanut or vegetable oil. Additional toppings can include mushrooms, chicken and crab meat.  Kampua mee   is a similar dish from  Sibu  of Fuzhou origin. 
 Kompia  is Chinese bread made with meat, onions, salt and flour. A ball of flour is stuffed with a filling of other desired ingredients and flattened with a rolling pin. It is then slapped onto the sides of a traditional home-made Chinese oven and takes approximately 15 minutes to bake. 
 Kuching Siew pau  is a Chinese baked bun with meat filling. 
 Laksa Sarawak  or  kuching laksa   is noodles (usually rice vermicelli) served in an aromatic spiced coconut milk soup, topped with shredded chicken, shredded omelette, bean sprouts, prawns, and garnished with coriander. [22]  This dish has received endorsement by an American celebrity chef  Anthony Bourdain  in 2015. [23] 
 Linut  is a staple food for the  Melanau people . It is made of  sago  flour mixed with hot or boiling water. 
 Manok kacangma  is a Chinese-influenced dish, traditionally eaten by local women during confinement after giving birth. It consists of chicken pieces cooked with ginger and  kacangma , often seasoned with some  Chinese wine  or  tuak  by non-Muslim cooks. [24] 
 Manok pansoh  is the most typical Iban  pansoh  preparation of chicken seasoned with  bungkang  leaves, lemongrass, ginger, and tapioca leaves, then stuffed into a bamboo tube and roasted in the  uma avok  (traditional fireplace). [22]  A related Bidayuh dish is  asam siok , with the addition of rice to the chicken mixture. These dishes are not commonly found in urban eateries and restaurants due to the practicality of roasting a bamboo tube over an open fire within a typical commercial kitchen. 
 Mee sapi  is a noodle dish which typically uses noodles similar to  kolok mee . However,  mee sapi  is different in the sense that it is served with a beef-based broth and topped with generous amounts of beansprouts and beef slices. 
 Midin  is a vegetable dish where the young fronds of the  Stenochlaena palustris  fern are stir-fried with garlic, dry shrimps or shrimp paste ( belacan ). [25] [26] 
 Nasi aruk Sarawak  is a traditional  Sarawakian Malay   nasi goreng  or fried rice. Unlike  nasi goreng ,  nasi aruk  does not use any oil to fry the rice. The ingredients are garlic, onion and anchovies, fried with very little oil and then rice. The rice must be fried for a longer time (compared to frying rice for  nasi goreng ) for the smoky or slightly-burnt taste to absorb into the rice. It is common to see  nasi aruk  on the menu at Malay coffee shops and stalls throughout Sarawak. 
 Nasi goreng dabai  is rice stir-fried with  dabai  ( canarium odontophyllum ), an indigenous fruit found only in Sarawak. [27]  It is often compared to an olive, due to its similarity in appearance as well as taste. [28]  As  dabai  is highly perishable and seasonal in nature, this dish is also prepared with preserved  dabai  paste. 
 Nasi goreng ikan terubuk masin  is a Sarawak specialty which is made of fried rice served with fried salt-preserved  toli shad . 
 Nasi lelapan  is a rice dish that is popular in  Miri , Sarawak. Usually, there is one main dish (either fried fish, chicken or sliced of beef) accompanied by seven side dishes (mainly fresh vegetables,  ulam , tempe, fried tofu) and  sambal belacan  (chilli blended with shrimp paste). This hot dish is served with steamed rice. 
 Nasi mak entek  is a rice dish served with chicken, baked beans, boiled egg and  sambal belacan  (chilli paste). This dish is popular in  Samarahan , Sarawak. 
 Nuba laya  is cooked  bario  rice which is mashed and wrapped in leaves of the  phacelophrynium maximum  plant. It is considered the centerpiece of a meal for the  Lun Bawang  and  Kelabit people . [29]  Accompaniments may include a small bowl of porridge ( kikid ), shredded beef cooked with wild ginger and dried chilli ( labo senutuq ), deboned shredded fish ( a'beng ), wild jungle vegetables prepared in various ways, and so on. [30] 
 Roti canai goreng Kapit  or Kapit fried flatbread is a unique and popular dish in  Kapit , Sarawak. The flat bread is composed of dough containing fat, flour, and water that is fried in oil. It is fluffy inside but crispy and flaky outside. It is served hot with chicken curry and hot spicy sauce ( sambal ). 
 Sio bee  is Kuching's version of  siu mai . It is popular among the Chinese in  Sarawak . The difference between  siu mai  and  sio bee  is that  siu mai  contains pork and shrimp while  sio bee  is stuffed only with pork. 
 Sinamu baka  is a Lun Bawang/Lundayeh traditional food. This is a tangy fermented food same like Bosuo but the differences is Sinamu Baka only suitable for wild bear meat. 
 Sup Terung Dayak  is a popular soup dish made with a native cultivar of wild eggplant, [17]  which is spherical in shape and slightly larger than a navel orange. Also called  terung asam  due to its natural tart flavour, this eggplant species comes in bright hues ranging from yellow to orange. Other ingredients for the soup may include fish, prawns, or fish products (dried, salted or smoked fish). 
 Sup paku kubok  is a hairy fern soup cooked with  ikan bilis  (anchovy) and ginger. 
 Sup ponas Bidayuh  is a Bidayuh soup dish made of tapioca, lemongrass and other herbs. 
 Tebaloi  is a sago biscuit snack which is traditionally associated with the Melanau people of Sarawak. [31] 
 Tomato  mee  is a noodle dish in tomato sauce. 
 Umai  is a traditional  Melanau  food, accompanied with a bowl of baked or toasted sago pearls. There are two different versions of umai – the traditional  sambal campur  and a more contemporary variation called  sambal cecah jeb . The former is a raw seafood salad which consists of raw sliced seafood (anything from freshwater and seawater fish, prawns and even jellyfish) cured in calamansi lime juice, tossed with ground peanuts, sliced onions and chilies. For  umai jeb , the raw sliced seafood is undressed, and is simply dipped into a spicy sauce for consumption. [32] 
 Beverages [ edit ] 
   Teh C Peng Special 
 Non-alcoholic beverages [ edit ] 
 Teh C Peng Special  is a popular local tea in Sarawak. Its name is derived from the local speak for iced ( peng ) tea ( teh ) with  evaporated milk  ( C ). This tea is an iced concoction of brewed tea, evaporated milk and  gula apong  (nirah palm sugar) syrup, carefully presented un-stirred in three or more layers. [22]  Originally from  Kuching , its popularity has spread to other areas of Sarawak as well as neighbouring Sabah. The drink White Lady is also popular; it is a shaved iced concoction with evaporated milk, mango juice, longan and pineapple. Invented in 1975 by a Kuching hawker, multiple variations can be found in various hawker stalls throughout the city. [33] 
 
 Alcoholic beverages [ edit ] 
 Tuak  is a type of traditional alcoholic beverage in Sarawak's Dayak communities. It is made with glutinous rice or a mixture of fragrant rice and glutinous rice or just fragrant rice. The process of making  tuak  involves fermentation of the cooked rice where the starch in the rice is converted into sugar, which is then fermented to produce alcohol. However, there is no accepted convention or definition on what constitutes  tuak .  Tuak  is essentially an alcoholic drink produced by fermenting anything that contains carbohydrates, as long as it is made in Sarawak by Sarawakians. [34]   Tuak  is normally served as a welcoming drink to guests, and as an important component for ritual events and festive occasions like  Gawai  and Christmas. Another type of a stronger alcoholic drink is called  langkau , which contains a higher alcohol content because it is actually made of  tuak  which has been distilled over fire to boil off the alcohol, cooled and collected into containers. The  Bidayuh  also use distilling methods to make  arak tonok , a kind of moonshine. The Bidayuh in particular are known for their skill and expertise in brewing  tuak : ingredients for  tuak  variants include sugarcane ( tepui ),  tampoi  (a wild fruit with a sweet and tart flavour), pineapples and apples.  Tepui  is an alcoholic drink which is quite similar to  tuak . Because it is made out of sugarcane juice, this alcoholic drink is both a smooth and soothing drink, compared to  tuak  and  langkau . Normally, Bidayuh people drink  tepui  right after dinner.
 
 Cakes [ edit ] 
   A colourful Sarawak layer cake 
 Kek lapis Sarawak  or  Sarawak layer cake  is a  layered cake  with unique patterns of interlaced of tasty layers and variety of flavours. It is a specialty of the  Malay  in Sarawak that is served during festive seasons and special occasions. They are often baked for religious or cultural celebrations such as  Eid ul-Fitr ,  Christmas , birthdays and weddings. People in Malaysia practice an open house on feast days. A unique feature of Sarawak's open houses is the modern layered  cakes . Sarawak layered cake with its elaborate pattern and variety of flavours is not only popular among the locals but also among visitors as gifts or for one's own consumption.
The cake got its name from its multiple-layer taste and presentation; it must have at least two colours. Among the ingredients for making this cake are flour, butter or vegetable oil, milk, eggs and other ingredients required for the desired flavour. [35]  The mixture is thoroughly mixed either manually or using an electric mixer. Special moulds are used for the cake requiring an elaborate design and patterns to maintain the perfect layer thickness. The multiple layers and patterns are achieved by pouring thin layers of different flavoured batter on top of each one another before the cake is baked. Different bakers have different styles and presentations. Some have more elaborate patterns and designs, while others prefer a simple multiple-layer style.
 
 See also [ edit ] 
 
 Food portal Malaysia portal 
 List of Malaysian dishes 
 Malaysian cuisine 
 Penang cuisine 
 Sabahan cuisine 
 References [ edit ] 
 
 
 ^   "Sarawak Laksa - De Facto State Dish of Sarawak" . 
 
 ^   "The Sarawak People" . Archived from  the original  on 6 January 2015. 
 
 ^   "The tebaloi, one of Sarawak's traditional past time snacks" . 
 
 ^   L.Y. Chew; I. Amin; A. Azrina; C.Y. Lau.  "Canarium odontophyllum Miq.: An Underutilized Fruit for Human Nutrition and Sustainable Diets"   (PDF) .  Universiti Putra Malaysia . Retrieved  30 March  2014 . 
 
 ^   "Best Sarawak Laksa in Kuching" . The Malaysian Insider. 29 April 2015. Archived from  the original  on 8 August 2015 . Retrieved  3 January  2016 . 
 
 ^   "Kolo mee, a Sarawak favourite, any time of day" . The Malaysian Insider. 14 September 2013. Archived from  the original  on 9 March 2014 . Retrieved  3 January  2016 . 
 
 ^   " 'Ayam pansuh' — A Sarawak exotic delicacy loved by many (VIDEO)" . The Malay Mail. 28 June 2015. Archived from  the original  on 1 July 2015 . Retrieved  3 January  2016 . 
 
 ^   "Sarawak Top 10 Iconic Food" . Sarawak Tourism Board. Archived from  the original  on 15 July 2015 . Retrieved  3 January  2016 . 
 
 ^   "Singer Deja Moss' real passion is Sarawak layered cakes" . The Star (Malaysia). 24 March 2015 . Retrieved  3 January  2016 . 
 
 ^   Langgat, J; Mohd Zahari, M.S.; Yasin, M.S.; Mansur, N.A (2011).  "The Alteration Of Sarawak Ethnic Natives' Food: It'S [sic] Impact To Sarawak State Tourism" .  2nd International Conference on Business and Economic Research (2nd ICBER 2011) Proceeding : 685, 694 . Retrieved  3 January  2016 . 
 
 ^   Wong, Jonathan (8 September 2013).  "Monetising Sarawak's cultural food" . The Borneo Post. Archived from  the original  on 13 July 2014 . Retrieved  3 January  2016 .  With Sarawak being a tourist destination, this opened up opportunities for small businesses to monetise the cultural aspect of the Dayaks for not only foreigners but locals as well. 
 
 ^   John Wong, Dale.  "People mad after Sarawak Laksa ranked Asia's best food, Balut ranked worst One man's trash is another man's treasure" .  Mashable . Archived from  the original  on 4 October 2021 . Retrieved  6 October  2021 . 
 
 ^   Johnson K Saai (26 October 2011).  "Rice self-sufficiency crucial" .  The Borneo Post . Retrieved  11 December  2015 . 
 
 ^   Samuel Aubrey (6 October 2013).  "Bario rice enjoying new lease of life" . The Borneo Post . Retrieved  26 March  2014 . 
 
 ^   Jonathan Chia (7 June 2010).  "Sarawak "belacan beehoon": An all-time favourite" . The Borneo Post . Retrieved  5 June  2015 . 
 
 ^   Vanes Devindran (18 August 2010).  "Bubur pedas a must-have for buka puasa" .  The Star . Retrieved  25 August  2013 . 
 
 ^  a   b   "BHF2008" . Borneo Hornbill Festival . Retrieved  7 June  2015 . 
 
 ^   Bridgette Donald (30 June 2013).  "A Unique Dining Experience" . New Sarawak Tribune. Archived from  the original  on 22 December 2015 . Retrieved  7 June  2015 . 
 
 ^   "Studies show Sarawak terubuk changes gender as it matures" . The Borneo Post. 25 October 2014 . Retrieved  7 June  2015 . 
 
 ^   Vanes Devindran (3 April 2014).  "Terubuk masin dapat sambutan orang ramai" . The Borneo Post . Retrieved  7 June  2015 . 
 
 ^   Othman Ishak (8 June 2013).  "Iban traders at Sibu Central Market enjoy brisk business" . The Borneo Post . Retrieved  19 July  2014 . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   "Teh C Peng Special" . Pullman Kuching Hotel . Retrieved  7 June  2015 . 
 
 ^   Yu, Ji (29 May 2015).  "It's Sarawak laksa again for Bourdain" . The Star (Malaysia). Archived from  the original  on 29 June 2017 . Retrieved  12 June  2018 . 
 
 ^   Raymond Tan (23 November 2014).  "The showbiz star from Balingian" . Borneo Post . Retrieved  7 June  2015 . 
 
 ^   Churchill, Edward (6 April 2018).  "Enjoy your midin without fear — Professor" . The Borneo Post. Archived from  the original  on 6 April 2018 . Retrieved  29 May  2018 . 
 
 ^   Paul P.K., Chai (April 2016).  "Midin (Stenochlaena palustris), the popular wild vegetable of Sarawak"   (PDF) .  Agriculture Science Journal . Universiti Tunku Abdul Rahman.  2  (2): 18–20. Archived from  the original   (PDF)  on 29 May 2018 . Retrieved  29 May  2018 . 
 
 ^   Zaain Zin (30 August 2013).  "Keenakan nasi goreng dabai" . Utusan Sarawak . Retrieved  7 June  2015 . 
 
 ^   Ronnie Teo (18 November 2010).  " 'Uniquely Sarawak' soaps" . Borneo Post . Retrieved  7 June  2015 . 
 
 ^   "Forest feast" .  The Star . 24 December 2006 . Retrieved  19 July  2014 . 
 
 ^   Dave Avran (15 November 2012).  "Tribal Scoops: Traditional Kelabit offering" .  Free Malaysia Today . Retrieved  19 July  2014 . 
 
 ^   "The making of Tebaloi" . Sarawak Tourism Board . Retrieved  7 June  2015 . 
 
 ^   Ng Ai Fern (31 March 2014).  "Unravelling the delicacies of Melanau food" . FZ.com. Archived from  the original  on 6 April 2014 . Retrieved  19 July  2014 . 
 
 ^   Yu Ji (5 April 2010).  "Hui Sing Hawker Centre boasts creative hawkers and raw ambience" .  The Star . Retrieved  26 March  2014 . 
 
 ^   Michael Cheang (25 August 2013).  "Spirit of the harvest" .  The Star . Retrieved  19 July  2014 . 
 
 ^   "Healthier trends for Kek lapis Sarawak" .  The Borneo Post . 26 July 2013 . Retrieved  14 August  2013 . 
 
 
 External links [ edit ] 
  Media related to  Cuisine of Sarawak  at Wikimedia Commons 
 v t e Cuisines Continental 
 African 
 North 
 West 
 list 
 Americas 
 Caribbean 
 North 
 South 
 list 
 Asian 
 Caucasian 
 Central 
 Indian subcontinent 
 Levantine 
 list 
 European 
 Balkan 
 Central 
 Eastern 
 list 
 Oceanic 
 Intercontinental
 Global 
 Latin American 
 Mediterranean 
 Middle Eastern 
 National  and regional 
 Afghan 
 Albanian 
 Algerian 
 American 
 Californian 
 Floribbean 
 Hawaiian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Lowcountry (South Carolina) 
 New England 
 New Mexico 
 Pacific Northwest 
 Pennsylvania Dutch 
 Puerto Rican 
 Southern US 
 Southwest US 
 Texas 
 Angolan 
 Argentine 
 Armenian 
 Australian 
 Austrian 
 Azerbaijani 
 Bahraini 
 Bangladeshi 
 Barbadian 
 Belarusian 
 Belgian 
 Belizean 
 Beninese 
 Bhutanese 
 Bolivian 
 Bosnian-Herzegovinian 
 Botswana 
 Brazilian 
 British 
 Channel Islands 
 English 
 Gibraltarian 
 Northern Irish 
 Saint Helena 
 Scottish 
 Welsh 
 Bruneian 
 Bulgarian 
 Burkinabé 
 Burmese 
 Burundian 
 Cambodian 
 Cameroonian 
 Canadian 
 Acadian 
 Québécois 
 Central African Republic 
 Chadian 
 Chilean 
 Chinese 
 Cantonese 
 Hong Kong 
 Macanese 
 Tibetan 
 Xinjiang 
 Colombian 
 Congolese 
 Corsican 
 Croatian 
 Cuban 
 Cypriot 
 Czech 
 Danish 
 Faroese 
 Greenlandic 
 Djiboutian 
 Dominican 
 Dominican Republic 
 Dutch 
 East Timorese 
 Ecuadorian 
 Egyptian 
 Emirati 
 Equatorial Guinean 
 Eritrean 
 Estonian 
 Ethiopian 
 Fijian 
 Filipino 
 Finnish 
 French 
 Occitan 
 French Guianan 
 Gabonese 
 Gambian 
 Georgian 
 German 
 Ghanaian 
 Greek 
 Cretan 
 Epirotic 
 Greek Macedonian 
 Heptanesean 
 Guatemalan 
 Guinea-Bissauan 
 Guinean 
 Haitian 
 Honduran 
 Hungarian 
 Icelandic 
 Indian 
 Arunachalese 
 Assamese 
 Bengali 
 Bihari 
 Goan 
 Gujarati 
 Himachal Pradesh 
 Kashmiri 
 Jharkhandi 
 Karnataka 
 Kerala 
 Maharashtrian 
 Manipuri 
 Meghalayan 
 Mizo 
 Naga 
 Odia 
 Punjabi 
 Rajasthani 
 Sikkimese 
 Sindhi 
 Tamil 
 Telangana 
 Telugu 
 Indonesian 
 Acehnese 
 Balinese 
 Banjar 
 Batak 
 Betawi 
 Indo 
 Javanese 
 Madurese 
 Makassar 
 Minahasan 
 Minangkabau 
 Palembangese 
 Sundanese 
 Iranian 
 Iraqi 
 Irish 
 Israeli 
 Italian 
 Abruzzese 
 Ligurian 
 Lombard 
 Lucanian 
 Neapolitan 
 Roman 
 Sardinian 
 Sicilian 
 Venetian 
 Ivorian 
 Jamaican 
 Japanese 
 Okinawan 
 Jordanian 
 Kazakh 
 Kenyan 
 Korean 
 North Korean 
 South Korean 
 Kosovan 
 Kuwaiti 
 Kyrgyz 
 Lao 
 Latvian 
 Lebanese 
 Lesotho 
 Liberian 
 Libyan 
 Liechtensteiner 
 Lithuanian 
 Luxembourg 
 Macedonian 
 Malagasy 
 Malawian 
 Malaysian 
 Sabahan 
 Sarawakian 
 Maldivian 
 Malian 
 Maltese 
 Mauritanian 
 Mauritian 
 Mexican 
 Moldovan 
 Monégasque 
 Mongolian 
 Montenegrin 
 Moroccan 
 Mozambican 
 Namibian 
 Nauruan 
 Nepalese 
 New Zealand 
 Nicaraguan 
 Niger 
 Nigerian 
 Niuean 
 Norwegian 
 Omani 
 Pakistani 
 Palestinian 
 Panamanian 
 Peruvian 
 Polish 
 Portuguese 
 Qatari 
 Romanian  (incl.  Transylvanian Saxon ) 
 Russian 
 Bashkir 
 Chechen 
 Circassian 
 Komi 
 Mordovian 
 Sakha 
 Tatar 
 Udmurt 
 Yamal 
 Rwandan 
 Saint Lucian 
 Salvadoran 
 Sammarinese 
 São Tomé and Príncipe 
 Saudi Arabian 
 Senegalese 
 Serbian 
 Seychellois 
 Sierra Leonean 
 Singaporean 
 Slovak 
 Slovenian 
 Somali 
 South African 
 Spanish 
 Andalusian 
 Asturian 
 Balearic 
 Basque 
 Canarian 
 Cantabrian 
 Catalan 
 Extremaduran 
 Galician 
 Manchegan 
 Valencian 
 Sri Lankan 
 Sudanese 
 Swazi 
 Swedish 
 Swiss 
 Syrian 
 Taiwanese 
 Tajik 
 Tanzanian 
 Zanzibari 
 Thai 
 Togolese 
 Tunisian 
 Turkish 
 Turkmen 
 Trinidadian and Tobagonian 
 Ugandan 
 Ukrainian 
 Uruguayan 
 Uzbek 
 Venezuelan 
 Vietnamese 
 Western Saharan 
 Yemeni 
 Zambian 
 Zimbabwean 
 Ethnic 
 Ainu 
 Arab 
 Indonesian 
 Aromanian 
 Assyrian 
 Balochi 
 Berber 
 Cajun 
 Chinese 
 American 
 Canadian 
 Chifa 
 Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Crimean Tatar 
 Greek American 
 Hazaragi 
 Indian 
 Anglo-Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Indigenous American 
 Inuit 
 Italian American 
 Kurdish 
 Livonian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Malay 
 Ossetian 
 Parsi 
 Pashtun 
 Peranakan 
 Romani 
 Sámi 
 Soul food 
 Sylheti 
 Transylvanian Saxon 
 Yup'ik 
 Religious 
 Buddhist 
 Christian 
 Goan Catholic 
 Mangalorean Catholic 
 Mennonite 
 Hindu 
 Islamic 
 Chinese 
 Ital 
 Jain 
 Jewish 
 American 
 Ashkenazi 
 Bukharan 
 Ethiopian 
 Mizrahi 
 Sephardic 
 Syrian 
 Ritual slaughter 
 Sikh 
 Historical 
 Ancient Egyptian 
 Ancient Greek 
 Ancient Israelite 
 Ancient Roman 
 Antebellum America 
 Aztec 
 Byzantine 
 Early modern European 
 Historical Chinese 
 Historical Indian subcontinent 
 Historical North Indian and Pakistani 
 History of agriculture 
 History of alcoholic drinks 
 History of bread 
 History of seafood 
 History of vegetarianism 
 Historical Argentine 
 Historical Japanese 
 Inca 
 Mayan 
 Muisca 
 Mughal 
 Medieval 
 Ottoman 
 Peasant 
 Soviet 
 Thirteen Colonies 
 Styles 
 Classique 
 Fast food 
 Fusion 
 New American 
 Eurasian 
 Haute 
 Molecular gastronomy 
 Note by Note 
 Nouvelle 
 Lists 
 List of cuisines 
 List of historical cuisines 
 Lists of prepared foods 
 Related 
 Cookbook 
 Cooking 
 Culinary arts 
 Drink 
 Food 
 history 
 Diet 
 Meal preparation 
 
   Food portal 
   Drink portal 
   Category 
   Commons 
   Cookbook 
   WikiProject 
   Outline 
 
 v t e   Malaysian cuisine  by  ethnicity Common dishes Malay 
 Asam pedas 
 Ayam bakar 
 Ayam goreng 
 Ayam masak kicap 
 Ayam masak merah 
 Ayam penyet 
 Bubur 
 Bubur asyura 
 Bubur ayam 
 Bubur kacang hijau 
 Bubur lambuk 
 Bubur pedas 
 Bubur pulut hitam 
 Dendeng 
 Gulai 
 Ikan bakar 
 Ikan goreng 
 Kangkung belacan 
 Ketupat 
 Kway teow goreng 
 Laksa 
 Lemang 
 Lontong 
 Mee bakso 
 Mee bandung Muar 
 Mee goreng 
 Mee jawa 
 Mee kari 
 Mee rebus 
 Mee siam 
 Nasi ambeng 
 Nasi campur 
 Nasi dagang 
 Nasi goreng 
 American fried rice 
 Nasi goreng pattaya 
 Nasi kerabu 
 Nasi kuning 
 Nasi lemak 
 Nasi minyak 
 Nasi paprik 
 Nasi tumpang 
 Nasi ulam 
 Otak-otak 
 Pais 
 Pecal 
 Pekasam 
 Pindang 
 Pulot tartal 
 Ramly burger 
 Roti canai 
 Roti Jala 
 Rendang 
 Rojak 
 Rojak bandung 
 Sayur lodeh 
 Sata 
 Satay 
 Satay celup 
 Serundeng 
 Soto 
 Soto ayam 
 Mee soto 
 Sup 
 Soup kambing 
 Sup tulang 
 Tauhu goreng 
 Telur pindang 
 Ulam 
 Chinese 
 Bakkwa 
 Bak kut teh 
 Banmian 
 Bean sprouts chicken 
 Beef kway teow 
 Chai tow kway 
 Char kway teow 
 Char siu 
 Chee cheong fun 
 Chwee kueh 
 Claypot chicken rice 
 Curry Mee 
 Duck rice 
 Duck soup noodles 
 Economy rice/Mixed rice 
 Fish ball 
 Fish head bee hoon 
 Hae mee 
 Heong Peng 
 Hokkien mee 
 Kolo mee 
 Kway chap 
 Kway Teow Th'ng 
 Loh bak 
 Lor mee 
 Mee pok 
 Oyster omelette 
 Pan mee 
 Pao 
 Popiah 
 Sar Hor Fun 
 Lou Shee Fun 
 Teochew Porridge 
 Tong sui 
 Wonton mee 
 Tambun biscuit 
 Yee Foo Mee 
 Yong tau foo 
 You char kway 
 Yusheng 
 Zongzi 
 Indian 
 Banana leaf rice 
 Butter chicken 
 Dalcha 
 Puliyodarai 
 Curd rice 
 Chapati 
 Fish molee 
 Dosai 
 Idli 
 Laddu 
 Mee goreng 
 Maggi goreng 
 Mee goreng mamak 
 Mee rebus 
 Mamak Rojak  ( Rojak Klang ) 
 Modak 
 Murtabak 
 Mutton curry 
 Nasi biryani 
 Nasi kandar 
 Korma 
 Pasembur 
 Puri 
 Putu mayam 
 Roti canai 
 Roti tissue 
 Naan 
 Sup kambing 
 Appam 
 Payasam 
 Upma 
 Paniyaram 
 Pongal 
 Vadai 
 Adhirasam 
 Murukku 
 Bajji 
 Rasam 
 Sambar 
 Papadum 
 Tandoori chicken 
 East Malaysian  ( Sabah  and  Sarawak ) 
 Ambuyat 
 Bosou 
 Hinava 
 Linatan 
 Linongot 
 Manok pansoh 
 Midin 
 Nasi kombos 
 Nasi laru 
 Nasik aruk 
 Sinalau bakas 
 Tonokon 
 Tuhau 
 Umai 
 Peranakan 
 Acar 
 Asam laksa/Laksa lemak 
 Buah keluak 
 Bubur cha cha 
 Cap cai 
 Kerabu Bihun 
 Perut Ikan 
 Pie tee 
 Pongteh 
 Nyonya Bak Chang 
 Eurasian 
 Shepherd's pie 
 Oxtail   stew 
 Chicken chop 
 Devil's curry 
 Semur 
 Snacks Cake  and  pastries 
 Bahulu 
 Batik cake 
 Heong peng 
 Roti bakar 
 Sarawak layer cake 
 Keropok ,  Crackers 
 Amplang 
 Lekor 
 Rempeyek 
 Mee Siput Muar 
 Kuih 
 Apam balik 
 Bingka 
 Borasa 
 Cakoi 
 Cincin 
 Cucur 
 Jemput-jemput 
 Penyaram 
 Pisang goreng 
 Dodol 
 Jala 
 Jelurut 
 Karipap 
 Kelupis 
 Kochi 
 Gelang 
 Goyang 
 Gulung 
 Laddu 
 Lapis 
 Lidah 
 Makmur 
 Modak 
 Mooncake 
 Ondeh-ondeh 
 Otokon 
 Pais 
 Red peach cake 
 Red tortoise cake 
 Pie tee 
 Pulut inti 
 Pulut panggang 
 Puto 
 Putu bambu/Putu bumbong 
 Putu mangkuk/piring 
 Qasidah 
 Sapit/Gulong/Kapit 
 Seri Muka 
 Soon kueh 
 Tat/Tae 
 Desserts 
 Lamban 
 Punjung 
 Roti tisu 
 Sagu Gula Melaka 
 Tapai 
 Wajid 
 Drinks Non-alcoholic 
 ABC 
 Bandung 
 Cendol 
 Cheng tng 
 Cincau 
 Chrysanthemum tea 
 Ginger tea 
 Ipoh white coffee 
 Kopi 
 Janda pulang 
 Milo 
 Sarsi 
 Soy milk 
 Teh tarik 
 Alcoholic 
 Jaz 
 Lihing 
 Montoku 
 Sikat 
 Tapai 
 Tuak 
 Condiments 
 Acar 
 Kaya 
 Sambal 
 Belacan 
 Budu 
 Cincalok 
 Tempoyak 
 Taucu 
 Tuhau 
 
   Malaysia portal 
   Food portal 
   Category: Malaysian cuisine 
 List of Malaysian dishes 
 
 v t e State  of  Sarawak Capital:  Kuching History 
 Santubong Kingdom (500 AD) 
 Malano Kingdom (700 AD–1400 AD) 
 Bruneian Empire (1368–1888) 
 Sultanate of Sarawak (1599–1641) 
 Raj of Sarawak (1841–1946) 
 Empire of Japan (1941–1945) 
 Crown Colony of Sarawak (1946–1963) 
 Sarawak (1963–present) 
 Topics 
 Index 
 History 
 Constitution 
 Elections 
 Government 
 Executive 
 Governor 
 Premier 
 Legislature 
 Geography 
 Sarawakians 
 Symbols
 Anthem 
 Coat of arms 
 Flag 
 Tourist attractions 
 Society 
 Culture 
 Crime 
 Cuisine 
 Demographics 
 Economy 
 Education 
 Politics 
 Administrative divisions Divisions 
 Betong 
 Bintulu 
 Kapit 
 Kuching 
 Limbang 
 Miri 
 Mukah 
 Samarahan 
 Sarikei 
 Serian 
 Sibu 
 Sri Aman 
 Districts 
 Asajaya 
 Bau 
 Belaga 
 Beluru 
 Betong 
 Bintulu 
 Bukit Mabong 
 Dalat 
 Daro 
 Gedong 
 Julau 
 Kabong 
 Kanowit 
 Kapit 
 Kuching 
 Lawas 
 Limbang 
 Lubok Antu 
 Lundu 
 Marudi 
 Matu 
 Meradong 
 Miri 
 Mukah 
 Pakan 
 Pusa 
 Samarahan 
 Saratok 
 Sarikei 
 Sebauh 
 Sebuyau 
 Selangau 
 Serian 
 Sibu 
 Siburan 
 Simunjan 
 Song 
 Sri Aman 
 Subis 
 Tanjung Manis 
 Tatau 
 Tebedu 
 Telang Usan 
 Municipalities 
 Padawan 
 Cities 
 Kuching 
 Miri 
 Towns 
 Asajaya 
 Ba'kelalan 
 Balingian 
 Bario 
 Batu Kawa 
 Batu Niah 
 Bau 
 Bekenu 
 Beladin 
 Belaga 
 Belawai 
 Betong 
 Biawak 
 Bintangor 
 Bintulu 
 Dalat 
 Daro 
 Debak 
 Engkilili 
 Igan 
 Julau 
 Kanowit 
 Kapit 
 Kota Samarahan 
 Lawas 
 Limbang 
 Lingga 
 Lubok Antu 
 Lundu 
 Maludam 
 Marudi 
 Matu 
 Mukah 
 Oya 
  Pakan 
 Pusa 
 Sadong Jaya 
 Saratok 
 Sarikei 
 Sebauh 
 Sebuyau 
 Selangau 
 Sematan 
 Serian 
 Serikin 
 Sibu 
 Siburan 
 Simunjan 
 Song 
 Spaoh 
 Simanggang 
 Sungai Tujuh 
 Tanjung Kidurong 
 Tanjung Manis 
 Tatau 
 Tebedu 
 
   Commons 
   Wikisource 
   Category 
 
  
NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw2417
Cached time: 20230310195650
Cache expiry: 1814400
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc, no‐toc‐conversion]
CPU time usage: 0.777 seconds
Real time usage: 0.987 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2821/1000000
Post‐expand include size: 221322/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1207/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 6/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 134059/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.454/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 22577272/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/400
 
 
Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  735.833      1 -total
 31.14%  229.141      1 Template:Reflist
 27.50%  202.336      1 Template:Cuisine_of_Malaysia
 27.15%  199.797      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 20.62%  151.704     26 Template:Cite_web
 14.75%  108.550      5 Template:Lang
 13.20%   97.106      7 Template:Navbox
  9.35%   68.813      1 Template:Short_description
  7.49%   55.107      1 Template:Cuisines
  6.83%   50.271      1 Template:Cleanup_lang
 
  Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:idhash:55251588-0!canonical and timestamp 20230310195649 and revision id 1131425679. Rendering was triggered because: api-parse
  
 esi <esi:include src="/esitest-fa8a495983347898/content" />  
 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Sarawakian_cuisine&oldid=1131425679 " 
 Categories :  Malaysian cuisine Sarawak Hidden categories:  Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata EngvarB from September 2017 Use dmy dates from September 2017 Pages with non-English text lacking appropriate markup and no ISO hint Pages with non-English text lacking appropriate markup from August 2021 Articles containing Malay (macrolanguage)-language text Articles containing Central Melanau-language text Commons category link is on Wikidata 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  This page was last edited on 4 January 2023, at 03:12  (UTC) . 
 Text is available under the  Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0 ;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the  Terms of Use  and  Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the  Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. 
 
 
 Privacy policy 
 About Wikipedia 
 Disclaimers 
 Contact Wikipedia 
 Mobile view 
 Developers 
 Statistics 
 Cookie statement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
