 This is a list of African cuisines.
A cuisine is a characteristic style of cooking practices and traditions,[1] often associated with a specific culture.
The various cuisines of Africa use a combination of locally available fruits, cereal grains and vegetables, as well as milk and meat products.
In some parts of the continent, the traditional diet features a preponderance of milk, curd and whey products.
The continent's diverse demographic makeup is reflected in the many different eating and drinking habits, dishes, and preparation techniques of its manifold populations.
[2] Central Africa stretches from the Tibesti Mountains in the north to the vast rainforest basin of the Congo River, the highlands of Kivu and the savana of Katanga.
This region has received culinary influence of the Swahilis (culture that evolved via the combination of Bantu, Yemeni, Omani and Indian cultures) during the East African Slave Trade.
Swahili culinary influences can be found in dishes such as mandanzi, pilaf rice, kachumbari, sambsusa, and kuku paka.
[3] Central African cuisine has also been influenced by the Portuguese, by way of the Kongo and Ndongo Kingdoms.
Salt fish was introduced following trade in the late 17th century, and the Kikongo term for salt fish, makayabu, comes from the term bacalhau (ba-cal-ha-u).
[4] The Portuguese culinary influence is especially prominent in Angola, Sao Tomé and Equatorial Guinea.
Central Africa has also been influenced by the cuisine of the regions East, West and Southern Africa because of their close proximity, e.g.
babuté/bobotie is shared with the south, nyama choma with the east and gombos with West Africa.
The main ingredients are plantains, cassava, rice, kwanga (cassava dumpling) and yam.
Fufu-like starchy foods are usually made from fermented cassava roots, but they can also be made with plantain, corn maize and yam.
Fufu is served buffet style with grilled meat, fish, stews, greens and piment.
A variety of local ingredients are used while preparing other dishes like spinach stew cooked with tomato, peppers, chillis, onions, and peanut butter.
[5] Eastern central Africa is also one of the few regions in Africa that uses potatoes as one of its main bases, since potatoes grow easily in the region.
Cassava plants are also consumed as cooked greens.
Groundnut (peanut) stew is also prepared, containing chicken, okra, ginger, and other spices.
Beef and chicken are favorite meat dishes, but game meat preparations containing crocodile, elephant, antelope and warthog are also served occasionally.
[6][7][8][9][10] Another favorite is bambara, a porridge of rice, peanut butter and sugar.
[11] A jomba is the bundling of foods in fresh green plantain leaves and then cooking them over hot coals or fire.
[12] Traditional South African cuisine Ndolé is the national dish of Cameroon.
A woman carrying bananas in the Democratic Republic of the Congo Central market of Léo, Burkina Faso Okra soup, Cameroon
