Montenegrin cuisine is a result of Montenegro's geographic position and its long history and tradition.
The first major influences to Montenegrin cuisine came from the Levant and Turkey, largely via Serbia: sarma, musaka, pilav, pita, gibanica, burek, ćevapi, kebab, đuveč, and Turkish sweets such as baklava and tulumba.
Hungarian cuisine influences stews and sataraš.
Central European cuisine is evident in the prevalence of crêpes, doughnuts, jams, many types of biscuits and cakes, and various kinds of breads.
Montenegrin cuisine also varies geographically; the cuisine in the coastal area differs from that of the northern highland region.
The coastal area is traditionally a representative of Mediterranean cuisine, with seafood being a common dish.
The traditional dishes of Montenegro's Adriatic coast, unlike its heartland, have a distinctively Italian influence as well.
[1] Homemade-style bread prepared in Montenegro is closest to what is known in Italy as pane casareccio.
It is served with every meal.
Types include ječmeni (barley bread), ražani (rye bread), pšenični (wheat bread), and rumetinov (corn bread).
Montenegrin language distinguishes between a clear soup (supa, pronounced [ˈsupə]), a thick soup or stew (čorba, pronounced [ˈtʃɔrbə]), and a porridge-style dish (kaša, pronounced [ˈkəʃə]).
Soups are usually served as the first course of lunch at midday: Traditionally, after the broth is made, a handful of rice is added to the pot to make the soup more substantial.
Nowadays, pasta has taken over as the preferred addition.
Seafood dishes include grilled or fried squid, octopus salad, black risotto (with cuttlefish), tuna, prawns, and mussels.
The most common salads served in Montenegrin homes: A piece of seasonal fruit is the most common way to end the meal.
The proper sweets are usually served on their own, around tea time or at any time coffee is served.
Affordable fast food includes ćevapi, pljeskavica (served in a local form of hamburger), and ražnjići.
The most common non-alcoholic drink in Montenegrin homes is the famed pomegranate syrup.
Turkish coffee is also almost unavoidable in any but the briefest meeting or visit.
Beer is brewed in the Trebjesa brewery.
Wine is also made in the country, such as Vranac.
Rakia and pelinkovac are traditional distilled drinks from the Balkans.
