Eritrean cuisine is based on Eritrea's native culinary traditions, but also arises from social interchanges with other regions.
The local cuisine shares similarities with the cuisine of neighboring Ethiopia and the cuisines from other African countries in the region.
Eritrean cuisine shares similarities with surrounding countries' cuisines; however, the cuisine has its unique characteristics.
The main traditional food in Eritrean cuisine is tsebhi (stew), served with injera (flatbread made from teff, wheat, or sorghum and hilbet (paste made from legumes; mainly lentil and faba beans).
A typical traditional Eritrean dish consists of injera accompanied by a spicy stew, which frequently includes beef, goat, lamb or fish.
Overall, Eritrean cuisine strongly resembles that of neighboring Ethiopia,[1][2] although Eritrean cooking tends to feature more seafood than Ethiopian cuisine on account of its coastal location.
[1] Eritrean dishes are also frequently lighter in texture than Ethiopian meals as they tend to employ less seasoned butter and spices and more tomatoes, as in tsebhi dorho.
[citation needed] Additionally, owing to its colonial history, cuisine in Eritrea features more Italian influences than are present in Ethiopian cooking, including more pasta specials and greater use of curry powders and cumin.
[3] People in Eritrea likewise tend to drink coffee [1] Christian Eritreans also drink sowa (a bitter fermented barley) and mies (a fermented honey beverage),[4] while Muslim Eritreans abstain from drinking alcohol.
[5] When eating injera diners generally share food from a large tray placed in the centre of a low dining table.
Numerous pieces of injera are layered on this tray and topped with various spicy stews.
Diners break into the section of injera in front of them, tearing off pieces and dipping them into the stews.
The stews that accompany injera are usually made from beef, chicken, lamb, goat, mutton, or vegetables.
Most Eritreans, with the exception of the Saho, like their food spicy and hot.
Berbere, a mixture that consists of a variety of common and unusual herbs and spices, accompanies almost all dishes.
Stews include zigni, made with beef; dorho tsebhi, made with chicken; alicha, a vegetable dish made without berbere; and shiro, a purée of various legumes.
When making ga'at, a ladle is used to make an indentation in the dough, which is then filled with a mixture of berbere and melted butter,  and surrounded by milk or yogurt.
When dining, a small piece of ga'at is dipped into the berbere and the butter sauce, and then into the milk or yogurt.
Influenced by its past as an Italian colony, Eritrean cuisine also features unique interpretations of classic Italian dishes.
[6] Among these specialties are pasta sauces spiced with berbere.
[7] Most dishes common to Eritrea are either meat-based or vegetable-based stews that are served over the spongy, fermented bread injera.
Suwa is the name for the home-brewed beer common in Eritrea.
It is made from roasted corn, barley, and other grain and is flavored with gesho, a type of buckthorn leaf.
The beverage is often made for celebrations; a sweet honey wine (called mies) is also commonly served.
The coffee ceremony is one of the most important and recognizable parts of Eritrean cultures.
Coffee is offered when visiting friends, during festivities, or as a daily staple of life.
If coffee is politely declined, then tea (shahee) will most likely be served.
Even though Eritrea has a tradition of coffee drinking for centuries, Italian-style coffee like espresso and cappuccino are extremely common in Eritrea, served in practically every bar and coffee shop in the capital Asmara.
The biggest brewery in the country is Asmara Brewery, built 1939 under the name Melotti.
The brewery today produces a range of beverages.
A popular beverage that is common during festivities is Eritrean-style Sambuca; in Tigrinya it is translated to areki.
[12][13]
