 Malaysian Indian cuisine, or the cooking of the ethnic Indian communities in Malaysia, consists of adaptations of authentic dishes from India, as well as original creations inspired by the diverse food culture of Malaysia.
Because the vast majority of Malaysia's Indian community are of South Indian descent, and are mostly ethnic Tamils who are descendants of immigrants from a historical region which consists of the modern Indian state of Tamil Nadu and Sri Lanka's Northern Province, much of Malaysian Indian cuisine is predominantly South Indian inspired in character and taste.
A typical Malaysian Indian dish is likely to be redolent with curry leaves, whole and powdered spice, and contains fresh coconut in various forms.
Ghee is still widely used for cooking, although vegetable oils and refined palm oils are now commonplace in home kitchens.
Before a meal it is customary to wash hands as cutlery is often not used while eating, with the exception of a serving spoon for each respective dish.
As nearly 90 percent of Malaysian Indians originated from South India, banana leaf is used traditionally to eat food from.
The banana leaf meal is famous in Malaysia.
[1] With rice at the center and different accompaniments like pickle, fried meat or vegetable, papadam (Indian fries made of lentils), it's a feast by itself and various curries that are served around this is not just a treat for the eyes but also to the palate.
[2] Etiquette is important when it comes to a banana leaf rice meal.
One part involves the practice of serving, namely the way the leaf is placed before a diner and where the food is placed on the leaf itself.
Eating with one's hands is a must.
The folding aspect of the banana leaf is also contentious with many believing it to be a rating system – fold towards one to indicate satisfaction or away to indicate dissatisfaction.
Chettinad cuisine, the cuisine of the Chettinad region in Tamil Nadu, is very popular and available at specialty restaurants.
The traditional cookery of the Chettiar community is distinct from the predominantly vegetarian fare of Tamil cuisine as it is heavily based on robustly spiced meat preparations.
Coconut milk is sparingly used in favour of liberal quantities of onions and tomatoes to flavour and thicken curries.
[3] Mamak dishes have developed a distinctly Malaysian style.
Available throughout the country, the omnipresent mamak stalls or restaurants are particularly popular among the locals as they offer a wide range of food and some outlets are open 24 hours a day.
A type of Indian Muslim meal served buffet-style at specialist mamak restaurant is called nasi kandar (analogous to the Indonesian nasi padang, where one pays for what one has actually eaten), white rice or biryani rice served with other dishes of curry either with chicken, fish, beef, or mutton, and usually accompanied with pickled vegetables and papadum.
People of all races, religions and ages frequent mamak stalls to gossip or catch a late-night football game while enjoying a cup of hot teh tarik.
No other type of restaurant has quite as much cultural significance in Malaysia, save for the kopitiam.
Payasam Cendol There is a large variety of bite-sized savoury snacks popular not only with the Indian community, but the wider Malaysian population as well.
Street vendors selling kacang putih, a collective term for snacks made of flour, nuts or legumes and many types of spices roasted or fried to golden yellow are still a common sight.
