Sindhi cuisine (Sindhi: سنڌي کاڌا)  refers to the distinct native cuisine of the Sindhi people from Sindh, Pakistan.
Sindhi cuisine has been influenced by Central Asian, Iranian, Mughal food traditions.
[1] It is mostly a non-vegetarian cuisine,[2] with even Sindhi Hindus widely accepting of meat consumption.
[3] The daily food in most Sindhi households consists of wheat-based flat-bread (phulka) and rice accompanied by two dishes, one gravy and one dry with curd, papad or pickle.
Freshwater fish and a wide variety of vegetables are usually used in Sindhi cuisine.
[4] Restaurants specializing in Sindhi cuisine are rare, although it is found at truck stops in rural areas of Sindh province, and in a few restaurants in urban Sindh.
[5] The arrival of Islam within India influenced the local cuisine to a great degree.
Since Muslims are forbidden to eat pork or consume alcohol and the Halal dietary guidelines are strictly observed, Muslim Sindhis focus on ingredients such as beef, lamb, chicken, fish, vegetables and traditional fruit and dairy.
Hindu Sindhi cuisine is almost identical with the difference that beef is omitted.
The influence of Central Asian, South Asian and Middle Eastern cuisine in Sindhi food is ubiquitous.
Sindhi cuisine was also found in India, where many Sindhi Hindus migrated following the Partition of India in 1947.
Before Independence, the State of Sindh was under Bombay Presidency.
Certain dishes are served on special occasions such as Diwali a Bahji (vegetable dish) called Chiti-Kuni is made with seven vegetables.
Special dishes are also served on recovery from serious illness for example when someone makes a full recovery from Chicken Pox, it is common to make an offering and make "mitho lolo", a sweet griddle-roasted flatbread: the dough is wheat flour mixed with oil (or ghee) and sugar syrup flavored with ground cardamom.
[6] Bhee (simply means 'lotus root' in English).
A high quality lotus root is grown in the north of Sindh which is then cooked in clay-pot using various spices, which then results in an excellent delicacy that is famous all over Pakistan.
Sindhi Briyani, Sindhi Curry, Sabu Dal Chawal (yellow daal with rice).
This section provides the translations between Urdu/Hindi, Sindhi and English (British and American) cooking terms of common Sindhi food.
There are occasional differences in Sindhi dialects for instance Hyderabadi Sindhi will refer to an egg as 'bedo' however Sindhis from other parts will refer to it as 'ando'.
Herbs  Spices Fruit, Vegetable and Pulses Nuts Other Certain sects of the Sindhi community are vegetarians.
The Thathai, Halai and Kutchi Bhatias are followers of Vallabh Acharya.
He put forward a way to worship Sri Krishna called Pushtimarg.
They are strict vegetarians who do not eat even onions and garlic and are devoted to Srinathji, the child form of Sri Krishna.
[9]
