Colombian cuisine is a compound of the culinary traditions of the six main regions within Colombia (Pacific, Amazonian, Andean, Orinoco, Caribbean, and Insular).
Colombian cuisine varies regionally and is particularly influenced by Indigenous Colombian, Spanish,[1] and African cuisines,[2] with slight Arab influence in some regions.
[3] Furthermore, being one of the most biodiverse countries in the world, Colombia has one of the widest variety of available ingredients depending on the region.
Colombian food is a unique blend of indigenous and European traditions with a strong Afro-Caribbean influence.
The two largest indigenous groups prior to European conquest were the Tairona, who lived along the Caribbean coast, and the Muisca, who lived in the highlands to the South.
[4] Arepas, made from ground corn, are one of the oldest cooked dishes in Colombian cuisine.
It is believed that the name derives from the word for corn in the Chibcha languages.
[4] Arepas are a popular modern Colombian dish.
Colombia's varied cuisine is influenced by its diverse fauna and flora as well as the cultural traditions of several ethnic groups.
Colombian dishes and ingredients vary widely by region.
Some of the most common ingredients are cereals such as rice and maize; tubers such as potato and cassava; assorted legumes; meats, including beef, chicken, pork and goat; and fish and other seafood.
Colombian cuisine also features a variety of tropical fruits such as cape gooseberry, feijoa, arazá, dragon fruit, mangostino, granadilla, papaya, guava, blackberry, lulo, soursop and passionfruit.
[5][6] Among the most representative appetizers and soups are patacones (fried green plantains), sancocho de gallina (chicken soup with root vegetables), ajiaco (potato and corn soup), and buñuelos (Christmas season deep fried dough balls).
Representative snacks and breads are pandebono, arepas (corn cakes), aborrajados (fried sweet plantains with cheese), torta de choclo, empanadas and almojábanas.
Representative main courses are bandeja paisa, lechona tolimense, tamales, and fish dishes such as arroz de lisa, especially in coastal regions where suero, costeño cheese, kibbeh and carimañolas are also eaten.
Representative side dishes are papas criollas al horno (roasted Andean potatoes), papas chorreadas (potatoes with messy cheese), and arroz con coco (coconut rice).
Organic food is a current trend in big cities, although in general the country's fruits and vegetables are very natural and fresh.
[7] Representative desserts are  natillas, torta Maria Luisa, bocadillo made of guayaba (guava jelly), cocadas (coconut balls), casquitos de guayaba (candied guava peels), torta de natas, obleas, flan de arequipe, roscón, milhoja, and the tres leches cake (sponge cake soaked in 3 types of milk).
Typical sauces are hogao, a tomato onion sauce, and ají, a spicy raw cilantro-based sauce used as a condiment for many dishes and sides.
Some representative beverages are coffee (Tinto), champús, cholado, lulada, avena colombiana, sugarcane juice, aguapanela, hot chocolate, and fresh fruit juices (often made with sugar and water or milk).
[8] There are a large variety of dishes that take into account the differences in regional climates.
For example: Piqueteaderos are rustic eateries that serve a variety of fried foods and specialties in platters to share.
Offerings can even include huesos cerdos (pig bones) and tarta de seso (brain pie), as well as fried dishes, morcilla, corn on the cob, and other foods common to Colombia.
Fruit and juice stands are found across Colombia, particularly on the Caribbean coast.
Being a tropical country, Colombia produces a large variety of fruits, such as: Colombia is home to numerous tropical fruits that are rarely found elsewhere.
Several varieties of banana include a very small, sweet version.
Other Colombian fruits include zapote (Quararibea cordata), nispero (Manilkara zapota) lulo (Solanum quitoense), uchuva (Physalis peruviana), papayuela (Vasconcellea pubescens), passion fruit, borojó (Borojoa patinoi), curuba (Passiflora tarminiana), mamoncillo (Melicoccus bijugatus), guanábana (Annona muricata), guava (Psidium guajava), tomate de arbol (tamarillo), noni (Morinda citrifolia).
More widespread fruit varieties grown in Colombia include mango, apple, pear, blackberry, and strawberry.
Ajiaco soup is typically served with table cream, capers and avocado, mixed in just before eating.
Fried Red Snapper, fried plantain, rice and tomato.
rice atollao A caldo de costilla served hot and with cilantro leaves Patacones are twice-fried plantain patties, often served as a side, appetizer, or snack.
Here they are being fried for the second time.
A traditional breakfast of Bogotá: hot chocolate with cheese, almojábanas and pan de queso Cocadas Bollo de yuca empanada barranquillera Manjar blanco Bocadillo with leaf packaging.
Arroz de lisa On a per capita basis, Colombia is one of the world's largest consumers of fruit juices, consuming on average more than three quarters of a serving each day.
[11] Chicha morada served with pipeño Cholado Colombian coffee is known for its quality and distinct flavor.
Aguardiente Canelazo
