 Puerto Rican cuisine has its roots in the cooking traditions and practices of Europe (mostly Spain), Africa and the native Taínos.
Puerto Rican cuisine has been influenced by an array of cultures including Taino Arawak, Spanish, and African.
[4] Although Puerto Rican cooking is somewhat similar to both Spanish and other Latin American cuisine, it reflects a unique blend of influences, using indigenous seasonings and ingredients.
Locals call their cuisine cocina criolla.
By the end of the nineteenth century, the traditional Puerto Rican cuisine was well established.
By 1848 the first restaurant, La Mallorquina, opened in Old San Juan.
[5] El Cocinero Puerto-Riqueño o Formulario, the island's first cookbook, was published in 1849.
[6] See: Native American cuisine From the diet of the Taíno (culturally related with the Maya and Carib peoples of Central America and the Caribbean) and Arawak people come many tropical roots and tubers (collectively called viandas) like yautía (Xanthosoma) and especially yuca.
Viandas are starchy root vegetables, including  yuca, ñame, yautía, batata, malanga, and the Puerto Rican apio, all locally grown in the mountain regions of the Island.
[7] See: Spanish cuisine See: African cuisine Coconuts, coffee (brought by the Arabs and Corsos to Yauco from Kafa, Ethiopia), okra, taro (malanga), tamarind, yams (ñame), sesame seeds, gandules (pigeon peas), plantains, many varieties of bananas, other root vegetables and Guinea hen, all came to Puerto Rico from, or at least through, Africa.
African slaves also introduced the deep-frying of food, such as cuchifritos.
[11] Arecibo is the biggest municipality in Puerto Rico by area and is located on the northern coast.
In the Río Grande de Arecibo, whitebait called cetí is caught.
[12] On certain coastal towns of the island, such as Luquillo, Fajardo, and Cabo Rojo, seafood is quite popular.
Traditional cooking on the island uses more fresh and local ingredients such as citrus to make mojo and mojito isleño and especially fresh herbs, vegetables and peppers to make recaíto and sofrito.
[15] The base of many Puerto Rican main dishes involves sofrito, similar to the mirepoix of French cooking, or the "trinity" of Creole cooking.
A proper sofrito is a sauté of freshly ground garlic, tomatoes, onions, recao/culantro, cilantro, red peppers, cachucha and cubanelle peppers.
Sofrito is traditionally cooked with olive oil or annatto oil, tocino (bacon), salted pork and cured ham.
A mix of stuffed olives and capers called alcaparrado are usually added with spices such as bay leaf, sazón and adobo.
[16] Although Puerto Rican diets can vary greatly from day to day, there are some markedly similar patterns to daily meals.
Dinners almost invariably include a meat, and rice and beans.
[4] Most American dishes have been adopted for this special day.
Side dishes such as cornbread, roasted yams, mashed potatoes with gravy, hard apple cider, and cranberry sauce are a part of a Puerto Rican Thanksgiving menu.
[citation needed] Puerto Rican culture can be seen and felt all year-round, but it is on its greatest display during Christmas when people celebrate the traditional aguinaldo and parrandas – Puerto Rico's version of carol singing.
Puerto Rican food is a main part of this celebration.
Rustic stalls displaying many kinds fritters under heat lamps or behind a glass pane can be spotted in may place in Puerto Rico.
Collectively known as frituras in Puerto Rico, these snacks are called cuchifritos in New York City, but to be strictly correct, cuchifritos are the mom-and-pop stores where frituras are sold.
In Puerto Rico, the name quiscos (kiosk) is used to refer to the cuchifrito.
[21][22] Quioscos are a much-frequented, time-honored, and integral part to a day at the beach and the culinary culture of the island.
Fresh octopus and conch salad are frequently seen.
Much larger kiosks serve hamburgers, local/Caribbean fusion, Thai, Italian, Mexican and even Peruvian food.
This mixing of the new cuisine and the classic Puerto Rican food.
Alcoholic beverage are a big part of kiosks with most kiosks having a signature drink.
Table with typical sweets in Húcares, Naguabo Rotisserie chicken, twice-fried plantain in Ciales, Puerto Rico Alcapurrias Papa rellena de Puerto Rico Mofongo, prepared in New York pigeon peas (gandules) Yuca, Puerto Rican name for cassava Chayote Acerola cherry Green and red cubanelle peppers are used to make sofríto Plantain "arañitas" and "tostones rellenos" Ajicitos / Cachucha, a.k.a., Ají Dulce, the Habanero chili pepper's mild cousin Ajíes caballero (aka, Puerto Rican Jelly Bean Hot Chili Pepper) is a very hot local pepper Marinated cassava (Spanish: Yuca en escabeche) Parcha, passion fruit, is often made into passion fruit juice Coconut with straw at restaurant in Esperanza, Vieques Pique (Puerto Rican Hot Sauce) Piña Colada Puerto Rican cooking has a unique blend of influences.
Grilled yellow snapper with green papaya salad and tostones
