 This is a list of European cuisines.
A cuisine is a characteristic style of cooking practices and traditions,[1] often associated with a specific culture.
European cuisine (also called "Western cuisine") refers collectively to the cuisines of Europe and other Western countries.
[2] European cuisine includes cuisines of Europe, including (depending on the definition) that of Russia,[2] as well as non-indigenous cuisines of North America, Australasia, Oceania, and Latin America, which derive substantial influence from European settlers in those regions.
The term is used by East Asians to contrast with Asian styles of cooking.
[3] This is analogous to Westerners referring collectively to the cuisines of Asian countries as Asian cuisine.
When used by Westerners, the term may refer more specifically to cuisine in Europe; in this context, a synonym is Continental cuisine, especially in British English.
The cuisines of Western countries are diverse by themselves, although there are common characteristics that distinguishes Western cooking from cuisines of Asian countries[4] and others.
Compared with traditional cooking of Asian countries, for example, meat is more prominent and substantial in serving-size.
[5] Wheat-flour bread has long been the most common sources of starch in this cuisine, along with pasta, dumplings and pastries, although the potato has become a major starch plant in the diet of Europeans and their diaspora since the European colonization of the Americas.
Swiss cuisine –  paprika sausage with potatoes at the Zeughauskeller, Zürich, Switzerland Pretzels are especially common in Southern Germany.
Austrian Wiener Schnitzel Fish and chips is an English dish of fried fish in crispy batter served with chips.
Haggis is a Scottish savoury pudding containing sheep's pluck (heart, liver, and lungs), minced with onion, oatmeal, suet, spices, and salt, mixed with stock, and cooked while traditionally encased in the animal's stomach.
Stegt flæsk is a Danish national dish of fried pork belly generally served with potatoes and parsley sauce (persillesovs).
Gravlax is a Nordic dish consisting of salmon that is cured using a mix of salt and sugar.
Skyr is an Icelandic cultured dairy product that has been a staple of the Icelandic diet since the Viking age.
Sklandrausis is a sweet Latvian pie of Livonian origin, made of rye dough and filled with potato and carrot paste and caraway.
A variety of tapas: appetizers or snacks in Spanish cuisine Rabbit meat and polenta, a traditional peasant food of Veneto, Italy A large paella, a Valencian rice dish Mediterranean cuisine in Dalmatia, Croatia Pizza is a Neapolitan dish and one of the world's most popular fast foods Gyros are a Greek dish of meat cooked on a vertical rotisserie Bouneschlupp is a traditional Luxemburgish green bean soup with potatoes, bacon, and onions.
Pot-au-feu is a French dish of slowly boiled meat, typically beef, and vegetables.
Moules-frites is a Belgian dish of mussels and fries.
