
 
 
 Jump to content 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle sidebar 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Create account Log in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Personal tools 
 
 
 
 
   Create account   Log in 
 
 
 
 
		Pages for logged out editors  learn more 
 
 
 Contributions Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Navigation 
 
 
 Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate 
 
 
 
 
 Contribute 
 
 
 Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file 
 
 
 
 
 Tools 
 
 
 What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item 
 
 
 
 
 Print/export 
 
 
 Download as PDF Printable version 
 
 
 
 
 In other projects 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons 
 
 
 
 
 Languages 
 
 On this Wikipedia the language links are at the top of the page across from the article title.  Go to top . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CentralNotice  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Contents 
 move to sidebar 
 hide 
 
 
 
 
 (Top) 
 
 
 
 
 
 1 History 
 
 
				Toggle History subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 1.1 Hawker centres 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 Food culture 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 Singapore food internationally 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4 Types of food 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5 Common dishes and snacks 
 
 
				Toggle Common dishes and snacks subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 5.1 Chinese-inspired 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5.2 Malay/Indonesian 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5.3 Indian 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5.4 Cross-cultural 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5.5 Seafood 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6 Fruit 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 7 Desserts 
 
 
				Toggle Desserts subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 7.1 Ice cream sandwich 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8 Drinks and beverages 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 9 Singaporean dishes uncommon in Singapore 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 10 See also 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 11 References 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
						Toggle the table of contents
					 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle the table of contents 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Singaporean cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 26 languages 
 
 
 
 العربية Български Čeština Español فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Jawa ქართული Кыргызча Bahasa Melayu 日本語 Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Русский தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 
 Edit links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Article Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 English 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 More 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
 
 
 Culinary traditions of Singapore 
 
 
   A  hawker centre  in Smith Street, Singapore. Eating in a hawker centre is part of the prevalent culinary culture of Singaporean people. 
 Singaporean cuisine  is derived from several  ethnic groups  in  Singapore  and has developed through centuries of political, economic, and social changes in the cosmopolitan  city-state .
 Influences include the  cuisines  of the  Malays / Indonesians , the  Chinese  and the  Indians  as well as,  Peranakan  and  Western  traditions (particularly  English  and  Portuguese -influenced  Eurasian , known as  Kristang ). Influences from neighbouring regions such as  Japan ,  Korea , and  Thailand  are also present.
 In Singapore, food is viewed as crucial to its national identity and a unifying cultural thread.  Singaporean literature  declares eating a national pastime and food a national obsession. Food is a frequent topic of conversation among Singaporeans. Religious dietary strictures do exist;  Muslims  do not eat pork and Hindus do not eat beef, and there is also a significant group of  vegetarians / vegans . People from different communities often eat together, while being mindful of each other's culture and choosing food that is acceptable for all.
 Apart from traditional Singaporean food, it is prevalent to discover restaurants in Singapore that focus on serving cuisine from a diverse range of countries worldwide.
 
 
 History [ edit ] 
   Chinese soup travelling street hawker in Singapore circa 1880. 
 Since its founding as a British port in 1819, Singaporean cuisine has been influenced by different cultures due to its position as an international shipping port. [1]  Singapore is geographically located in between the Pacific and Indian oceans but it also has the shape of a peninsula and an island at the same time, where various cultures and trades used to and continue to occur. Indonesia is located to the south, Thailand, China, the Philippines and Malaysia are located to the north and India is located to the west. Since Singapore's geographical position is surrounded by various Asian countries, there is much diversity in food and culture. [2] 
 The culture of Singapore is made up of diverse influences from different continents and countries. Hence, the Singapore cuisine can be said to be culturally enriched. Singaporean cuisine has also been influenced by its colonial history, as it established as a  British   colony  from the early 19th century until the mid-20th century when it became part of Malaysia before becoming independent; Singapore was also occupied by  Imperial Japan  during the  Second World War . [3] 
 It is believed that certain dishes that are part of Singaporean cuisine today predates the  arrival of Raffles  in 1819; some of these dishes include  laksa ,  biryani  and  betel quid . However, it is unknown when these dishes arrived in Singapore, as historical records on them are largely scattered and inaccurate as these dishes were largely made by early Singapore immigrants at home and not served in an establishment. [4]  Adaptation of various dishes that were prepared by early Singapore immigrants to suit the ingredients and taste preferences were how some of the dishes were created; [4]  some examples of such dishes are  fish head curry , [5]   Kaya toast [6]  and  Hainanese chicken rice , [7]  which are culinary staples in Singaporean cuisine today. [8] 
 
 Hawker centres [ edit ] 
   Hawker center in Bugis village 
 A large part of Singaporean cuisine revolves around hawker centres, where hawker stalls were first set up around the mid-19th century, and were largely street food stalls selling a large variety of foods [9]  These street vendors usually set up stalls by the side of the streets with pushcarts or bicycles and served cheap and fast foods to  coolies , office workers and those that did not cook at home. [10] [11]  Although the street vendors provided early Singapore immigrants with cheap and fast meals, these stalls were unhygienic, due to the lack of supporting infrastructure such as waste disposal, a steady supply of fresh water and limited sanitation practices. [11]  Starting in the 1960s, the Singapore government began enforcing more rules and regulations for street hawkers, and relocated these vendors to more permanent locations with the construction of wet markets and hawker centres across the country. [12] 
 Today, when dining out, Singaporeans often eat at  hawker centres ,  coffee shops  or  food courts  rather than restaurants, due to convenience, a wider range of options and affordability. Hawker centres are widespread and offer affordable food. They usually feature dozens of stalls in a single complex, with each stall offering its own speciality dishes. Well-known hawker centres among tourists include Telok Ayer Market, Maxwell Food Center, Lau Pa Sat and Newton Food Centre. Coffee shops are non-air-conditioned versions of food courts and are commonly found island-wide, usually at the bottom of blocks of  HDB   flats . Hawker centres, or open air food courts, have come to define Singaporean food culture. Popular markets like Old Airport Road Food Centre in  Geylang , Golden Mile Food Centre on Beach Road and Maxwell Road Food Centre in  Chinatown  offer the best of Chinese, Malaysian and Indian cooking, melded into foods that are uniquely Singaporean. [2]  Some well-known Singaporean hawker or  kopitiam  dishes includes  kaya toast ,  chilli crab ,  fish head curry , laksa,  roti prata [8]  and  Hainanese chicken rice , which is widely considered to be one of Singapore's national dish. [13] [14] [15] 
 In 2016,  Hong Kong Soya Sauce Chicken Rice and Noodle  and  Hill Street Tai Hwa Pork Noodle  became the first two street food locations in the world to be awarded a  Michelin star . [16]  The former also gained the title of the world's "cheapest Michelin-starred meal". [17] [18] 
 In 2018, Singapore hawker culture was nominated by Singapore's National Heritage Board (NHB), National Environment Agency and Federation of Merchants' Associations Singapore for inscription into  UNESCO 's  Representative list of the Intangible Cultural Heritage of Humanity . [19]  The nomination was submitted in March 2019 and approved and inscribed on 16 December 2020. [20]  UNESCO described the hawker centre as "‘community dining rooms’ where people from diverse backgrounds gather and share the experience of dining over breakfast, lunch and dinner." [21] 
 
 Food culture [ edit ] 
   Chinese Singaporeans  families gather in a restaurant in  Suntec City  for  Yusheng  yee sang  (prosperity toss), a symbol of abundance and prosperity during  Chinese New Year  celebration. 
 A common greeting for many Singaporean comes in the form of the question "Have you eaten?", and its equivalent is in various Chinese languages. It is one way of expressing a greeting to another person. It is also possible to assume that this is how Singaporeans think about meals and food. Since Singapore is a multicultural nation there is a diverse range of people who might have different and restricted diets, such as  Muslims  and Hindus. [22]  Since Singapore is influenced by many different regions, religions, and cultures, there are also many events or anniversaries. During the  Lunar New Year , people eat  nian gao , which is originally from China, and is traditionally eaten around the Chinese New Year. It is an extension of Malay cuisine but influenced by the Chinese and Indians – not to mention the Arabs, British and other immigrants who have contributed to making Singapore one of the world's most important trading ports. [ citation needed ] 
 
 Singapore food internationally [ edit ] 
   Bak kut teh , one of the foods often associated with Singapore 
 Singaporean food is a significant cultural attraction for tourists and visitors. Some Singaporean dishes have become internationally known. In 2011, four Singaporean dishes were included in the list of 'World's 50 Most Delicious Foods (Readers' Pick)' – a worldwide online poll by 35,000 people held by  CNN International . They are  Hainanese chicken rice  (13th),  chili crab  (29th),  Katong laksa  (44th) and  roti prata  (45th). [23] 
 Anthony Bourdain  brought international attention to local food available in hawker centres on his show,  No Reservations . He featured  Tian Tian Chicken Rice  and  Maxwell Food Centre  on the programme. Bourdain also publicly spoke about hoping to feature four Singaporean dishes in his upcoming food hall in New York City. [24] 
 Gordon Ramsay  participated in a ' Hawker Heroes Challenge ' held in Singapore in 2013, in which each competitor made three dishes. Ramsay's chili crab was voted the best, but he lost on the other two dishes to Ryan Koh (representing 328 Katong Laksa) and Foo Kui Lian (representing Tian Tian Chicken Rice). [25] 
 YouTube personality  Mike Chen , better known by his username Strictly Dumpling, has created several videos bringing attention to local cuisine on his channel. Over the course of 13 videos he highlighted Singaporean street food, hawker centres, local buffets and restaurants. These videos have a combined view count of over 17 million views.
 Singaporean cuisine has been promoted as a tourist attraction by the  Singapore Tourism Board . The  Singapore Food Festival , held every year in July, is a celebration of Singapore's cuisine. The Overseas Singaporean Unit also organises  Singapore Day  in major cities around the world as a platform for Singaporeans living abroad. [26]  One of Singapore Day's major draws is the local Singaporean hawker food, which is prepared on-site by well-known hawkers specially flown in for the event.
 
 Types of food [ edit ] 
 This section  does not  cite  any  sources .  Please help  improve this section  by  adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and  removed .   ( December 2020 )  ( Learn how and when to remove this template message ) 
   Hainanese chicken rice  is considered one of the national dishes of Singapore 
 Singaporean food can be divided into six types: meat, seafood, rice, noodles, dessert and snacks. Singapore is especially renowned for its seafood. Chili crab and black pepper crab are two quintessential dishes that dominate the scene and are greatly recommended to tourists. Another favourite is sambal stingray. In the meat category,  Hainanese chicken rice  is the most popular dish. Essentially, it is rice cooked with chicken fat, served with boiled chicken, accompanied with chili sauce. Three noodle dishes stand out in Singapore cuisine. "Fried Hokkien mee" comprises fried egg noodles with prawns, sliced pork and gravy. "Nyonya laksa" is composed of rice noodles served in a coconut prawn broth, and "Char Kuey Teow" is stir-fried rice noodles with prawns, Chinese sausage, lard and cockles. In the dessert category, tau-suan is one of many types of desserts commonly found in hawker centres around Singapore. Tāu-suàn (split mung bean soup), is a dessert of Teochew origin. It is a sweet and starchy soup made from split mung beans, usually eaten with Youtiao. In the snack category,  kaya toast  is the representative dish, primarily due to the use of  kaya . "Kaya kopitiams" are a common sight on the island. These affordable coffee shops dish out bread toasts, spread with coconut egg jam and butter, served with coffee and tea as well as two soft  boiled eggs .
 
 Common dishes and snacks [ edit ] 
 Chinese-inspired [ edit ] 
 The dishes that comprise "Singaporean Chinese cuisine" today were originally brought to Singapore by the early southern Chinese immigrants ( Hokkien ,  Teochew ,  Cantonese ,  Hakka  and  Hainanese ). They were then adapted to suit the local availability of ingredients, while absorbing influences from Malay, Indian and other cooking traditions.
 Most of the names of Chinese-originated Singaporean dishes were derived from languages/dialects of southern China,  Hokkien (Min Nan)  being the most common. As there was no common system for transliterating these Sinitic languages/dialects into the Latin alphabet, it is common to see different variants on the same name for a single dish. For example,  bah kut teh  may also be spelt  bak kut teh , and  char kway tiao  may also be spelt  char kuay teow .
 
 Bak kut teh  ( 肉骨茶 ;  ròu gǔ chá ), pork rib soup made with a variety of Chinese herbs and spices. 
 Beef kway teow  ( 牛肉粿条 ;  niú ròu guǒ tiáo ), flat rice noodles stir-fried with beef, served dry or with soup. 
 Bak chang  ( 肉粽 ;  ròu zòng ), glutinous rice dumplings, usually filled with pork, mushrooms and stewed egg, steamed in bamboo leaves. Although it is Chinese in origin, it is also a favourite in  Peranakan cuisine . 
 Bak Chor Mee  ( 肉脞面 ;  ròu cuò miàn ; 'minced pork noodles'), egg noodles with minced pork, braised mushroom, pork meatball and other ingredients, served dry or in soup. Usually the flat, tape-like  mee pok  noodle is used. 
 Ban mian  ( 板面 ;  bǎn miàn ), hand-made flat noodles served with vegetables, minced meat, sliced mushrooms, and an egg in an  anchovy -based soup. Noodle variations are common. "Ban mian" refers to flat, long noodles; "mee hoon kuay" ( 米粉粿 ;  mí fěn guǒ ; 'rice vermicelli cake') refers to flat, rectangular noodles; "you mian" ( 幼面 ;  yòu miàn ; 'thin noodles') refers to thin noodles. 
 Chai tow kway  ( 菜头粿 ;  cài tóu guǒ ), also known as char kway ( 炒粿 ;  chǎo guǒ ) or carrot cake, is a dish of steamed  radish / daikon  cakes diced and stir-fried with garlic, egg, chopped preserved radish, and sometimes with shrimp. This dish comes in black (fried with sweet dark soy sauce) or white (fried into an omelette) versions, with a chilli paste sometimes added. 
 Char kway teow  ( 炒粿条 ;  chǎo guǒ tiáo ), thick, flat rice noodles stir-fried in dark soy sauce with shrimp, eggs, beansprouts, fish cake, cockles, green leafy vegetables, Chinese sausage and fried cubes of lard. 
 Char siu  ( 叉烧 ;  chā shāo ), also romanised cha-su, cha siu, cha sio, caa siu and char siew, is barbecued pork in  Cantonese cuisine . 
 Chicken noodles  is an egg noodle dish with diced chicken meat. 
 Chwee kueh  (水粿;  chúi-kóe),  a type of steamed rice cake served with preserved radish. 
 Crab bee hoon  ( 螃蟹米粉 ;  páng xiè mí fěn ) is a rice vermicelli dish served with whole  mud crab . It may be served dry or in soup and sometimes in a  claypot . 
 Drunken prawns  ( 醉虾 ;  zuì xiā ), prawns cooked with  rice wine . 
 Duck rice  ( 鸭饭 ;  yā fàn ), braised duck served with rice cooked with yam and shrimp. It can be served simply with white rice and a thick dark sauce, or with braised hard-boiled eggs, preserved salted vegetables, and hard bean curd  (tau kua)  on the side.  Teochew  boneless duck rice is a similar, but a more refined dish. The duck is deboned and sliced thinly, allowing the sauces to seep into the meat. Roasted duck rice is also commonly sold. 
 Fish ball noodles  ( 鱼丸面 ;  yú wán miàn ), similar to bak chor mee, except that fish balls are used instead of minced pork. 
 Fish soup bee hoon  ( 鱼片米粉 ;  yú piàn mí fěn ) is a Singaporean soup served with sliced fish pieces, green vegetables and bee hoon. 
 Frog Leg  porridge ( 田鸡粥 ;  tían jī zhōu ) is served with frog legs, scallion, ginger and thick black sauce in a claypot with porridge in another claypot. 
 Hae mee  ( 虾面 ;  xiā miàn ), stir-fried prawn noodles cooked in a broth made from prawn heads and pork bones, topped with ingredients such as prawns, sliced pork belly, squid, egg, lard, and served with sambal chilli and lime at the side. 
 Hainanese chicken rice  ( 海南鸡饭 ;  Hǎinán jī fàn ) is based on the Hainanese dish  Wenchang chicken . It is considered Singapore's national dish. [7] [27] 
 Hainanese curry rice  is a dish consisting of steamed white rice smothered in a mess of curries and braised gravy. 
 Har cheong gai  ( 虾酱鸡 ;  xiā jiàng jī ; 'shrimp paste chicken'), chicken wings fried in a batter with fermented  shrimp paste . 
 Hokkien mee  ( 福建面 ;  Fújiàn miàn ), egg noodles and rice noodles stir-fried with egg, slices of pork, prawns and squid, and served and garnished with spring onion, lard, sambal chilli and lime (for adding lime juice to the dish). 
 Ham chim peng  ( 咸煎饼 ;  xián jiān bǐng ), a deep-fried bun-like pastry sometimes filled with bean paste. 
 Kaya toast , a traditional breakfast dish.  Kaya  is a sweet coconut and egg jam which is spread over toasted bread. Combined with a cup of local coffee and a half-boiled egg, this constitutes a typical Singaporean breakfast. 
 Kway chap  / kuay chap ( 粿汁 ;  guǒ zhī ), a Teochew dish of flat, broad rice sheets in a soup made with dark soy sauce, served with pig offal, braised duck meat, various kinds of beancurd, preserved salted vegetables, and braised hard-boiled eggs. 
 Mee pok  ( 面薄 ;  miàn báo ), a noodle dish characterised by its flat and yellow appearance, varying in thickness and width. 
 Min chiang kueh  ( 面煎粿 ;  miàn jiān guǒ ), a thick, chewy pancake with a ground peanut and sugar filling. Other variations include grated coconut and red bean paste. This traditional snack also is served in blueberry, cheese and chocolate varieties. 
 Oyster omelette  (蠔烙;  háolào ), a dish of omelette cooked with fresh raw oysters, tapioca starch and eggs. 
 Pig's brain soup ( 猪脑汤 ;  zhū nǎo tāng ), a soup dish comprising pig brain with Chinese herbs. 
 Pig fallopian tubes , a dish comprising stir-fried pig Fallopian tubes with vegetables and sambal chilli. 
 Pig's organ soup  ( 猪杂汤 ;  zhū zá tāng ; 'pig spare parts soup'), a soup-based variant of kuay chap 
 Pig's trotters  usually braised in black sauce and vinegar. 
 Popiah  ( 薄饼 ;  báo bǐng ), Hokkien/Teochew-style  spring roll  or rolled  crêpe , stuffed with stewed turnip, Chinese sausage, shrimp and lettuce. 
 Shredded chicken noodles  ( 鸡丝面 ;  jī sī miàn ), a noodles dish topped with shredded chicken, fish dumpling and mushroom. 
 Sliced fish soup  ( 鱼片汤 ;  yú piàn tāng ), a soup dish consisting of fish and vegetables. 
 Soon kway  ( 笋粿 ;  sǔn guǒ ), a white vegetable dumpling with black soy sauce. 
 Teochew porridge  ( 潮州粥 ;  Cháozhōu zhōu ), a rice porridge dish consumed with a selection of local side dishes. 
 Turtle soup  ( 乌龟汤 ;  wū guī tāng ), a soup or stew made from turtle flesh. 
 Vegetarian bee hoon  ( 斋米粉 ;  zhāi mǐ fěn ), thin braised  rice vermicelli  to which a choice of various gluten, vegetable, or beancurd-based delicacies may be added. 
 Yong Tau Foo  ( 酿豆腐 ;  niàng dòu fǔ ), a dish that contains a varied selection of food items, including tofu filled with ground meat mixture or fish paste, fish balls, crab sticks, an assortment of vegetables and meat. 
 Youtiao  ( 油条 ;  yóu tiáo ), also called yew char kueh ( 油炸粿 ;  yóu zhá guǒ ), fried dough crullers similar to those served in other Chinese cuisines around the world. 
 Yam ring  ( 佛钵 ;  fú bō ), a deep-fried ring of  taro  filled with stir-fried ingredients 
 
 
 
 
 Hokkien mee 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Beef fried rice topped with a sunny side up egg
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kaya toast , a traditional breakfast dish
 
 
 
 
 Malay/Indonesian [ edit ] 
   Mee soto 
   Nasi goreng  (fried rice) 
   Mee rebus 
 Situated between  Malaysia  and  Indonesia , Singaporean  Malay dishes  are influenced by the food of the neighbouring Malay Peninsula, Sumatra, Java and the Riau Islands. Despite absorbing regional influences, it tends to be adapted to local tastes and differs from their counterparts in neighbouring countries. Although Malays, such as the Orang Laut, are native to Singapore, most Malays in Singapore today are descended from native Indonesians or native Malays from present-day Malaysia. [28]  Hence, Singaporean Malay cuisine features a unique set of influences, especially from  Minang cuisine . Spices and coconut milk are common ingredients, although Chinese ingredients such as taupok (tofu puffs) and tofu (known as tauhu in Malay) have been integrated. Many Chinese and  Tamil Muslim  adaptations of the following dishes also exist. As almost all Malays are Muslims, pork is not used as it is prohibited in  Islam .
 
 Acar ,  pickled  vegetables or fruits with dried chilli, peanuts, and spices. Indian and Peranakan versions can also be found. 
 Assam pedas , seafood and vegetables cooked in a sauce consisting of tamarind, coconut milk, chilli, and spices. 
 Ayam penyet , fried chicken dish consisting of fried chicken that is smashed with the pestle against mortar to make it softer and a relatively new culinary phenomenon of Indonesian origin. [29] 
 Bakso , also Ba'so, meatballs served with noodles. 
 Begedil , mashed potato mixture that is fried into patties and eaten together with mee soto. 
 Curry puff , also known as epok-epok, a flaky pastry usually stuffed with curry chicken, potato cubes, and a slice of hard-boiled egg. Sardines are sometimes used in place of chicken. 
 Dendeng paru, a dish of dried beef lung cooked in spices. 
 Goreng pisang , bananas rolled in flour, fried, and eaten as a snack. 
 Gudeg  putih, white jackfruit curry. [30] 
 Gulai daun ubi, sweet potato leaves stewed in coconut milk. 
 Keropok , deep fried crackers usually flavoured with shrimp, but sometimes with fish or vegetables. 
 Ketupat , rice cakes steamed in a square-shaped coconut leaf wrapping and usually served with satay. 
 Lemak siput, shellfish cooked in a thick coconut milk-based gravy. 
 Lontong , compressed rice cakes (see ketupat) in a spicy vegetable soup. 
 Nagasari , a rice snack with Indonesian origins. 
 Nasi goreng , steamed rice stir-fried in a wok, often mixed with other ingredients, such as eggs, vegetables and meat. 
 Nasi Padang , a steamed white rice served with an array – sometimes as many as 12, or more – of pre-cooked dishes, the mini banquet usually laid out in small plates. 
 Otak-otak /otah, spicy fish cake grilled in a banana leaf wrapping. 
 Pecel lele , fried catfish served with chilli paste. 
 Rawon , beef soup. 
 Rojak bandung , a variant of  Singaporean style rojak . 
 Roti john , an omelette sandwich. 
 Sambal , not a dish in itself, but a common chilli-based accompaniment to most foods. 
 Satay , grilled meat on skewers served with satay sauce (a spicy peanut sauce) and usually eaten with ketupat, cucumber and onions. 
 Sayur lodeh , a mix of vegetables in coconut milk. 
 Soto , a soup dish mainly composed of meat and vegetables. 
 Soto ayam , a spicy chicken soup that features chicken shreds, rice cakes and sometimes begedil. 
 Tumpeng , a cone-shaped rice dish of Javanese origin. It is served with side dishes of vegetables and meat. [31] 
 Indian [ edit ] 
   Indian rojak 
   Rice served with  papadum  on a banana leaf 
 Like other Singaporean ethnic cuisines,  Indian Singaporean cuisine  has been influenced by multiple cultural groups. Dishes from both North India and South India can be found in Singapore. [32] 
 
 Appam , a fermented rice pancake. 
 Dosa , rice and lentil pancake. Commonly served as a "masala" version that includes spiced potatoes and is served with different types of sambar. 
 Murtabak , an  Indian-Muslim  dish originating from the Middle East. It consists of folded dough stuffed with spiced minced meat, onions and egg, and is often served with curry. 
 Naan , an Indian oven-baked flatbread. 
 Putu mayam  rice flour  string hoppers  or noodles served with sugar and coconut usually eaten for breakfast. 
 Roti prata , a local evolution of the Indian  paratha . It is a popular dish for breakfast and supper. It is a fried bread pancake that is crispy on the outside and soft on the inside. The dough is flipped to attain the right texture, then cooked quickly on a greased stove and served with curry or sugar. A plethora of modern variations are available, including egg, cheese, chocolate,  masala , durian and even ice cream. 
 Soup kambing , a local  Tamil-Muslim  dish of spiced mutton soup. 
 Soup tulang, a local  Tamil-Muslim  dish of mutton or beef leg bones stewed in a spice. The bones are broken to allow the marrow to be eaten. 
 Soup tulang merah, is a dish consisting of mutton or beef bones stewed in a sweet and spicy red soup of mutton stock, tomatoes, ginger, chillies and spices.  It is considered a Singapore invention 
 Tandoori chicken , chicken marinated in a mixture of spices and yogurt and cooked in a clay oven. 
 Vadai , spicy, deep-fried snacks that are made from dhal, lentils or potato. 
 
 Cross-cultural [ edit ] 
   A typical serving of Singaporean-style laksa 
   Katong Laksa  and  otah 
 A number of dishes, listed below, can be considered as truly hybrid or multi-ethnic food.
 
 Ayam buah keluak, a Peranakan dish of chicken stewed with spices and Southeast Asian black nuts (buah keluak). 
 Biryani  (Indian variant) or  Nasi Briyani  (Malay variant), a popular mixed rice dish commonly found in places offering Malay or Indian food. 
 Cereal prawns ( 麦片虾 ;  mài piàn xiā ), stir-fried prawns with sweetened cereal. 
 Chili Crab Pasta , pasta served with chili crab. 
 Laksa lemak, a Peranakan dish of vermicelli noodles and fried bean curd served in a creamy coconut sauce with slices of shrimp, fish, and cockles. 
 Fish head curry , a dish created by Singapore's Malayali (an Indian ethnic group from  Kerala ) community with some Chinese and Malay influences. The head of a  red snapper  ( ikan merah , literally "red fish") stewed in curry consisting of varying amounts of coconut milk and tamarind juice, along with vegetables ( okra  and  eggplant  are common). Usually served with either rice or bread. 
 Kari debal  / Devil's curry, a Eurasian Singaporean curry dish with Portuguese and Peranakan influences. Includes chicken, cabbage, sausage, and bacon pieces stewed in a curry sauce. 
 Kari lemak ayam, a Peranakan chicken curry with a coconut milk base 
 Katong Laksa , a Singaporean thick rice noodles (bee hoon) in a coconut curry gravy with prawn and egg. Sometimes chicken, tau pok (beancurd puffs) or fish cake may be added. [ citation needed ] 
 Kueh tutu  steamed rice flour pastries with a sweet shredded coconut or peanut filling 
 Kueh pie tee , a thin and crispy pastry tart shell filled with a spicy, sweet mixture of thinly sliced vegetables and prawns. 
 Kway teow goreng , stir-fried  flat rice noodles . 
 Mee rebus , egg noodles with a spicy slightly sweet curry-like gravy. The gravy is made from sweet potatoes, curry powder, water, salted soybeans, dried shrimp and peanuts. 
 Mee siam , a dish of thin rice vermicelli. 
 Mee goreng , yellow egg noodles stir fried with ghee, tomato sauce, chilli, eggs, vegetables, and various meats and seafood. 
 Mee soto , a spicy noodle soup dish. 
 Rojak , a traditional fruit and vegetable salad dish of Indian origin and with Malay/Indonesian influences. 
 Sambal kangkong, a dish of  water spinach ( kangkong )  fried in sambal. 
 Satay bee hoon , rice noodles served with cuttlefish, fried bean curd puffs, cockles and water spinach in satay sauce. 
 Tauhu goreng , fried bean curd with sweet sauce. 
 "Western Food" in hawker centres where "Singapore-style" chicken chop [33]  (topped with black pepper or mushroom sauce), chicken cutlet, pork chop are available. These are usually served with fries/mashed potato, coleslaw and baked beans. This style is often called "Hainanese Western food" due to the fact that it traces its origins to Hainanese immigrants who worked as cooks in the kitchens of Western employers. [34] [35] [36] 
 Seafood [ edit ] 
   Chilli crab 
 Singaporeans also enjoy a wide variety of seafood including fish, squid (known as  sotong  in Malay), stingray, crab, lobster, clams, and oysters.
 Popular seafood dishes include:
 
 Black pepper crab , hard shell crabs cooked in a black pepper sauce. Salted Egg crab and buttermilk crab are also common. 
 Chilli crab , hard shell crabs cooked in chilli sauce, usually served with  man tou , or deep fried buns. 
 Oyster omelette , an oyster omelette mixed with flour and fried, served garnished with coriander. 
 Sambal lala , soft shell clams fried with sambal sauce 
 Sambal stingray / hang hir  ( 魟鱼 ;  魟魚 ;  hōng yú ), smothered in sambal and served on banana leaf, also known as  ikan bakar  in Malay. 
 Fruit [ edit ] 
   A durian stall in Singapore 
 A wide variety of tropical fruits are available all year round. By far the most well known is the  durian , known as the "King of Fruits", which produces a characteristic odour from the creamy yellow custard-like flesh within its spiky green or brown shell. Durians are banned on public transport, elevators, certain hotels, and public buildings because of their strong odour.
 Other popular tropical fruits include  mangosteen ,  jackfruit ,  longan ,  lychee ,  rambutan ,  soursop ,  pineapple  and  mango . Some of these fruits also are used as ingredients for other dishes: iced desserts, sweet-and-sour pork, and certain types of salad such as  rojak .
 
 
 Desserts [ edit ] 
   Tangyuan 
   Chendol 
 Singaporean desserts have a varied history. A typical food court or hawker centre dessert stall will usually have a large variety of desserts available, including but not limited to:
 
 Bubur cha cha , a dish of pearled sago, sweet potatoes, yams, bananas, black-eyed peas, pandan leaves, sugar, and salt cooked in coconut milk and served hot or cold. 
 Chendol , basic version consist of pandan jelly strips with coconut milk and gula melaka syrup with shaved iced; other ingredients which could be added are red beans, sweet corns, ice cream and even durians. 
 Cheng tng  ( 清汤 ;  qīng tāng ), a light, refreshing soup with longan, barley,  agar  strips, lotus seeds and a sweet syrup, served either hot or cold. It is analogous to the Cantonese  Ching bo leung . 
 Ice kacang , a mound of grated ice on a base consisting of jelly, red beans, corn and  attap  seeds, topped with various kinds of coloured sugar syrups,  palm sugar , rose syrup and  evaporated milk . 
 Kuih  or kueh, small cakes or coconut milk based desserts that come in a variety of flavours, usually containing fruit such as durian or banana.  Pandan  is a common flavouring.
 Kueh laddu  are ball-shaped sweets. 
 Kueh lapis is a rich, multi-layered cake-style kueh using a large amount of egg whites and studded with prunes. 
 Kueh modak  are rice flour dumplings stuffed with coconut and palm sugar. 
 Lapis sagu is also a popular kueh with layers of alternating colour and a sweet, coconut taste. 
 Orh-nee  ( 芋泥 ;  yù ní ), a Teochew dish consisting of  taro  (locally known as "yam") paste, coconut paste and ginkgo nuts. 
 Pulut hitam , a creamy dessert made of black glutinous rice and served with coconut cream. 
 Tau suan ( 豆爽 ;  dòu shuǎng ),  mung beans  in jelly, served hot with dough crullers. 
 Ice cream sandwich [ edit ] 
 Wafer  ice cream sandwiches are a popular dish sold by street vendors operating carts on busy street corners. These carts carry a variety of flavours, including but not limited to vanilla, chocolate, strawberry, coffee, sweet corn, coconut, and durian. While some vendors sell their ice cream in cups or cones, as is common in the West, the more popular variant is on slices of bread or between wafers. The ice cream consists of sealed blocks which are sliced to order and then placed on a single slice of over-sized, often multicolored bread. This can be either white bread or a slice of multicolored, slightly sweetened bread (dyed with food colouring and flavoured with pandan leaf extract). A sandwich costs around S$1 but may cost up to S$2 or more in downtown areas and tourist spots.
 
 Drinks and beverages [ edit ] 
   A typical open-air kopi tiam in Singapore 
 Popular Singaporean drinks include:
 
 Bandung , rose syrup with evaporated milk. 
 Beer in Singapore 
 Chin chow drink ( 仙草水 ;  xiān cǎo shuǐ ),  grass jelly  made into a sweet beverage. 
 Kopi , the local coffee in Singapore. Singapore's kopi lingo is mixed with various languages. [37] 
 Kopi: Coffee with sugar and condensed milk 
 Kopi- O : Coffee with sugar 
 Kopi- O - Kosong : Coffee without sugar and evaporated milk 
 Kopi- C : Coffee with sugar and evaporated milk 
 Kopi- Peng : Iced coffee with sugar and condensed milk 
 Kopi- Siew - Dai : Coffee with less sugar and condensed milk 
 Kopi- Siew - Siew - Dai : Coffee with little sugar and condensed milk 
 Kopi- Ga - Dai : Coffee with extra sugar and condensed milk 
 Kopi- Gao : Coffee with sugar, condensed milk and extra thick concentrated coffee 
 Kopi- Di - Lo : Coffee with no dilution    
 Kopi- Poh : Coffee with extra dilution    
 Lemon barley drink 
 Water chestnut drink 
 Horlicks , malt milk drink. Variations include the Horlicks Dinosaur, a standard Horlicks drink topped with a scoop of Horlicks powder. 
 Milo , chocolate/malt milk drink. Variations include the  Milo Dinosaur , a standard Milo drink topped with a scoop of Milo powder. 
 Sugarcane  juice, usually blended to order from fresh sugar cane stalks. 
 Teh halia tarik, ginger tea with "pulled" milk (tarik) 
 Singapore Sling . While the cocktail was invented in Singapore's  Raffles Hotel , and is still served at the hotel's Long Bar, it is not common in most Singaporean bars. 
 Singaporean dishes uncommon in Singapore [ edit ] 
 Singapore style noodles  ( 星州炒米粉 ;  xīng zhōu chǎo mí fěn ), an  American Chinese  dish featuring fried rice vermicelli flavoured with yellow curry powder, is not found in Singapore. The close relative to this dish is fried bee hoon (thin rice noodles). 
 Singapore fried  kway tiao  ( 星州炒粿条 ;  xīng zhōu chǎo guǒ tiáo ), a dish featuring fried thick, flat rice noodles flavoured with dark soy sauce commonly available in some Chinese restaurants in Canada and the United States, is also not a Singaporean dish. The dish most resembling it is  char kway teow . 
 
 
 
 
 Singapore Sling 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Singapore style noodles 
 
 
 
 
 See also [ edit ] 
 
 Food portal Singapore portal 
 Culture of Singapore 
 Gastronomy in Singapore 
 List of coffeehouse chains 
 List of chicken restaurants 
 List of countries with organic agriculture regulation 
 List of shopping malls in Singapore 
 List of supermarket chains in Singapore 
 List of vegetarian restaurants 
 List of restaurants in Singapore 
 List of Singaporean dishes 
 References [ edit ] 
 
 
 ^   "A history of Singapore cuisine" . Seasoned Pioneers . Retrieved  25 September  2021 . 
 
 ^  a   b   Sood, Suemedha (15 December 2010).  "Singaporean Food's past and Present" . BBC Travel . Retrieved  22 June  2017 . 
 
 ^   Tarulevicz, Nicole (December 2013).  Eating Her Curries and Kway: A Cultural History of Food in Singapore . University of Illinois Press. p. 11.  ISBN   978-0252095368 . 
 
 ^  a   b   "CULINARY BIOGRAPHIES: CHARTING SINGAPORE'S HISTORY THROUGH COOKING AND CONSUMPTION"   (PDF) . ISEAS - Yusof Ishak Institute. 1 October 2020 . Retrieved  25 September  2021 . 
 
 ^   "The man behind fish head curry" .  The Straits Times . 10 December 2017.  He ( M.J. Gomez ) came to  Singapore  from Trivandrum, the capital of Kerala, in the 1930s before returning to get married. After the birth of his first child, a daughter, he returned to Singapore, only to get caught here during the war. Mr Gomez then came to Singapore again, and later brought his family over. They lived in  Sophia Road , where he started his restaurant,  Gomez Curry , which later moved to nearby  Selegie Road . 
 
 ^   "Kaya Toast" . TasteAtlas . Retrieved  16 July  2020 . 
 
 ^  a   b   Farley, David.  "The Dish Worth the 15-Hour Flight" . BBC. 
 
 ^  a   b   "Singapore Famous Local Food & Cuisine" . Visit Singapore Official Site . Retrieved  25 September  2021 . 
 
 ^   "Hawker Culture in Singapore – Heritage Plan" . Our SG Heritage . Retrieved  25 September  2021 . 
 
 ^   "OUR STREET HAWKERS, p. 2" . Eastern Daily Mail and Straits Morning Advertiser, Archived by National Library Board. 6 November 1905 . Retrieved  27 September  2021 . 
 
 ^  a   b   "Hawker centres – Where did they come from?" . Expat Living SG. 2 June 2020 . Retrieved  27 September  2021 . 
 
 ^   Yeoh, Brenda S.A. (2003).  Contesting Space in Colonial Singapore: Power Relations and the Urban Built Environment . NUS Press. pp. 262–266.  ISBN   9789971692681 . 
 
 ^   "Dipping sauce and a little controversy: who knew chicken rice had such 'wow' factor" .  SBS . Retrieved  14 November  2020 . 
 
 ^   Benton, G. A.  "10 Best Restaurants of 2019: #4 Service Bar" .  Columbus Monthly . Retrieved  14 November  2020 . 
 
 ^   "A Brief History of Hainanese Chicken Rice, Singapore's National Dish" . The Culture Trip. 24 January 2017 . Retrieved  15 July  2020 . 
 
 ^   Kim, Soo (25 July 2016).  "Singapore street food stalls get Michelin stars" .  The Daily Telegraph .  Archived  from the original on 12 January 2022 . Retrieved  8 August  2016 . 
 
 ^   Han, Kirsten (1 October 2016).  "Michelin star for Singapore noodle stall where lunch is half the price of a Big Mac" .  The Guardian . Retrieved  8 August  2016 . 
 
 ^   "The world's first Michelin-starred hawker stall" .  The Guardian . 1 October 2016 . Retrieved  8 August  2016 . 
 
 ^   hermes (20 August 2018).  "Singapore hawker culture to be nominated for Unesco listing" .  The Straits Times . Retrieved  18 January  2019 . 
 
 ^   "Singapore's hawker culture clinches spot on Unesco's intangible cultural heritage list" .  Today . 17 December 2020. 
 
 ^   "Nomination file No. 01568 — Hawker culture in Singapore, community dining and culinary practices in a multicultural urban context" .  UNESCO . Retrieved  17 December  2020 . 
 
 ^   "Dining in Singapore." Dining in Singapore. InterNations, n.d. Web. 17 March 2016. 
 
 ^   Tim Cheung (7 September 2011).  "Your pick: World's 50 best foods" . CNNGo. Archived from  the original  on 11 November 2012 . Retrieved  19 May  2015 . 
 
 ^   "4 Singaporean dishes make Anthony Bourdain's wishlist for his new street food hall in New York" .  The Straits Times . 17 February 2016 . Retrieved  18 July  2016 . 
 
 ^   Alex WestCott (7 July 2013).  "Gordon Ramsay loses Hawker Heroes Challenge" .  TODAYonline.com . Retrieved  24 December  2016 . 
 
 ^   "Singapore Day" .  Singaporeday.sg . Retrieved  7 April  2013 . 
 
 ^   Ling, Catherine.  "40 Singapore foods we can't live without" . CNN . Retrieved  13 January  2019 . 
 
 ^   Minorities at Risk (MAR) Project assessment for Malays in Singapore   Archived  28 March 2016 at the  Wayback Machine 
 
 ^   "Best ayam penyet in Singapore – HungryGoWhere Singapore" .  Hungrygowhere.com . Retrieved  2 October  2018 . 
 
 ^   "Singapore – White Curry Jackfruit (Gudeg Putih)" .  Iims-asean-singapore.blogspot.com . 26 May 2012. 
 
 ^   "Nasi Tumpeng Singapore – IndoChili Indonesian Restaurant" .  Indochili.com . Retrieved  2 October  2018 . 
 
 ^   "Indian Cuisines in Singapore" .  Visitsingapore.com . Retrieved  7 April  2013 . 
 
 ^   "Thank Singapore & Malaysia for Ketchup and Chicken Chop" .  Angmohdan.com . 24 October 2014. 
 
 ^   "Hainanese Western food" . 
 
 ^   "Western food in S'pore popularised by Hainanese-run kopitiams set up in 1930s" . 
 
 ^   "Hainanese cooking, with its fusion of Chinese and Western, comes back in vogue" . 16 October 2017. 
 
 ^   "Introduction to Singapore's Coffee Culture" . 
 
 
 v t e Singapore   articles History 
 Archaeology 
 Early history (pre–1819) 
 Founding of modern Singapore and early colonial period (1819–1826) 
 Straits Settlements (1826–1942) 
 Japanese occupation (1942–1945) 
 British Military Administration (1945–1946) 
 Post-war Singapore (1946–1955) 
 Self-governance of Singapore (1955–1962) 
 Merger with Malaysia (1962–1965) 
 Republic of Singapore (1965– present ) 
 Geography 
 Beaches 
 Environmental issues 
 Geology 
 Islands 
 Parks 
 Reservoirs 
 Rivers 
 Urban planning 
 Urban renewal 
 Waterways 
 Wildlife 
 Politics 
 Administrative divisions 
 Town Councils 
 Constitution 
 Elections 
 Foreign relations 
 Government 
 Cabinet 
 Prime Minister 
 Human rights 
 Law 
 Military 
 Parliament 
 Police 
 Political parties 
 President 
 The Reserves 
 Economy 
 Economic statistics 
 Agriculture 
 Aviation 
 Monetary Authority 
 China–Singapore Suzhou Industrial Park 
 Dollar  (currency) 
 Energy 
 Labour 
 Proposed developments 
 Singapore Exchange 
 Singapore Standard (SS) 
 Telecommunications 
 Tourism 
 Transport 
 Society 
 Communitarianism 
 Caning 
 Crime 
 Disability 
 Women 
 Education 
 Demographics 
 Eat Frozen Pork 
 Five Cs 
 Health 
 Long hair in Singapore 
 National Courtesy Campaign 
 National Day Parade 
 No U-turn syndrome 
 OB marker 
 Population planning 
 Prostitution 
 Public housing 
 Public holidays 
 Sex trafficking 
 Smoking 
 Social fund 
 Water supply and sanitation 
 Culture 
 Art 
 Architecture 
 Cinema 
 Cuisine 
 Gambling 
 Languages 
 LGBT 
 Literature 
 Mass media 
 Music 
 Religion 
 Sports 
 Singaporeans 
 Symbols 
 Anthem 
 Coat of arms 
 Flag 
 Flower 
 Lion head 
 Merlion 
 Pledge 
 Outline Index Bibliography 
 Category 
 Portal 
 v t e   Singaporean cuisine Articles 
 Singaporean cuisine 
 List of Singaporean dishes 
 Dishes Noodle dishes 
 Banmian 
 Beef kway teow 
 Beef noodle soup 
 Bee hoon goreng 
 Char kway teow 
 Crab bee hoon 
 Fish soup bee hoon 
 Hokkien mee 
 Katong laksa 
 Kway chap 
 Kway teow goreng 
 Mee bakso 
 Mee goreng 
 Mee rebus 
 Mee pok 
 Bak chor mee 
 Mee siam 
 Mee soto 
 Satay bee hoon 
 Vegetarian bee hoon 
 Other dishes 
 Assam pedas 
 Ayam goreng 
 Ayam penyet 
 Bak kut teh 
 Bakso 
 Biryani 
 Black pepper crab 
 Chai tow kway 
 Char siu 
 Chilli crab 
 Dendeng paru 
 Duck rice 
 Fish head curry 
 Fish ball 
 Gudeg putih 
 Gulai daun ubi 
 Hainanese chicken rice 
 Hainanese curry rice 
 Har Cheong Gai 
 Ketupat 
 Naan 
 Nasi goreng 
 Nasi lemak 
 Nasi padang 
 Oyster omelette 
 Pecel lele 
 Pig fallopian tubes 
 Pig's organ soup 
 Rawon 
 Rojak bandung 
 Roti john 
 Roti prata 
 Satay 
 Sayur lodeh 
 Sliced fish soup 
 Soto 
 Soto ayam 
 Soup kambing 
 Teochew porridge 
 Turtle soup 
 Snacks and desserts 
 Ais kacang 
 Apam balik 
 Bubur cha cha 
 Cendol 
 Cheng tng 
 Curry puff 
 Ham chim peng 
 Kaya toast 
 Keropok 
 Kueh 
 Laddu 
 Modak 
 Red peach cake 
 Soon kueh 
 Otak-otak 
 Pisang goreng 
 Putugal 
 Sugee cake 
 Drinks 
 Bandung 
 Kopi 
 Milo 
 Milo dinosaur 
 Singapore Sling 
 Teh tarik 
 
 v t e Asian cuisine Sovereign states 
 Afghanistan 
 Armenia 
 Azerbaijan 
 Bahrain 
 Bangladesh 
 Bhutan 
 Brunei 
 Burma (Myanmar) 
 Cambodia 
 China 
 Cyprus 
 East Timor (Timor-Leste) 
 Egypt 
 Georgia 
 India 
 Indonesia 
 Iran 
 Iraq 
 Israel 
 Japan 
 Jordan 
 Kazakhstan 
 North Korea 
 South Korea 
 Kuwait 
 Kyrgyzstan 
 Laos 
 Lebanon 
 Malaysia 
 Maldives 
 Mongolia 
 Nepal 
 Oman 
 Pakistan 
 Philippines 
 Qatar 
 Russia 
 Saudi Arabia 
 Singapore 
 Sri Lanka 
 Syria 
 Tajikistan 
 Thailand 
 Turkey 
 Turkmenistan 
 United Arab Emirates 
 Uzbekistan 
 Vietnam 
 Yemen 
 States with limited recognition 
 Abkhazia 
 Artsakh 
 Northern Cyprus 
 Palestine 
 South Ossetia 
 Taiwan 
 Dependencies and other territories 
 British Indian Ocean Territory 
 Christmas Island 
 Cocos (Keeling) Islands 
 Hong Kong 
 Macau 
 
 v t e Cuisines Continental 
 African 
 North 
 West 
 list 
 Americas 
 Caribbean 
 North 
 South 
 list 
 Asian 
 Caucasian 
 Central 
 Indian subcontinent 
 Levantine 
 list 
 European 
 Balkan 
 Central 
 Eastern 
 list 
 Oceanic 
 Intercontinental
 Global 
 Latin American 
 Mediterranean 
 Middle Eastern 
 National  and regional 
 Afghan 
 Albanian 
 Algerian 
 American 
 Californian 
 Floribbean 
 Hawaiian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Lowcountry (South Carolina) 
 New England 
 New Mexico 
 Pacific Northwest 
 Pennsylvania Dutch 
 Puerto Rican 
 Southern US 
 Southwest US 
 Texas 
 Angolan 
 Argentine 
 Armenian 
 Australian 
 Austrian 
 Azerbaijani 
 Bahraini 
 Bangladeshi 
 Barbadian 
 Belarusian 
 Belgian 
 Belizean 
 Beninese 
 Bhutanese 
 Bolivian 
 Bosnian-Herzegovinian 
 Botswana 
 Brazilian 
 British 
 Channel Islands 
 English 
 Gibraltarian 
 Northern Irish 
 Saint Helena 
 Scottish 
 Welsh 
 Bruneian 
 Bulgarian 
 Burkinabé 
 Burmese 
 Burundian 
 Cambodian 
 Cameroonian 
 Canadian 
 Acadian 
 Québécois 
 Central African Republic 
 Chadian 
 Chilean 
 Chinese 
 Cantonese 
 Hong Kong 
 Macanese 
 Tibetan 
 Xinjiang 
 Colombian 
 Congolese 
 Corsican 
 Croatian 
 Cuban 
 Cypriot 
 Czech 
 Danish 
 Faroese 
 Greenlandic 
 Djiboutian 
 Dominican 
 Dominican Republic 
 Dutch 
 East Timorese 
 Ecuadorian 
 Egyptian 
 Emirati 
 Equatorial Guinean 
 Eritrean 
 Estonian 
 Ethiopian 
 Fijian 
 Filipino 
 Finnish 
 French 
 Occitan 
 French Guianan 
 Gabonese 
 Gambian 
 Georgian 
 German 
 Ghanaian 
 Greek 
 Cretan 
 Epirotic 
 Greek Macedonian 
 Heptanesean 
 Guatemalan 
 Guinea-Bissauan 
 Guinean 
 Haitian 
 Honduran 
 Hungarian 
 Icelandic 
 Indian 
 Arunachalese 
 Assamese 
 Bengali 
 Bihari 
 Goan 
 Gujarati 
 Himachal Pradesh 
 Kashmiri 
 Jharkhandi 
 Karnataka 
 Kerala 
 Maharashtrian 
 Manipuri 
 Meghalayan 
 Mizo 
 Naga 
 Odia 
 Punjabi 
 Rajasthani 
 Sikkimese 
 Sindhi 
 Tamil 
 Telangana 
 Telugu 
 Indonesian 
 Acehnese 
 Balinese 
 Banjar 
 Batak 
 Betawi 
 Indo 
 Javanese 
 Madurese 
 Makassar 
 Minahasan 
 Minangkabau 
 Palembangese 
 Sundanese 
 Iranian 
 Iraqi 
 Irish 
 Israeli 
 Italian 
 Abruzzese 
 Ligurian 
 Lombard 
 Lucanian 
 Neapolitan 
 Roman 
 Sardinian 
 Sicilian 
 Venetian 
 Ivorian 
 Jamaican 
 Japanese 
 Okinawan 
 Jordanian 
 Kazakh 
 Kenyan 
 Korean 
 North Korean 
 South Korean 
 Kosovan 
 Kuwaiti 
 Kyrgyz 
 Lao 
 Latvian 
 Lebanese 
 Lesotho 
 Liberian 
 Libyan 
 Liechtensteiner 
 Lithuanian 
 Luxembourg 
 Macedonian 
 Malagasy 
 Malawian 
 Malaysian 
 Sabahan 
 Sarawakian 
 Maldivian 
 Malian 
 Maltese 
 Mauritanian 
 Mauritian 
 Mexican 
 Moldovan 
 Monégasque 
 Mongolian 
 Montenegrin 
 Moroccan 
 Mozambican 
 Namibian 
 Nauruan 
 Nepalese 
 New Zealand 
 Nicaraguan 
 Niger 
 Nigerian 
 Niuean 
 Norwegian 
 Omani 
 Pakistani 
 Palestinian 
 Panamanian 
 Peruvian 
 Polish 
 Portuguese 
 Qatari 
 Romanian  (incl.  Transylvanian Saxon ) 
 Russian 
 Bashkir 
 Chechen 
 Circassian 
 Komi 
 Mordovian 
 Sakha 
 Tatar 
 Udmurt 
 Yamal 
 Rwandan 
 Saint Lucian 
 Salvadoran 
 Sammarinese 
 São Tomé and Príncipe 
 Saudi Arabian 
 Senegalese 
 Serbian 
 Seychellois 
 Sierra Leonean 
 Singaporean 
 Slovak 
 Slovenian 
 Somali 
 South African 
 Spanish 
 Andalusian 
 Asturian 
 Balearic 
 Basque 
 Canarian 
 Cantabrian 
 Catalan 
 Extremaduran 
 Galician 
 Manchegan 
 Valencian 
 Sri Lankan 
 Sudanese 
 Swazi 
 Swedish 
 Swiss 
 Syrian 
 Taiwanese 
 Tajik 
 Tanzanian 
 Zanzibari 
 Thai 
 Togolese 
 Tunisian 
 Turkish 
 Turkmen 
 Trinidadian and Tobagonian 
 Ugandan 
 Ukrainian 
 Uruguayan 
 Uzbek 
 Venezuelan 
 Vietnamese 
 Western Saharan 
 Yemeni 
 Zambian 
 Zimbabwean 
 Ethnic 
 Ainu 
 Arab 
 Indonesian 
 Aromanian 
 Assyrian 
 Balochi 
 Berber 
 Cajun 
 Chinese 
 American 
 Canadian 
 Chifa 
 Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Crimean Tatar 
 Greek American 
 Hazaragi 
 Indian 
 Anglo-Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Indigenous American 
 Inuit 
 Italian American 
 Kurdish 
 Livonian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Malay 
 Ossetian 
 Parsi 
 Pashtun 
 Peranakan 
 Romani 
 Sámi 
 Soul food 
 Sylheti 
 Transylvanian Saxon 
 Yup'ik 
 Religious 
 Buddhist 
 Christian 
 Goan Catholic 
 Mangalorean Catholic 
 Mennonite 
 Hindu 
 Islamic 
 Chinese 
 Ital 
 Jain 
 Jewish 
 American 
 Ashkenazi 
 Bukharan 
 Ethiopian 
 Mizrahi 
 Sephardic 
 Syrian 
 Ritual slaughter 
 Sikh 
 Historical 
 Ancient Egyptian 
 Ancient Greek 
 Ancient Israelite 
 Ancient Roman 
 Antebellum America 
 Aztec 
 Byzantine 
 Early modern European 
 Historical Chinese 
 Historical Indian subcontinent 
 Historical North Indian and Pakistani 
 History of agriculture 
 History of alcoholic drinks 
 History of bread 
 History of seafood 
 History of vegetarianism 
 Historical Argentine 
 Historical Japanese 
 Inca 
 Mayan 
 Muisca 
 Mughal 
 Medieval 
 Ottoman 
 Peasant 
 Soviet 
 Thirteen Colonies 
 Styles 
 Classique 
 Fast food 
 Fusion 
 New American 
 Eurasian 
 Haute 
 Molecular gastronomy 
 Note by Note 
 Nouvelle 
 Lists 
 List of cuisines 
 List of historical cuisines 
 Lists of prepared foods 
 Related 
 Cookbook 
 Cooking 
 Culinary arts 
 Drink 
 Food 
 history 
 Diet 
 Meal preparation 
 
   Food portal 
   Drink portal 
   Category 
   Commons 
   Cookbook 
   WikiProject 
   Outline 
 
 Authority control : National libraries  
 Israel 
 United States 
 
  
NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw2407
Cached time: 20230311031503
Cache expiry: 1814400
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc, no‐toc‐conversion]
CPU time usage: 0.972 seconds
Real time usage: 1.185 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 20675/1000000
Post‐expand include size: 225714/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 18667/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 30/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 141512/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.474/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 8274284/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/400
 
 
Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  904.355      1 -total
 30.84%  278.881      1 Template:Reflist
 20.08%  181.585     26 Template:Cite_web
 19.14%  173.111      4 Template:Navbox
 18.35%  165.939      1 Template:Singapore_topics
 18.14%  164.011      1 Template:Country_topics
 15.13%  136.793      1 Template:Asian_topic
  9.44%   85.328     52 Template:Iso2country
  5.70%   51.590      1 Template:Short_description
  5.56%   50.287     46 Template:Zh
 
  Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:idhash:2024434-0!canonical and timestamp 20230311031502 and revision id 1143980959. Rendering was triggered because: page-view
  
 esi <esi:include src="/esitest-fa8a495983347898/content" />  
 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Singaporean_cuisine&oldid=1143980959 " 
 Categories :  Singaporean cuisine Southeast Asian cuisine Hidden categories:  CS1: Julian–Gregorian uncertainty Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from January 2019 EngvarB from January 2019 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2017 Articles needing additional references from December 2020 All articles needing additional references Articles containing Chinese-language text Articles with unsourced statements from June 2019 Articles containing simplified Chinese-language text Articles containing traditional Chinese-language text Region topic template using suffix Articles with J9U identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  This page was last edited on 11 March 2023, at 03:04  (UTC) . 
 Text is available under the  Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0 ;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the  Terms of Use  and  Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the  Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. 
 
 
 Privacy policy 
 About Wikipedia 
 Disclaimers 
 Contact Wikipedia 
 Mobile view 
 Developers 
 Statistics 
 Cookie statement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
