
 
 
 Jump to content 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle sidebar 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Create account Log in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Personal tools 
 
 
 
 
   Create account   Log in 
 
 
 
 
		Pages for logged out editors  learn more 
 
 
 Contributions Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Navigation 
 
 
 Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate 
 
 
 
 
 Contribute 
 
 
 Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file 
 
 
 
 
 Tools 
 
 
 What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item 
 
 
 
 
 Print/export 
 
 
 Download as PDF Printable version 
 
 
 
 
 In other projects 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons 
 
 
 
 
 Languages 
 
 On this Wikipedia the language links are at the top of the page across from the article title.  Go to top . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CentralNotice  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Contents 
 move to sidebar 
 hide 
 
 
 
 
 (Top) 
 
 
 
 
 
 1 Origins 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 Native American influence 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 African influence 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4 Cookbooks 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5 Cultural relevance 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6 Health concerns 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 7 Dishes and ingredients 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8 See also 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 9 References 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 10 Further reading 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 11 External links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
						Toggle the table of contents
					 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle the table of contents 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Soul food 
 
 
 
 
 19 languages 
 
 
 
 Čeština Dansk Deutsch Español فارسی Français 한국어 Italiano עברית Jawa ქართული Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Simple English Suomi Svenska 中文 
 Edit links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Article Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 English 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 More 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
 
 
 For other uses, see  Soul Food . 
 See also:  Cuisine of the Southern United States 
 Not to be confused with  Seoul cuisine . 
 This article  needs additional citations for  verification .  Please help  improve this article  by  adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources:   "Soul food"  –  news   ·   newspapers   ·   books   ·   scholar   ·   JSTOR   ( August 2022 )  ( Learn how and when to remove this template message ) 
 Type of American cuisine made by African-Americans 
 Part of a series on American cuisine 
 Regional cuisines 
 Northeastern 
 
 New England 
 New Jersey 
 New York City 
 Philadelphia 
 Midwestern 
 
 Chicago 
 Michigan 
 North Dakota 
 Omaha 
 St. Louis 
 Wisconsin 
 Mid-Atlantic 
 
 Baltimore 
 Pittsburgh 
 Southern  ( list ) 
 
 Atlanta 
 Cajun 
 Floribbean 
 Kentucky 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Lowcountry 
 Houston 
 New Orleans 
 Texas 
 Tex-Mex 
 Western 
 
 California 
 California fusion 
 Los Angeles 
 Pacific Northwest 
 Rocky Mountain 
 Southwestern 
 
 New Mexican 
 Other 
 
 Hawaiian 
 Military rations 
 Puerto Rican 
 Roadkill 
 Tailgate party 
 
 History 
 Thirteen Colonies 
 Antebellum America 
 Chuckwagon 
 Culinary Revolution 
 
 Ingredients and foods 
 List of American foods 
 Apple 
 Beef 
 Blueberry 
 Chocolate 
 Collard greens 
 Corn 
 Okra 
 Pecan 
 Potato 
 Pumpkin 
 Sunflower seed 
 Tomato 
 Turkey 
 Vanilla 
 
 Styles 
 Barbecue in the United States 
 Kansas City 
 Memphis 
 North Carolina 
 Santa Maria 
 St. Louis 
 Texas 
 Fast food 
 Fusion 
 New American 
 Pizza in the United States 
 
 Ethnic and cultural 
 American Chinese 
 Filipino-American cuisine 
 Greek-American 
 Indian 
 Italian-American 
 Japanese 
 Jewish 
 Mexican-American 
 Native American 
 Pennsylvania Dutch 
 Soul food 
 Tlingit 
 
 Holidays and festivals 
 Fourth of July 
 Christmas 
 Thanksgiving 
 
   United States portal 
   Food portal v t e 
 Part of  a series  on African Americans 
 History 
Periods 
 Timeline 
 Atlantic slave trade 
 Abolitionism in the United States 
 Slavery in the colonial history of the United States 
 Revolutionary War 
 Antebellum period 
 Slavery  and  military history  during the Civil War 
 Reconstruction era 
 Politicians 
 Juneteenth 
 Civil rights movement (1865–1896) 
 Jim Crow era (1896–1954) 
 Civil rights movement (1954–1968) 
 Black power movement 
 Post–civil rights era 
 
Aspects 
 Agriculture history 
 Black Belt in the American South 
 Business history 
 Military history 
 Treatment of the enslaved 
 
Migrations 
 Great Migration 
 Second Great Migration 
 New Great Migration 
 
 
 Culture 
Lifeways 
 
 Dance 
 Family structure 
 Film 
 Folktales 
 Music 
 Musical theater 
 Names 
 Neighborhoods 
 Newspapers 
 Soul food 
 
 
Schools 
 
 Black schools 
 Historically black colleges and universities 
 Fraternities 
 Stepping 
 
 
Academic study 
 
 Studies 
 Art 
 Literature 
 
 
Celebrations 
 
 Martin Luther King Jr. Day 
 Black History Month 
 Juneteenth 
 Kwanzaa 
 
 
Economic class 
 
 African-American businesses 
 Middle class 
 Upper class 
 Billionaires 
 
 
Symbols and ideas 
 
 African-American beauty 
 Black is beautiful 
 Black pride 
 African-American hair 
 Good hair 
 " Lift Every Voice and Sing " 
 Self-determination 
 
 
 
 Religion 
Institutions 
 
 Black church 
 
 
Theologies 
 
 Black theology 
 Womanist theology 
 
 
Minorities and sects 
 
 Black Hebrew Israelites 
 African-American Muslims 
 
 
 
 Politics 
Organizations 
 
 Congressional Black Caucus 
 Joint Center for Political and Economic Studies 
 National Black Caucus of State Legislators 
 National Conference of Black Mayors 
 
 
Ideologies 
 
 Afrocentrism 
 Anarchism 
 Back-to-Africa movement 
 Black power 
 Capitalism 
 Conservatism 
 Garveyism 
 Leftism 
 Nationalism 
 Pan-Africanism 
 Populism 
 Socialism 
 
 
 
 Civic / economic groups 
Organizations 
 
 Association for the Study of African American Life and History (ASALH) 
 Black conductors 
 National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP) 
 National Black Chamber of Commerce (NBCC) 
 National Council of Negro Women (NCNW) 
 National Pan-Hellenic Council (NPHC) 
 National Urban League (NUL) 
 TransAfrica Forum 
 United Negro College Fund (UNCF) 
 
 
 
 Sports 
 Negro league baseball 
 
Athletic associations and conferences 
 Central (CIAA) 
 Gulf Coast (GCAC) 
 Mid-Eastern (MEAC) 
 Southern (SIAC) 
 Southwestern (SWAC) 
 
 
 Sub-communities 
Multiethnic 
 
 African-American Jews 
 Afro-Puerto Ricans 
 Black Indians 
 Black Seminoles 
 Mascogos 
 Blaxicans 
 Brass Ankles 
 Creoles of color 
 Dominickers 
 Melungeon 
 Carmel Indians 
 Redbone 
 
 
Specific ancestries 
 
 Americo-Liberians 
 Creek Freedmen 
 Gullah 
 Merikins 
 Nova Scotians 
 Samaná Americans 
 Sierra Leone Creole 
 
 
Sexual orientation 
 
 LGBT community 
 
 
 
 Dialects and languages 
English dialects 
 
 African-American English 
 African-American Vernacular English 
 Liberian English 
 Samaná English 
 Tutnese 
 
 
Languages and other dialects 
 
 Gullah 
 Afro-Seminole Creole 
 Negro Dutch 
 
 
 
 Population 
U.S. states 
 
 Alabama 
 Arkansas 
 California 
 Florida 
 Georgia 
 Kansas 
 Louisiana 
 Maryland 
 Mississippi 
 North Carolina 
 Oklahoma 
 Oregon 
 South Carolina 
 Tennessee 
 Texas 
 Utah 
 Virginia 
 
 
U.S. cities 
 
 Black mecca 
 List of neighborhoods 
 Atlanta 
 Baltimore 
 Boston 
 Chicago 
 Dallas-Fort Worth 
 Davenport 
 Detroit 
 Houston 
 Jacksonville 
 Kentucky 
 Los Angeles 
 New York City 
 Omaha 
 Philadelphia 
 San Antonio 
 San Francisco 
 
 
 Historic places 
 
 District of Columbia 
 Florida 
 Georgia 
 Mississippi 
 Missouri 
 Omaha, Nebraska 
 North Carolina 
 South Carolina 
 Texas 
 West Virginia 
 
 
Population count 
 
 U.S. states and territories 
 U.S. metropolitan areas 
 U.S. cities 
 U.S. communities 
 Places by plurality of population 
 
 
 Diaspora 
 
 Africa 
 France 
 Ghana 
 Israel 
 Liberia 
 Nova Scotia 
 Sierra Leone 
 
 
 
 Prejudice 
Racism 
 
 Black genocide 
 Race and ethnicity in the United States Census 
 Racism against Black Americans 
 Reparations for slavery 
 School segregation in the United States 
 
 
 Stereotypes  and  media depictions 
 
 Blackface 
 Criminal stereotypes 
 Hollywood 
 Magical Negro 
 Minstrel show 
 
 
 
   United States portal 
 Category 
 Index v t e 
   Soul food sign in New Orleans 
   Fried chicken  with  macaroni and cheese ,  collard greens ,  fried okra , and  cornbread 
   Fatback 
   Sweet potato pie 
   Red velvet cake 
   Chitterlings 
 Soul food  is an  ethnic cuisine  traditionally prepared and eaten by  African Americans , originating in the  Southern United States . [1]  Soul food originated with the foods that were given to enslaved black people by their white owners on Southern plantations during the  Antebellum period ; however, it was strongly influenced by the traditional practices of  West Africans  and Southeastern  Native Americans  from its inception. [2]  Due to the historical presence of African Americans in the region, soul food is closely associated with the  cuisine of the American South  although today it has become an easily identifiable and celebrated aspect of  mainstream American food culture . [3] 
 The expression "soul food" originated in the mid-1960s, when " soul " was a common word used to describe  African-American culture . [4] 
 
 
 Origins [ edit ] 
 Soul food originated in the  Deep South , mainly  Alabama ,  Mississippi  and  Georgia , where there was a large population of enslaved peoples. [5] 
 The term  soul food  became popular in the 1960s and 1970s in the midst of the  Black Power movement . [6]  One of the earliest written uses of the term is found in  The Autobiography of Malcolm X ,  which was published in 1965. [7]  LeRoi Jones ( Amiri Baraka ) published an article entitled "Soul Food" and was one of the key proponents for establishing the food as a part of the black American identity. [6]  Those who had participated in the  Great Migration  found within soul food a reminder of the home and family they had left behind after moving to unfamiliar northern cities. Soul food restaurants were black-owned businesses that served as neighborhood meeting places where people socialized and ate together. [8] 
 Soul food recipes have pre-slavery influences, as  West African  and  European foodways  were adapted to the environment of the region. [3]  Many of the foods integral to the cuisine originate from the limited rations given to enslaved people by their planters and masters. Enslaved people were typically given a  peck  of cornmeal and 3-4 pounds of pork per week, and from those rations come soul food staples such as  cornbread ,  fried catfish ,  barbecued   ribs ,  chitterlings , and neckbones. [9]  It has been noted that enslaved Africans were the primary consumers of cooked greens ( collards ,  beets ,  dandelion ,  kale , and  purslane ) and sweet potatoes for a portion of US history. [10] 
 Most enslaved people needed to consume a high-calorie diet, to replenish the calories spent working long days in the fields or performing other physically arduous tasks. This led to time-honored soul food traditions like frying foods, breading meats and fishes with cornmeal, and mixing meats with vegetables (e.g. putting pork in collard greens). [11]  Eventually, this slave-invented style of cooking was adopted into larger Southern culture, as slave owners gave special privileges to slaves with cooking skills.
 Impoverished whites and blacks in the South cooked many of the same dishes stemming from the soul tradition, but styles of preparation sometimes varied. Certain techniques popular in soul and Southern cuisines (i.e., frying meat and using all parts of the animal for consumption) are shared with ancient cultures all over the world, including China, Egypt, and Rome. [12] 
 Introduction of soul food to northern cities such as Washington D.C. also came from private chefs in the White House. [13]  Many American presidents have desired French cooking, and have sought after black Creole chefs. The 23rd President of the United States,  Benjamin Harrison , and former First Lady Caroline Harrison, took this same route when they terminated their French cooking staff for a black woman by the name of Dolly Johnson. [14] 
 One famous relationship includes the bond formed between President  Lyndon B. Johnson  and  Zephyr Wright . Wright became a great influence to Johnson in fighting for civil rights as he saw her treatment and segregation as they would travel throughout the south. Johnson even had Wright present at the signing of several civil rights laws. [13]  Lizzie McDuffie, a former maid and cook to Franklin Delano Roosevelt, assisted her boss during the 1936 election simply by making the president more relatable to black voters. With public awareness of black Americans preparing food in the presidential kitchen, this in turn helped to sway minority votes for hopeful presidential candidates such as John F. Kennedy. [15] 
 
 Native American influence [ edit ] 
 Southeastern  Native American  culture is an important element of  Southern cuisine . From their cultures came one of the main staples of the Southern diet:  corn  (maize), either ground into meal or limed with an alkaline salt to make  hominy , in a Native American process known as  nixtamalization . [16]  Corn was used to make all kinds of dishes, from the familiar  cornbread  and  grits , to  liquors  such as  moonshine  and  whiskey  (which are still important to the Southern economy [17] ).
 Many  fruits  are available in this region:  blackberries ,  muscadines ,  raspberries , and many other wild berries were part of Southern Native Americans' diets, as well.
 
 To a far greater degree than anyone realizes, several of the most important food dishes that the Native Americans of the southeastern U.S.A live on today is the "soul food" eaten by both Black and White Southerners. Hominy, for example, is still eaten: Sofkee lives on as grits; cornbread [is] used by Southern cooks; Indian fritters -- variously known as "hoe cake" or "Johnny cake"; Indian boiled cornbread is present in Southern cuisine as "corn meal dumplings" and "hush puppies"; Southerners cook their beans and field peas by boiling them, as did the Native tribes; and, like the Native Americans, Southerners cured their meats and smoked it over hickory coals... —  Charles Hudson,  The Southeastern Indians [18] African, European, and Native Americans of the American South supplemented their diets with meats derived from the hunting of native game. [19]  What meats people ate depended on seasonal availability and geographical region. Common game included  opossums ,  rabbits , and  squirrels .  Livestock , adopted from Europeans, in the form of  cattle  and  hogs , were kept.
 When game or livestock was killed, the entire animal was used. Aside from the meat, it was common for them to eat organ meats such as  brains ,  livers , and  intestines . This tradition remains today in hallmark dishes like  chitterlings  (commonly called  chit'lins ), which are small  intestines  of  hogs ;  livermush  (a common dish in the Carolinas made from hog liver); and pork brains and eggs. The fat of the animals, particularly hogs, was rendered and used for cooking and frying. Many of the early European settlers in the South learned Native American cooking methods, and so  cultural diffusion  was set in motion for the Southern dish.
 
 African influence [ edit ] 
   Ham hock  and  black-eyed peas 
 Scholars have noted the substantial African influence found in soul food recipes, especially from the  West  and  Central  regions of  Africa . This influence can be seen through the  heat level  of many soul food dishes, as well as many ingredients found within them. [20]  Peppers used to add spice to food included  malagueta pepper , as well as peppers native to the western hemisphere such as  red (cayenne) peppers . [10]  Several foods that are essential in southern cuisine and soul food were domesticated or consumed in the  African savanna  and the tropical regions of  West  and  Central Africa . These include  pigeon peas ,  black-eyed peas ,  okra , and  sorghum . [20] 
 It has also been noted that a species of  rice  was domesticated in Africa, thus many Africans who were brought to the Americas kept their knowledge for rice cooking. [21]  Rice is a staple side dish in the  Lowcountry  region and in Southern Louisiana. Rice is the center of dishes such as  jambalaya  and  red beans and rice  which are popular in  Southern Louisiana .
 There are many documented parallels between the foodways of West Africans and soul food recipes. [22]  The consumption of sweet potatoes in the US is reminiscent of the consumption of yams in West Africa. The frequent consumption of cornbread by African-Americans is analogous to West Africans' use of  fufu  to soak up stews. [22] 
 West Africans also cooked meat over open pits, and thus it is possible that enslaved Africans came to the New World with knowledge of this cooking technique (it is also possible they learned it from Native Americans, since Native Americans barbecued as a cooking technique). [10] [23] 
 Researchers state that many tribes in Africa utilized a vegetarian/plant based diet because of its simplicity. This included the way food was prepared as well as served. It was not uncommon to see food served out of an empty gourd. Many techniques to change the overall flavor of staple food items such as nuts, seeds, and rice contributed to added dimensions of evolving flavors. These techniques included roasting, frying with palm oil, baking in ashes, and steaming in leaves such as  banana  leaf. [24] 
 
 Cookbooks [ edit ] 
 This section  needs additional citations for  verification .  Please help  improve this article  by  adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources:   "Soul food"  –  news   ·   newspapers   ·   books   ·   scholar   ·   JSTOR   ( July 2022 )  ( Learn how and when to remove this template message ) 
   Skillet  cornbread 
 Because it was illegal in many states for slaves to learn to read or write, soul food  recipes  and cooking techniques tended to be passed along orally, until after  emancipation . [25] 
 The first soul food  cookbook  is attributed to  Abby Fisher , entitled  What Mrs. Fisher Knows About Old Southern Cooking  and published in 1881.  Good Things to Eat  was published in 1911; the author, Rufus Estes, was a former slave who worked for the  Pullman   railway  car service. Many other cookbooks were written by black Americans during that time, but as they were not widely distributed, most are now lost. [ citation needed ] 
 Since the mid-20th century, many cookbooks highlighting soul food and African-American foodways have been compiled and published. One notable soul food chef is celebrated traditional Southern chef and author  Edna Lewis , [26]  who released a series of books between 1972 and 2003, including  A Taste of Country Cooking  in which she weaves stories of her childhood in  Freetown, Virginia  into her recipes for "real Southern food". [27] 
 Another early and influential soul food cookbook is  Vertamae Grosvenor 's  Vibration Cooking, or the Travel Notes of a Geechee Girl , originally published in 1970, focused on  South Carolina   Lowcountry / Geechee / Gullah  cooking. Its focus on spontaneity in the kitchen—cooking by "vibration" rather than precisely measuring ingredients, as well as " making do " with ingredients on hand—captured the essence of traditional African-American cooking techniques. The simple, healthful, basic ingredients of lowcountry cuisine, like  shrimp ,  oysters ,  crab , fresh produce, rice and  sweet potatoes , made it a bestseller. [ citation needed ] 
 Usher boards and Women's Day committees of various religious congregations large and small, and even public service and social welfare organizations such as the  National Council of Negro Women  (NCNW) have produced cookbooks to fund their operations and charitable enterprises. [6]  The NCNW produced its first cookbook,  The Historical Cookbook of the American Negro , in 1958, and revived the practice in 1993, producing a popular series of cookbooks featuring recipes by famous black Americans, among them:  The Black Family Reunion Cookbook   (1991),  Celebrating Our Mothers' Kitchens: Treasured Memories and Tested Recipes  (1994), and  Mother Africa's Table: A Chronicle of Celebration  (1998).  The NCNW also recently reissued  The Historical Cookbook .
 
 Cultural relevance [ edit ] 
   Soul food dinner 
   Soul food restaurant in Texas 
 Soul food originated in the southern region of the US and is consumed by African-Americans across the nation. Traditional soul food cooking is seen as one of the ways enslaved Africans passed their traditions to their descendants once they were brought to the US, and is a cultural creation stemming from slavery and Native American and European influences. [22] [10] 
 Soul food recipes are popular in the South due to the accessibility and affordability of the ingredients. [22] [9] 
 Scholars have noted that while white Americans provided the material supplies for soul food dishes, the cooking techniques found in many of the dishes have been visibly influenced by the enslaved Africans themselves. [10]  Dishes derived by slaves consisted of many vegetables and grains because slave owners felt more meat would cause the slave to become lethargic with less energy to tend to the crops.
 The bountiful vegetables that were found in Africa, were substituted in dishes down south with new leafy greens consisting of dandelion, turnip, and beet greens. Pork, more specifically hog, was introduced into several dishes in the form of cracklins from the skin, pig's feet, chitterlings, and lard used to increase the fat intake into vegetarian dishes. Spices such as thyme, and bay leaf blended with onion and garlic gave dishes their own characteristics. [24] 
 Figures such as LeRoi Jones (Amiri Baraka),  Elijah Muhammad , and  Dick Gregory  played notable roles in shaping the conversation around soul food. [6] [22]  Muhammad and Gregory opposed soul food because they felt it was unhealthy food and was slowly killing African-Americans. [7]  They saw soul food as a remnant of oppression and felt it should be left behind. Many African-Americans were offended by the Nation of Islam's rejection of pork as it is a staple ingredient used to flavor many dishes. [22] 
 Stokely Carmichael  also spoke out against soul food, claiming that it was not true African food due to its colonial and European influence. [22]  Despite this, many voices in the Black Power Movement saw soul food as something African-Americans should take pride in, and used it to distinguish African-Americans from white Americans. [6]  Proponents of soul food embraced the concept of it, and used it as a counterclaim to the argument that African-Americans had no culture or cuisine. [10] [22] 
 The magazine  Ebony Jr!  was important in transmitting the cultural relevance of soul food dishes to middle-class African-American children who typically ate a more standard American diet. [28] 
 Soul food is frequently found at religious rituals and social events such as funerals, fellowship, Thanksgiving, and Christmas in the black community. [22] [26] [20] 
 Soul food spread throughout the United States when African Americans from the South moved to major cities across the country such as  Chicago  and  New York City . They brought with them the foods and traditions of the Southern United States, where they were enslaved. [29] 
 Soul food is culturally similar to  Romani cuisine  in Europe. [30] 
 
 Health concerns [ edit ] 
 Further information:  Soul food health trends 
   Hushpuppies 
 Soul food prepared traditionally and consumed in large amounts can be detrimental to one's health. Opponents to soul food have been vocal about health concerns surrounding the culinary traditions since the name was coined in the mid-20th century. [31] 
 Soul food has been criticized for its high  starch ,  fat ,  sodium ,  cholesterol , and  caloric content , as well as the inexpensive and often low-quality nature of the ingredients such as  salted pork  and  cornmeal . In light of this, soul food has been implicated by some in the disproportionately high rates of high blood pressure ( hypertension ),  type 2 diabetes , clogged arteries ( atherosclerosis ),  stroke , and  heart attack  suffered by African-Americans. [32] [33]  Figures who led discussions surrounding the negative impacts of soul food include Dr.  Alvenia Fulton ,  Dick Gregory , and  Elijah Muhammad . [6] [22] 
 On the other hand, critics and traditionalists have argued that attempts to make soul food healthier also make it less tasty, as well as less culturally/ethnically authentic. [34] 
 There is also often a foundational difference in how health is perceived; soul food may differ from normal understandings in American culture.  [35] 
 Fueled by federal subsidies, the agricultural system in the United States became industrialized as the nutritional value of most processed foods, and not just those implicated in a traditional perception of soul food, have degraded. [36]  This urges a consideration of how concepts of racial authenticity evolve alongside changes in the structures that make some foods more available and accessible than others. [37] [38] 
 An important aspect of the preparation of soul food was the reuse of cooking  lard . Because many cooks could not afford to buy new  shortening  to replace what they used, they would pour the liquefied cooking grease into a container. After cooling completely, the grease re-solidified and could be used again the next time the cook required lard. [39] 
 With changing fashions and perceptions of "healthy" eating, some cooks may use preparation methods that differ from those of cooks who came before them: using liquid oil like  vegetable oil  or  canola oil  for frying and cooking, and using smoked  turkey  instead of  pork , for example. Changes in hog farming techniques have also resulted in drastically leaner pork, in the 21st and late 20th centuries. Some cooks have even adapted recipes to include vegetarian alternatives to traditional ingredients, including  tofu  and  soy -based analogues. [40] 
 Several of the ingredients included in soul food recipes have pronounced health benefits. Collard and other greens are rich sources of several  vitamins  (including  vitamin A ,  B 6 ,  folic acid  or vitamin B 9 ,  vitamin K , and  C ), minerals ( manganese ,  iron , and  calcium ),  fiber , and small amounts of  omega-3 fatty acids . They also contain a number of  phytonutrients , which are thought to play a role in the prevention of  ovarian  and  breast cancers . [41] 
 The traditional preparation of soul food vegetables often consists of high temperatures or slow cooking methods, which can lead the water-soluble vitamins (e.g., Vitamin C and the B complex vitamins) to be destroyed or leached out into the water in which the greens cooked. This water is often consumed and is known as  pot liquor . [26]  Because it contains micronutrients from the greens cooked in it, pot liquor contributes to the nutritional value of a meal when consumed. [42] 
 Peas  and  legumes  are inexpensive sources of  protein , and they also contain important vitamins, minerals, and fiber. [43] 
 
 Dishes and ingredients [ edit ] 
 Main article:  List of soul foods and dishes 
 See also [ edit ] 
 
 United States portal Food portal Africa portal Drink portal 
 American cuisine 
 High on the Hog: How African American Cuisine Transformed America 
 Comfort food 
 List of American foods 
 Cuisine of the Southern United States 
 Native American cuisine 
 Soul Food Junkies , a documentary 
 Louisiana Creole cuisine 
 Cajun cuisine 
 African cuisine 
 Cuisine of New Orleans 
 Indigenous cuisine of the Americas 
 Black veganism 
 West African cuisine 
 Ethnic cuisine 
 List of cuisines 
 Texan cuisine 
 Slave health on plantations in the United States#Slave diet 
 Romani cuisine 
 Barbecue 
 Barbecue in North Carolina 
 Barbecue in the United States 
 Memphis-style barbecue 
 List of American desserts 
 List of foods of the Southern United States 
 List of American foods 
 Cuisine of Houston 
 Cuisine of Atlanta 
 Cuisine of Kentucky 
 Thanksgiving dinner 
 Cuisine of Antebellum America 
 Mexican-American cuisine 
 Cuisine of the Pennsylvania Dutch 
 Italian-American cuisine 
 Greek-American cuisine 
 American Jewish cuisine 
 Filipino-American cuisine 
 American Chinese cuisine 
 Kool-Aid 
 References [ edit ] 
 
 
 ^   " "Soul Food" a brief history" .  African American Registry . Retrieved  2020-02-12 . 
 
 ^   Poe, Tracy N. (1999). "The Origins of Soul Food in Black Urban Identity: Chicago, 1915-1947".  American Studies International .  37  (1): 4–33.  JSTOR   41279638 . 
 
 ^  a   b   "An Illustrated History of Soul Food" . 
 
 ^   Ferguson, Sheila (1993).  Soul Food Classic Cuisine from the Deep South . Grove Press. pp. 57–60.  ISBN   9781493013418 . 
 
 ^   "The Beginner's Guide to the History of Soul Food | Hemp&fork" . 10 February 2022. 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   e   f   WITT, DORIS (1999). "Soul Food and America".  Black Hunger: Soul Food and America  (NED - New ed.). University of Minnesota Press.  ISBN   9780816645510 .  JSTOR   10.5749/j.cttttkdq . 
 
 ^  a   b   Rouse, Carolyn Moxley (2004).  Engaged Surrender: African American Women and Islam . Berkeley and Los Angeles, CA, London, England: University of California Press. p. 106.  ISBN   978-0-520-23794-0 . 
 
 ^   Poe, Tracy N. (1999). "The Origins of Soul Food in Black Urban Identity: Chicago, 1915-1947".  American Studies International . XXXVII No. 1 (February): 4–17. 
 
 ^  a   b   Covey, Herbert.  What the Slaves Ate: Recollections of African American Foods and Foodways from the Slave Narratives . pp. 105–110. 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   e   f   Whit, William C.; Hall, Robert L. (2007).  Bower, Anne L. (ed.).  African American foodways : explorations of history and culture . University of Illinois Press. pp.  34, 48 .  ISBN   9780252031854 .  OCLC   76961285 . 
 
 ^   Bower, Anne. "African American Foodways: Explorations of History and Culture": 52.   {{ cite journal }} :  Cite journal requires  |journal=  ( help ) 
 
 ^   "Fried Dough History" . Archived from  the original  on October 12, 2008. 
 
 ^  a   b   "The African-Americans in the White House kitchen" .  BostonGlobe.com . Retrieved  2018-04-12 . 
 
 ^   Miller, Adrian (3 June 2014).  "African American cooks in the White House: Hiding in plain sight" .  Washington Post . 
 
 ^   Miller, Adrian (3 June 2013).  "African American cooks in the White House: Hiding in Plain Sight" .  Washington Post . 
 
 ^   Dragonwagon, Crescent (2007).  The Cornbread Gospels . Workman Publishing.  ISBN   978-0-7611-1916-6 . 
 
 ^   X, Malcolm, and Alex Haley. The Autobiography of Malcolm X. Grove Press, 1966 
 
 ^   Hudson, Charles (1976). "A Conquered People".  The Southeastern Indians . The University of Tennessee Press. pp. 498–99.  ISBN   978-0-87049-248-8 . 
 
 ^   Glitner, Scott (2006).  Glave, Dianne D.; Stoll, Mark (eds.).  "To love the wind and the rain" : African Americans and environmental history . Pittsburgh, PA: University of Pittsburgh Press. pp. 21–36.  ISBN   9780822972907 .  OCLC   878132911 . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   Hall, Robert L. (2012).  Chambers, Douglas B.; Watson, Kenneth (eds.).  The Past Is Not Dead . Jackson, Mississippi: University Press of Mississippi. pp. 292, 294, 297, 305.  ISBN   9781617033056 . 
 
 ^   Ann, Carney, Judith (2009-06-30).  Black rice : the African origins of rice cultivation in the Americas . Cambridge, Massachusetts.  ISBN   9780674029217 .  OCLC   657619002 . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   e   f   g   h   i   j   Douglass, Opie, Frederick (2008-10-08).  Hog & hominy : soul food from Africa to America . New York.  ISBN   9780231517973 .  OCLC   648458580 . 
 
 ^   "Barbecue is more American than you think… it is a Native American culinary art" .  Sofrito for Your Soul . Retrieved  2019-06-26 . 
 
 ^  a   b   Arrington, Kathye Edwina (3 February 2013). "History of "Soul Food" ".  ProQuest   1283537628 .   {{ cite journal }} :  Cite journal requires  |journal=  ( help ) 
 
 ^   Opie, F.D. (2008).  Hog and Hominy: Soul Food from Africa to America . Columbia University Press. p. 35.  ISBN   9780231146395 . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   Twitty, Michael (2017-08-01).  The cooking gene : a journey through African American culinary history in the Old South  (First ed.). New York, NY.  ISBN   9780062379290 .  OCLC   971130586 . 
 
 ^   "Biography: Edna Lewis" .  Biography: Edna Lewis . Retrieved  2022-07-12 . 
 
 ^   Henderson, Laretta (Winter 2007). " "Ebony Jr!" and "Soul Food": The Construction of Middle-Class African American Identity through the Use of Traditional Southern Foodways".  Society for the Study of the Multi-Ethnic Literature of the United States (MELUS) .  32  (4): 81–97.  JSTOR   30029833 . 
 
 ^   ReadWorks.  "The Roots of Southern Food"   (PDF)  – via troup.org. 
 
 ^   "African Americans and the Gypsies: A cultural relationship formed through hardships" . 27 September 2013. 
 
 ^   "Soul food | Description, History, & Ingredients | Britannica" . 
 
 ^   Singh, Maanvi S. (2 October 2018).  "Southern Diet Blamed For High Rates Of Hypertension Among Black Americans" .  NPR . Retrieved  7 August  2022 . 
 
 ^   Belle, Genesis (Spring 2009).  "Can the African-American Diet be Made Healthier Without Giving up Culture — York College / CUNY" .  www.york.cuny.edu .  5  (2) . Retrieved  7 August  2022 . 
 
 ^   Jonsson, Patrick (February 6, 2006).  "Backstory: Southern discomfort food" .  The Christian Science Monitor .  The Christian Science Publishing Society . Retrieved  2006-11-09 . 
 
 ^   Joshanloo, Mohsen; Van De Vliert, Evert; Jose, Paul E. (2021).  "Four Fundamental Distinctions in Conceptions of Wellbeing Across Cultures" .  The Palgrave Handbook of Positive Education . pp. 675–703.  doi : 10.1007/978-3-030-64537-3_26 .  ISBN   978-3-030-64536-6 .  S2CID   237932558 . 
 
 ^   Belasco, Warren (2008).  Food: The Key Concepts . Berg.  ISBN   978-1845206734 . 
 
 ^   Julier, Alice (2008).  The Political Economy of Obesity: The Fat Pay All . Food and Culture: A Reader: Routledge. pp. 482–499.  ISBN   978-0415977777 . 
 
 ^   Guthman, Julie (2011).  Weighing In: Obesity, Food Justice, and the Limits of Capitalism . University California Press.  ISBN   978-0520266254 . 
 
 ^   https://health.usnews.com/health-news/blogs/eat-run/articles/2017-01-26/healthy-soul-food-ideas-and-recipes 
 
 ^   Shelf, Angela.  "African Vegetarian Recipes : The Ethnic Vegetarian" . Enotalone.com. Archived from  the original  on February 22, 2009 . Retrieved  2009-06-20 . 
 
 ^   "Collard greens" . WHFoods. 2006-05-04 . Retrieved  2009-06-20 . 
 
 ^   Aubrey, Allison (7 August 2013).  "Pot Liquor: A Southern Tip To Save Nutritious Broth From Greens" .  NPR . Retrieved  3 January  2022 . 
 
 ^   "Beans and pulses in your diet" . 27 April 2018. 
 
 
 Further reading [ edit ] 
 Huges, Marvalene H.  Soul, Black Women, and Food. Ed. Carole Counihan and Penny van Esterik. New York: Routledge, 1997. 
 Bowser, Pearl and Jean Eckstein, A Pinch of Soul, Avon, New York, 1970 
 Counihan, Carol and Penny Van Esterik editors, Food and Culture, A Reader, Routledge, New York, 1997 
 Harris, Jessica, The Welcome Table – African American Heritage Cooking, Simon and Schuster, New York, 1996 
 Mitchell, Patricia (1998).  Plantation Row slave cabin cooking: the roots of soul food . Patricia B. Mitchell foodways publications. Chatham, VA: P.B. Mitchell.  ISBN   978-0925117892 . 
 Root, Waverley and Richard de Rochemont, Eating in America, A History, William Morrow, New York, 1976 
 Glenn, Gwendolyn, "American Visions", Southern Secrets From Edna Lewis, February–March, 1997 
 Puckett, Susan, "Restaurant and Institutions", Soul Food Revival, February 1, 1997 
 External links [ edit ] 
 
 
 
 Look up  soul food  in Wiktionary, the free dictionary. 
 
 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons has media related to  Soul food . 
 
 Soul Food  at  Curlie 
 What Mrs. Fisher Knows about Old Southern Cooking 
 v t e African Americans History 
 Timeline 
 Abolitionism 
 African American founding fathers 
 Afrocentrism 
 American Civil War 
 Atlantic slave trade 
 Black genocide 
 Black Lives Matter 
 Brown v. Board of Education 
 Children of the plantation 
 Civil Rights Acts
 1964 
 Voting Rights Act of 1965 
 1968 
 Civil rights movement 1865–1896 
 Civil right movement 1896–1954 
 Civil rights movement 1954–1968 
 Montgomery bus boycott 
 Browder v. Gayle 
 Sit-in movement 
 Freedom Riders 
 Birmingham movement 
 March on Washington 
 Selma to Montgomery marches 
 Chicago Freedom Movement 
 Post–civil rights era 
 Cornerstone Speech 
 COVID-19 impact 
 Dred Scott v. Sandford 
 Free Negro 
 Free people of color 
 George Floyd protests 
 Great Migration 
 Second 
 New 
 Inauguration of Barack Obama 2009  /  Inauguration of Barack Obama 2013 
 Jim Crow laws 
 Lynching 
 Military history 
 Nadir of American race relations 
 The Negro Motorist Green Book 
 Partus sequitur ventrem 
 Plantations 
 Plessy v. Ferguson 
 Reconstruction Amendments 
 Reconstruction era 
 Redlining 
 Separate but equal 
 Slavery 
 Treatment of slaves 
 Tulsa race massacre 
 Underground Railroad 
 Women's suffrage movement 
 Culture 
 Afrofuturism 
 Art 
 Black mecca 
 Businesses 
 Dance 
 Family structure 
 Film 
 Folktales 
 Hair 
 Harlem Renaissance 
 New Negro 
 Juneteenth 
 Kwanzaa 
 LGBT community 
 Literature 
 Music 
 Musical theater 
 Names 
 Negro National Anthem 
 Neighborhoods 
 Newspapers 
 Soul food 
 Stereotypes 
 Middle class 
 Upper class 
 Notable people 
 Ralph Abernathy 
 Maya Angelou 
 Crispus Attucks 
 James Baldwin 
 James Bevel 
 Julian Bond 
 Amelia Boynton 
 James Bradley 
 Carol Moseley Braun 
 Edward Brooke 
 Blanche Bruce 
 Ralph Bunche 
 George Washington Carver 
 Shirley Chisholm 
 Claudette Colvin 
 Frederick Douglass 
 W. E. B. Du Bois 
 Medgar Evers 
 James Farmer 
 Henry Highland Garnet 
 Marcus Garvey 
 Fred Gray 
 Fannie Lou Hamer 
 Kamala Harris 
 Jimi Hendrix 
 Jesse Jackson 
 Ketanji Brown Jackson 
 Michael Jackson 
 Harriet Jacobs 
 Barbara Jordan 
 Coretta Scott King 
 Martin Luther King Jr. 
 Bernard Lafayette 
 James Lawson 
 Huddie Ledbetter 
 John Lewis 
 Joseph Lowery 
 Malcolm X 
 Thurgood Marshall 
 Toni Morrison 
 Bob Moses 
 Diane Nash 
 Barack Obama 
 Michelle Obama 
 Rosa Parks 
 Adam Clayton Powell Jr. 
 Colin Powell 
 Gabriel Prosser 
 Joseph Rainey 
 A. Philip Randolph 
 Hiram Revels 
 Paul Robeson 
 Al Sharpton 
 Fred Shuttlesworth 
 Clarence Thomas 
 Emmett Till 
 Sojourner Truth 
 Harriet Tubman 
 Nat Turner 
 Denmark Vesey 
 C. T. Vivian 
 David Walker 
 Booker T. Washington 
 Ida B. Wells 
 Roy Wilkins 
 Oprah Winfrey 
 Andrew Young 
 Whitney Young 
 Education, science and technology 
 Black studies 
 Black schools 
 Historically black colleges and universities 
 Inventors and scientists 
 Museums 
 Women
 in computer science 
 in medicine 
 in STEM fields 
 Religion 
 African-American Jews 
 Islam 
 American Society of Muslims 
 Nation of Islam 
 Black church 
 Azusa Street Revival 
 Black Hebrew Israelites 
 Black theology 
 Doctrine of Father Divine 
 Political movements 
 Anarchism 
 Back-to-Africa movement 
 Black power 
 Movement 
 Capitalism 
 Conservatism 
 Leftism 
 Pan-Africanism 
 Populism 
 Raised fist 
 Self-determination 
 Nationalism 
 Socialism 
 Civic and economic groups 
 Association for the Study of African American Life and History (ASALH) 
 Black Panther Party 
 Congress of Racial Equality (CORE) 
 National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP) 
 Nashville Student Movement 
 National Black Chamber of Commerce (NBCC) 
 National Council of Negro Women (NCNW) 
 National Pan-Hellenic Council (NPHC) 
 National Urban League (NUL) 
 Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC) 
 Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee (SNCC) 
 Thurgood Marshall College Fund 
 United Negro College Fund (UNCF) 
 Universal Negro Improvement Association and African Communities League (UNIA-ACL) 
 Sports 
 Negro league baseball 
 Baseball color line 
 Black players in professional American football 
 Black NFL quarterbacks 
 Black players in ice hockey 
 Muhammad Ali 
 Arthur Ashe 
 Jack Johnson 
 Joe Louis 
 Jesse Owens 
 Jackie Robinson 
 Serena Williams 
 Athletic associations and conferences 
 Central (CIAA) 
 Mid-Eastern (MEAC) 
 Southern (SIAC) 
 Southwestern (SWAC) 
 Ethnic subdivisions 
 By African descent
 Fula 
 Gullah 
 Igbo 
 Yoruba 
 Black Indians 
 Black Seminoles 
 Cherokee freedmen controversy 
 Choctaw freedmen 
 Creek Freedmen 
 Black Southerners 
 Blaxicans 
 Louisiana Creole 
 of color 
 Melungeon 
 Demographics 
 Neighborhoods 
 list 
 U.S. cities with large populations 
 2000 majorities 
 2010 majorities 
 Metropolitan areas 
 States and territories 
 Languages 
 English 
 American English 
 African-American English 
 African-American Vernacular English 
 Gullah 
 Louisiana Creole 
 By state/city 
 Alabama 
 Arkansas 
 California 
 Los Angeles 
 San Francisco 
 Florida 
 Jacksonville 
 Tallahassee 
 Georgia 
 Atlanta 
 Hawaii 
 Illinois
 Chicago 
 Iowa
 Davenport 
 Kansas 
 Kentucky 
 Louisiana 
 Maryland 
 Baltimore 
 Massachusetts
 Boston 
 Michigan
 Detroit 
 Mississippi 
 Nebraska
 Omaha 
 New York
 New York City 
 North Carolina 
 Oklahoma 
 Oregon 
 Pennsylvania
 Philadelphia 
 Puerto Rico 
 South Carolina 
 Tennessee 
 Texas 
 Austin 
 Dallas–Fort Worth 
 Houston 
 San Antonio 
 Utah 
 Virginia 
 Diaspora 
 Africa 
 Gambia 
 Ghana 
 Liberia 
 Sierra Leone 
 America
 Canada 
 Dominican Republic 
 Haiti 
 Mexico 
 Trinidad and Tobago 
 Israel 
 Europe
 France 
 Lists 
 African Americans 
 Activists 
 Actors 
 Astronauts 
 Billionaires 
 Jurists 
 Mathematicians 
 Republicans 
 Singers 
 Spingarn Medal winners 
 US cabinet members 
 US representatives 
 US senators 
 Visual artists 
 Writers 
 African-American firsts 
 Mayors 
 Sports firsts 
 US state firsts 
 Historic places 
 Index of related articles 
 Landmark African-American legislation 
 Lynching victims 
 Monuments 
 Neighborhoods 
 Topics related to the African diaspora 
 
 Category 
   United States portal 
 
 v t e Cuisine of the United States Historical 
 Cuisine of the Thirteen Colonies 
 Thanksgiving dinner 
 Regional General 
 List of regional dishes of the United States 
 List of regional beverages of the United States 
 Northeast 
 Mid-Atlantic 
 New Jersey 
 New York
 New York City 
 Pennsylvania
 Allentown 
 Philadelphia 
 New England 
 South 
 Appalachia 
 Floribbean 
 Kentucky 
 Louisiana
 Creole 
 New Orleans 
 Lowcountry 
 Texas 
 Barbecue in Texas 
 Tex-Mex 
 Midwest 
 Chicago 
 Cincinnati 
 Kansas City-style barbecue 
 Omaha 
 St. Louis 
 Wisconsin 
 West 
 California 
 Southwestern 
 New Mexican 
 Pacific Northwestern 
 Hawaii 
 Territories 
 Puerto Rico 
 Ethnic 
 Cajun 
 American Cambodian 
 American Chinese 
 Greek American 
 Soul food 
 Mexican 
 Native American 
 New Mexican (Neomexicano and Pueblo) 
 Pennsylvania Dutch 
 Italian American 
 Tejano 
 Tlingit 
 Filipino-American 
 American Jewish 
 List articles 
 American foods 
 American breads 
 American cheeses 
 American desserts 
 American regional and fusion cuisines 
 American sandwiches 
 American breakfast foods 
 Foods of the Southern United States 
 Soul foods and dishes 
 Miscellaneous 
 Barbecue 
 Christmas food 
 Fast food 
 Drinks 
 Sweet tea 
 Root beer 
 Coca-Cola 
 Egg cream 
 Milkshake 
 Shirley Temple 
 Italian soda 
 Pepsi 
 American tea culture 
   Category: American cuisine 
 v t e Cuisines Continental 
 African 
 North 
 West 
 list 
 Americas 
 Caribbean 
 North 
 South 
 list 
 Asian 
 Caucasian 
 Central 
 Indian subcontinent 
 Levantine 
 list 
 European 
 Balkan 
 Central 
 Eastern 
 list 
 Oceanic 
 Intercontinental
 Global 
 Latin American 
 Mediterranean 
 Middle Eastern 
 National  and regional 
 Afghan 
 Albanian 
 Algerian 
 American 
 Californian 
 Floribbean 
 Hawaiian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Lowcountry (South Carolina) 
 New England 
 New Mexico 
 Pacific Northwest 
 Pennsylvania Dutch 
 Puerto Rican 
 Southern US 
 Southwest US 
 Texas 
 Angolan 
 Argentine 
 Armenian 
 Australian 
 Austrian 
 Azerbaijani 
 Bahraini 
 Bangladeshi 
 Barbadian 
 Belarusian 
 Belgian 
 Belizean 
 Beninese 
 Bhutanese 
 Bolivian 
 Bosnian-Herzegovinian 
 Botswana 
 Brazilian 
 British 
 Channel Islands 
 English 
 Gibraltarian 
 Northern Irish 
 Saint Helena 
 Scottish 
 Welsh 
 Bruneian 
 Bulgarian 
 Burkinabé 
 Burmese 
 Burundian 
 Cambodian 
 Cameroonian 
 Canadian 
 Acadian 
 Québécois 
 Central African Republic 
 Chadian 
 Chilean 
 Chinese 
 Cantonese 
 Hong Kong 
 Macanese 
 Tibetan 
 Xinjiang 
 Colombian 
 Congolese 
 Corsican 
 Croatian 
 Cuban 
 Cypriot 
 Czech 
 Danish 
 Faroese 
 Greenlandic 
 Djiboutian 
 Dominican 
 Dominican Republic 
 Dutch 
 East Timorese 
 Ecuadorian 
 Egyptian 
 Emirati 
 Equatorial Guinean 
 Eritrean 
 Estonian 
 Ethiopian 
 Fijian 
 Filipino 
 Finnish 
 French 
 Occitan 
 French Guianan 
 Gabonese 
 Gambian 
 Georgian 
 German 
 Ghanaian 
 Greek 
 Cretan 
 Epirotic 
 Greek Macedonian 
 Heptanesean 
 Guatemalan 
 Guinea-Bissauan 
 Guinean 
 Haitian 
 Honduran 
 Hungarian 
 Icelandic 
 Indian 
 Arunachalese 
 Assamese 
 Bengali 
 Bihari 
 Goan 
 Gujarati 
 Himachal Pradesh 
 Kashmiri 
 Jharkhandi 
 Karnataka 
 Kerala 
 Maharashtrian 
 Manipuri 
 Meghalayan 
 Mizo 
 Naga 
 Odia 
 Punjabi 
 Rajasthani 
 Sikkimese 
 Sindhi 
 Tamil 
 Telangana 
 Telugu 
 Indonesian 
 Acehnese 
 Balinese 
 Banjar 
 Batak 
 Betawi 
 Indo 
 Javanese 
 Madurese 
 Makassar 
 Minahasan 
 Minangkabau 
 Palembangese 
 Sundanese 
 Iranian 
 Iraqi 
 Irish 
 Israeli 
 Italian 
 Abruzzese 
 Ligurian 
 Lombard 
 Lucanian 
 Neapolitan 
 Roman 
 Sardinian 
 Sicilian 
 Venetian 
 Ivorian 
 Jamaican 
 Japanese 
 Okinawan 
 Jordanian 
 Kazakh 
 Kenyan 
 Korean 
 North Korean 
 South Korean 
 Kosovan 
 Kuwaiti 
 Kyrgyz 
 Lao 
 Latvian 
 Lebanese 
 Lesotho 
 Liberian 
 Libyan 
 Liechtensteiner 
 Lithuanian 
 Luxembourg 
 Macedonian 
 Malagasy 
 Malawian 
 Malaysian 
 Sabahan 
 Sarawakian 
 Maldivian 
 Malian 
 Maltese 
 Mauritanian 
 Mauritian 
 Mexican 
 Moldovan 
 Monégasque 
 Mongolian 
 Montenegrin 
 Moroccan 
 Mozambican 
 Namibian 
 Nauruan 
 Nepalese 
 New Zealand 
 Nicaraguan 
 Niger 
 Nigerian 
 Niuean 
 Norwegian 
 Omani 
 Pakistani 
 Palestinian 
 Panamanian 
 Peruvian 
 Polish 
 Portuguese 
 Qatari 
 Romanian  (incl.  Transylvanian Saxon ) 
 Russian 
 Bashkir 
 Chechen 
 Circassian 
 Komi 
 Mordovian 
 Sakha 
 Tatar 
 Udmurt 
 Yamal 
 Rwandan 
 Saint Lucian 
 Salvadoran 
 Sammarinese 
 São Tomé and Príncipe 
 Saudi Arabian 
 Senegalese 
 Serbian 
 Seychellois 
 Sierra Leonean 
 Singaporean 
 Slovak 
 Slovenian 
 Somali 
 South African 
 Spanish 
 Andalusian 
 Asturian 
 Balearic 
 Basque 
 Canarian 
 Cantabrian 
 Catalan 
 Extremaduran 
 Galician 
 Manchegan 
 Valencian 
 Sri Lankan 
 Sudanese 
 Swazi 
 Swedish 
 Swiss 
 Syrian 
 Taiwanese 
 Tajik 
 Tanzanian 
 Zanzibari 
 Thai 
 Togolese 
 Tunisian 
 Turkish 
 Turkmen 
 Trinidadian and Tobagonian 
 Ugandan 
 Ukrainian 
 Uruguayan 
 Uzbek 
 Venezuelan 
 Vietnamese 
 Western Saharan 
 Yemeni 
 Zambian 
 Zimbabwean 
 Ethnic 
 Ainu 
 Arab 
 Indonesian 
 Aromanian 
 Assyrian 
 Balochi 
 Berber 
 Cajun 
 Chinese 
 American 
 Canadian 
 Chifa 
 Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Crimean Tatar 
 Greek American 
 Hazaragi 
 Indian 
 Anglo-Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Indigenous American 
 Inuit 
 Italian American 
 Kurdish 
 Livonian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Malay 
 Ossetian 
 Parsi 
 Pashtun 
 Peranakan 
 Romani 
 Sámi 
 Soul food 
 Sylheti 
 Transylvanian Saxon 
 Yup'ik 
 Religious 
 Buddhist 
 Christian 
 Goan Catholic 
 Mangalorean Catholic 
 Mennonite 
 Hindu 
 Islamic 
 Chinese 
 Ital 
 Jain 
 Jewish 
 American 
 Ashkenazi 
 Bukharan 
 Ethiopian 
 Mizrahi 
 Sephardic 
 Syrian 
 Ritual slaughter 
 Sikh 
 Historical 
 Ancient Egyptian 
 Ancient Greek 
 Ancient Israelite 
 Ancient Roman 
 Antebellum America 
 Aztec 
 Byzantine 
 Early modern European 
 Historical Chinese 
 Historical Indian subcontinent 
 Historical North Indian and Pakistani 
 History of agriculture 
 History of alcoholic drinks 
 History of bread 
 History of seafood 
 History of vegetarianism 
 Historical Argentine 
 Historical Japanese 
 Inca 
 Mayan 
 Muisca 
 Mughal 
 Medieval 
 Ottoman 
 Peasant 
 Soviet 
 Thirteen Colonies 
 Styles 
 Classique 
 Fast food 
 Fusion 
 New American 
 Eurasian 
 Haute 
 Molecular gastronomy 
 Note by Note 
 Nouvelle 
 Lists 
 List of cuisines 
 List of historical cuisines 
 Lists of prepared foods 
 Related 
 Cookbook 
 Cooking 
 Culinary arts 
 Drink 
 Food 
 history 
 Diet 
 Meal preparation 
 
   Food portal 
   Drink portal 
   Category 
   Commons 
   Cookbook 
   WikiProject 
   Outline 
 
 Authority control : National libraries  
 Israel 
 United States 
 
  
NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw2301
Cached time: 20230310193843
Cache expiry: 1814400
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc, no‐toc‐conversion]
CPU time usage: 0.959 seconds
Real time usage: 1.227 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 4835/1000000
Post‐expand include size: 362115/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 18887/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 14/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 381441/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.477/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 10785240/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/400
 
 
Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  837.125      1 -total
 36.44%  305.055      1 Template:Reflist
 15.95%  133.561     15 Template:Cite_web
 14.87%  124.486      2 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 10.02%   83.862      1 Template:American_cuisine
  9.36%   78.362     18 Template:Cite_book
  7.61%   63.665      2 Template:Refimprove
  6.83%   57.154      2 Template:Ambox
  5.92%   49.533      2 Template:Sister_project
  5.73%   47.944      2 Template:Side_box
 
  Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:idhash:27910-0!canonical and timestamp 20230310193842 and revision id 1143756113. Rendering was triggered because: page-view
  
 esi <esi:include src="/esitest-fa8a495983347898/content" />  
 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Soul_food&oldid=1143756113 " 
 Categories :  Soul food African-American cultural history American cuisine Cuisine of the Southern United States Native American cuisine of the Southeastern Woodlands Native American culture Native American history Culture of the Southern United States Cuisine by ethnicity Hidden categories:  CS1: long volume value CS1 errors: missing periodical Articles needing additional references from August 2022 All articles needing additional references Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from July 2022 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2021 Commons category link from Wikidata Articles with Curlie links Articles with J9U identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  This page was last edited on 9 March 2023, at 18:01  (UTC) . 
 Text is available under the  Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0 ;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the  Terms of Use  and  Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the  Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. 
 
 
 Privacy policy 
 About Wikipedia 
 Disclaimers 
 Contact Wikipedia 
 Mobile view 
 Developers 
 Statistics 
 Cookie statement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
