
 
 
 Jump to content 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle sidebar 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Create account Log in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Personal tools 
 
 
 
 
   Create account   Log in 
 
 
 
 
		Pages for logged out editors  learn more 
 
 
 Contributions Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Navigation 
 
 
 Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate 
 
 
 
 
 Contribute 
 
 
 Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file 
 
 
 
 
 Tools 
 
 
 What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item 
 
 
 
 
 Print/export 
 
 
 Download as PDF Printable version 
 
 
 
 
 In other projects 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons 
 
 
 
 
 Languages 
 
 On this Wikipedia the language links are at the top of the page across from the article title.  Go to top . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CentralNotice  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Contents 
 move to sidebar 
 hide 
 
 
 
 
 (Top) 
 
 
 
 
 
 1 History 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 Indigenous cookery 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 Non-indigenous cookery 
 
 
				Toggle Non-indigenous cookery subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 3.1 Cape Dutch and Cape Malay cookery 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.2 French cookery 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.3 Indian cookery 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4 Beverages 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5 Restaurants and outlets 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6 Typical South African foods and dishes 
 
 
				Toggle Typical South African foods and dishes subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 6.1 Savoury 
 
 
 
 
 
 6.1.1 Game and meats 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6.1.2 Meals 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6.1.3 Breads 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6.1.4 Relishes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6.1.5 Fruits and plants 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6.2 Sweet 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6.3 Drinks 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 7 See also 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8 Footnotes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 9 References 
 
 
				Toggle References subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 9.1 Citations 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 9.2 Sources 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 10 External links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
						Toggle the table of contents
					 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle the table of contents 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 South African cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 18 languages 
 
 
 
 Asturianu Azərbaycanca Čeština Deutsch Español فارسی Français 한국어 Italiano עברית Македонски Nederlands Português Русский Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Українська 
 Edit links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Article Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 English 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 More 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
 
 
 Cuisine of South Africa 
 
 
 Part of  a series  on the Culture of South Africa 
 History 
 People 
 Languages 
 Afrikaans 
 English 
 Ndebele 
 Northern Sotho 
 Sotho 
 Swazi 
 Tswana 
 Tsonga 
 Venda 
 Xhosa 
 Zulu 
 
 Cuisine 
 Festivals 
 Public holidays 
 
 Religion 
 Art 
 Literature 
 Writers 
 Poets 
 
 Music  and Performing arts 
 Musicians 
 
 Media 
 Television 
 Cinema 
 
 Sport 
 Monuments 
 World Heritage Sites 
 
 Symbols 
 Flag 
 Coat of arms 
 National anthem 
 
   South Africa portal v t e 
   Potjiekos , literally translated to "small pot food", is a  stew  prepared outdoors in a traditional round,  cast iron , three-legged pot. This one is being cooked on a barbecue. 
   Location of South Africa 
 South African cuisine  reflects the diverse range of culinary traditions embodied by the various communities that inhabit the country. Among the indigenous peoples of South Africa, the  Khoisan  foraged over 300 species of edible food plants, [1]  such as the  rooibos  shrub legume, [2]  whose culinary value continues to exert a salient influence on South African cuisine. Subsequent encounters with  Bantu pastoralists  facilitated the emergence of cultivated crops and domestic cattle, which supplemented traditional Khoisan techniques of meat preservation. [3]  In addition, Bantu-speaking communities forged an extensive repertoire of culinary ingredients and dishes, many of which are still consumed today in traditional settlements and urban entrepôts alike.
 
 
 History [ edit ] 
 The  San peoples  were  hunter-gatherers , who mostly depended on foods like  tortoises ,  crayfish ,  coconuts  and  squash .  Agriculture was introduced to South Africa  by the  Bantu peoples , who were taught to grow vegetables such as  maize ,  squash  and  sweet potatoes .
 By the 17th century,  Dutch  and  British  foodways brought via European immigration resulted in further culinary diffusion. The  Cape Malay  community founded a distinctive diasporic cuisine, derived largely from  South East Asian  culinary traditions, while Afrikaner  voortrekkers  further inland adapted Dutch, Khoisan, Cape Malay and Bantu foodways to accommodate their peripatetic lifestyle. In addition,  French Huguenot refugees , many of whom settled in  Franschhoek , played an instrumental role in developing  South Africa's viticultural industry. 
 During the period of  British colonial rule , immigrants  from Asia , many of whom arrived as  indentured laborers  in the 19th century, further enriched the culinary oeuvre of South Africa. In particular,  Indian South Africans  brought a wealth of spices, seasonings and dishes, historically associated with  Kwa-Zulu Natal , although  Indian cuisine  is currently widely available across South Africa and consumed by all ethnic groups.
 Disinvestments  and sanctions imposed on South Africa during  apartheid  stifled the country's culinary output. At this time  shebeens , situated in urban townships, became very popular and often served as non-formal community centers, especially for black South Africans who pursued their cultural and culinary traditions. Following the end of apartheid, South African cuisine witnessed a renaissance, with diverse culinary options available in most of the country's major cities catering to  tourists , expatriates and local residents. In addition, South African ingredients and dishes have attained greater visibility worldwide, owing to the burgeoning  South African diaspora .
 
 Indigenous cookery [ edit ] 
 In the precolonial period, indigenous cuisine was characterised by the use of a very wide range of foods including fruits, nuts, bulbs, leaves and other products gathered from wild plants and by the hunting of wild game. The introduction of domestic  cattle  and grain crops by  Bantu  speakers who arrived in the southern regions from central Africa since 10,000 BC and the spread of cattle keeping to  Khoisan  groups enabled products and the availability of fresh meat on demand.
 The pre-colonial diet consisted primarily of cooked grains, especially  sorghum  and  millet , fermented milk (somewhat like yogurt) and roasted or stewed meat. At some point, maize replaced sorghum as the primary grain, and there is some dispute as to whether maize, a Central American crop, arrived with European settlers (notably the Portuguese) or spread through Africa before white settlements via Africans returning from the Americas during the era of the slave trade. [4] 
 People also kept sheep and goats, and communities often organised vast hunts for the abundant game, but the beef was considered the absolutely most important and high-status meat. The ribs of any cattle that were slaughtered in many communities were so prized that they were offered to the chief of the village. [5] [6] 
 In many ways, the daily food of South African families can be traced to the indigenous foods that their ancestors ate. A typical meal in a Bantu-speaking, South African household is a stiff, fluffy porridge of maize meal (called  pap , and very similar to American grits) with a flavorful stewed meat gravy. Traditional rural families (and many urban ones) often ferment their  pap  for a few days—especially if it is sorghum instead of maize—which gives it a tangy flavour. The Sotho-Tswana call this fermented  pap ,  ting . [7] [8] 
 Vegetables  used are often some sort of  pumpkin , varieties of which are indigenous to South Africa, although now many people eat pumpkins that originated in other countries.  Rice  and  beans  are also very popular although they are not indigenous. Another common vegetable dish, which arrived in South Africa with its many Irish immigrants, but which has been adopted by South Africans, is shredded cabbage and white potatoes cooked with  butter .
 
   Men preparing the meat for a traditional ceremony 
 For many South Africans meat is the center of any meal. The Khoisan ate roasted meat, and they also dried meat for later use. The influence of their diet is reflected in the common Southern African love of barbecue (generally called in South Africa by its Afrikaans name, a  braai ) and  biltong  (dried preserved meat). As in the past, when men kept cattle as their prized possession in the rural areas, South Africans have a preference for beef.
 Today, South Africans enjoy not only beef, but mutton, goat, chicken and other meats as a centerpiece of a meal. On weekends, many South African families have a  braai , and the meal usually consists of  pap en vleis , which is maize meal and grilled meat. Eating meat even has a ritual significance in both traditional and modern South African culture.
 In  Bantu  culture, for weddings, initiations, the arrival of family members after a long trip and other special occasions, families will buy a live animal and slaughter it at home, and then prepare a large meal for the community or neighbourhood. Participants often say that spilling the blood of the animal on the ground pleases the ancestors who invisibly gather around the carcass. On holiday weekends, entrepreneurs will set up pens of live animals along the main roads of townships—mostly sheep and goats—for families to purchase, slaughter, cook and eat. Beef being the most prized meat for weddings, affluent families often purchase a live steer for slaughter at home.
 
 Non-indigenous cookery [ edit ] 
   Biltong and droëwors on sale 
 During the pioneering days of the 17th century, new foods such as  biltong , droëwors and  rusks  evolved locally out of necessity.
 
 Cape Dutch and Cape Malay cookery [ edit ] 
 Further information:  Dutch cuisine § Colonial influences , and  Malay cuisine § South Africa 
   A Cape Malay dish served in Cape Town 
 A very distinctive regional style of South African cooking is often referred to as " Cape Dutch ". This cuisine is characterised mainly by the usage of spices such as  nutmeg ,  allspice  and  chili peppers . The Cape Dutch cookery style owes at least as much to the cookery of the  slaves  brought by the  Dutch East India Company  to the Cape from  Bengal ,  Java  and  Malaysia  as it does to the European styles of cookery imported by settlers from the  Netherlands , and this is reflected in the use of eastern spices and the names given to many of these dishes.
 The  Cape Malay  influence has brought spicy  curries ,  sambals , pickled fish, and variety of fish  stews .
 Bobotie  is a South African dish that has Cape Malay origins. It consists of spiced  minced meat  baked with an egg-based topping. Of the many dishes common to South Africa,  bobotie  is perhaps closest to being the national dish, because it isn't commonly found in any other country.  The recipe originates from the  Dutch East India Company  colonies in  Batavia , with the name derived from the  Indonesian   bobotok . It is also made with curry powder leaving it with a slight "tang". It is often served with  sambal , a hint of its origins from the  Malay Archipelago .
 South African  yellow rice , a sweet dish made with  turmeric ,  raisins ,  cinnamon  and  sugar , also has its origins in Cape Malay cookery, often being referred to as Cape Malay yellow rice. [9] 
 
 French cookery [ edit ] 
 Further information:  French cuisine 
 French  Huguenot  refugees brought wines as well as their  traditional recipes  from  France . [10] 
 
 Indian cookery [ edit ] 
 Further information:  Indian cuisine 
   Bunny chow  and salad, a meal that originated in the  Indian South African  community. [11] 
 Curried dishes are popular in South Africa among people of all ethnic origins; many dishes came to the country with the thousands of  Indian  indentured labourers brought to South Africa in the nineteenth century. South African Indian cuisine has contributed to South African cooking with a wide variety of dishes and culinary practices, including a variety of curries,  sweets ,  chutneys , fried snacks such as  samosa , and other savoury foods.
 Bunny chow , a dish from  Durban  ("the largest 'Indian' city outside of India" [12] ), consisting of a hollowed-out loaf of bread filled with curry, has been adapted into mainstream South African cuisine.
 
 Beverages [ edit ] 
 See also:  Beer in South Africa  and  South African wine   A cup of freshly prepared  rooibos  tea, native to South Africa 
 Beer  has been an important beverage in South Africa for hundreds of years among indigenous people long before colonisation and the arrival of Europeans with their own beer drinking traditions. Traditional beer was brewed from local grains, especially sorghum. Beer was so prized that it became central to many ceremonies, like betrothals and weddings, in which one family ceremoniously offered beer to the other family.
 Unlike European beer, South African traditional beer was unfiltered and cloudy and had a low alcohol content. Around the turn of the 1900s, when white-owned industry began studying malnutrition among urban workers, it was discovered that traditional beer provided crucial vitamins sometimes not available in the grain-heavy traditional diet and even less available in urban industrial slums.
 When South Africa's mines were developed and black South Africans began to urbanise, women moved to the city also, and began to brew beer for the predominantly male labour force—a labour force that was mostly either single or who had left their wives back in the rural areas under the migrant labour system. That tradition of urban women making beer for the labour force persists in South Africa to the extent that informal bars and taverns ( shebeens ) are typically owned by women ( shebeen  queens).
 Today, most urban dwellers buy beer manufactured by industrial breweries that make beer that is like beer one would buy in  Europe  and America, but rural people and recent immigrants to the city still enjoy the cloudy, unfiltered traditional beer.
 Comparable to an American or western European diet, milk and milk products are very prominent in the traditional Black South African diet.  As cows were considered extremely desirable domestic animals in precolonial times, milk was abundant. In the absence of refrigeration, various kinds of soured milk, somewhat like yogurt, were a dietary mainstay. A visitor to any African village in the 1800s would have been offered a large calabash of cool fermented milk as a greeting.
 Because milk cows allowed women to wean their children early and become fertile more quickly, local cultures had a number of sayings connecting cattle, milk and population growth, such as the Sotho-Tswana saying, "cattle beget children."
 Today, in the dairy section of South Africa's supermarkets, one will find a variety of kinds of milk, sour milk, sour cream, and other modern versions of traditional milk products.
 
 Restaurants and outlets [ edit ] 
   Panarotti's, a pizza restaurant originating in South Africa 
 South Africa can be said to have a significant "eating out" culture. While there are some restaurants that specialise in traditional South African dishes or modern interpretations thereof, restaurants featuring other cuisines such as  Moroccan ,  Chinese ,  West African ,  Congolese , and  Japanese  can be found in all of the major cities and many of the larger towns. [13]  There are also many home-grown chain restaurants, such as  Spur  and  Dulce Café .
 There is also a proliferation of fast-food restaurants in South Africa. While some international players such as  Kentucky Fried Chicken  and  McDonald's  are active in the country, they face stiff competition from local chains such as  Nando's , Galito's,  Steers ,  Chicken Licken , Barcelos, Fat Cake City and King Pie. Many of the restaurant chains originating from South Africa have also expanded successfully outside the borders of the country. [14]  Also,  Starbucks  is present in the country.
 
 Typical South African foods and dishes [ edit ] 
 Savoury [ edit ] 
 
 
 
 
 Boerewors  roll
 
 
 
 
 
 
 A large  braai  in process
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Freshly prepared springbok goulash
 
 
 
 
 
 
 A  Spatlo , popular street meal in all provinces
 
 
 
 
 Game and meats [ edit ] 
 Afrikaans 
 
 Biltong —dried meat (typically seasoned with coriander seeds and salt). Although the meat used is most commonly beef, different variants also exist using springbok, kudu, eland, chicken and ostrich. 
 Boerewors —a  sausage  that is traditionally  braaied  ( barbecued ). 
 Droëwors—translates to dried sausage and is made like boerewors, but park meat is left out. It is dried the same way as biltong is. 
 Frikkadels —usually baked, but sometimes deep-fried,  meatballs . 
 Bokkoms —whole, salted and dried  mullet . 
 Skilpadjies —lamb's liver wrapped in  netvet  and  braaied  over hot coals. 
 Smoked  or  braaied   snoek —a regional gamefish. 
 Sosatie —kebab, grilled marinated meat on a  skewer . 
 Amanqina —chicken feet, cow feet, pig feet, lamb feet and sheep feet, usually consumed with  pap  or as a delicacy. When cooking, just add water and salt. 
 Walkie Talkies—grilled or deep-fried chicken feet and beaks). Another dish is a cookee pigs head known as a "smiley", most popular in  townships  and sold by street vendors, sometimes in industrial areas with high concentrations of workers. 
 Ostrich —an increasingly popular  protein  source, as it has low  cholesterol  content, used in a stew or filleted and grilled. 
 Meals [ edit ] 
 Tsonga and Venda 
 
 Mashonja/Matamani—made from  Mopani worms 
 Afrikaans 
 
   A serving of Tomato bredie 
 Gesmoorde vis—salted cod or snoek with potatoes and tomato sauce, sometimes served with apricot, grapes or moskonfyt. 
 Hoenderpastei —chicken pot pie, traditional  Afrikaans  fare. 
 
 Kaiings —made from lamb tail or lamb flank cut into small cubes, and cooked in a cast-iron pot over a slow fire. Kaiings resemble cracklings, though the skin is not as puffy and crispy as a crackling, and a small piece of protein is usually left on the skin and fat. They are a chewy traditional Boer delicacy often served as a topping over  pap  or with honey. 
 Mielie-meal —a staple food, often used in baking but predominantly cooked into  pap  or  Ugali 
 Oepsies—a starter made on a braai. Similar to the American  devils on horseback  but exclusively made with cherries wrapped in bacon and battered with barbeque sauce. 
 Paptert—a tart used as a side dish for a braai. Made from pap, cheese, canned tomatoes and bacon. Both modern and traditional. 
 Potjiekos —a traditional  Afrikaans   stew , made with meat and vegetables and cooked over coals in  cast-iron  pots. 
 Tomato bredie —a  lamb  and tomato  stew . 
 Waterblommetjiebredie  (water flower stew)—meat  stewed  with the flower of the  Cape pondweed . 
 Indian 
 
 Biryani —a mixed rice dish originating among the Muslims of the Indian subcontinent. 
 Bunny chow — curry  stuffed into a hollowed-out loaf of bread, often called Kota by the locals (usually those of African descent) who sometimes, instead of curry, fill the bread with slap chips ( French fries ), a slice of  polony  (bologna), cheese, and  atchar  ( South Asian pickle ) and other fillings and spices. 
 Durban   curry —more spicy than the Cape Malay version. Usually mutton is used and the most common spices used are cayenne pepper, paprika, cinnamon, cumin and fennel. Potatoes and carrots are sometimes also used. 
 Malay 
 
 Bobotie —a dish of  Malay  descent, is like  meatloaf  with  raisins  and with baked  egg  on top, and is often served with yellow rice,  sambals ,  coconut , banana slices, and  chutney . 
 Cape Malay curry—a curry most often made with chicken and spiced with mild masala. Spices include cinnamon, ginger, cardamom, cayenne pepper, coriander, garlic, turmeric, bay leaves, and fenugreek. 
 Zulu, Xhosa and Sotho 
 
 Dombolo — dumplings , usually steamed in a pot. 
 Isidudu —soft porridge made from ground corn known as "mealie meal". 
 Mala mogodu —a local dish similar to tripe, usually eaten with hot  pap  and  spinach . 
 Iinkobe —summer salad made with boiled corn. 
 Sigwaqani —boiled beans mixed with mealie-meal. 
 Mqhavunyeko —wet corn mixed with beans. 
 Trotters  and  beans —from the  Cape , made from boiled pig's or sheep's trotters and onions and beans. 
 Ugali —maize porridge in South Africa, traditional porridge/polenta and a staple food of the African peoples 
 Umngqusho —a  dish made from white maize and sugar beans, a staple food for the Xhosa people. 
 Umphokoqo —an African salad made of  maize meal . [15] 
 Umvubo —sour milk mixed with dry  pap , commonly eaten by the Xhosa. 
 Breads [ edit ] 
 Afrikaans 
 
   A gatsby sandwich 
 Braaibroodjie —a  sandwich consisting of two slices of bread with a filling of sliced tomato, cheese, onion, South African peach chutney (traditional Mrs. H.S. Balls) seasoned with salt and pepper. The braaibroodjie is placed in a folding  braai  grid ( Gridiron ) and slowly grilled over medium-hot coals until the cheese melts and the bread is browned. 
 Gatsby —a sandwich popular in Cape Town, a long roll with fillings of anything ranging from  polony  (bologna) to chicken or steak and hot chips. 
 Potbrood  (pot bread or  boerbrood )—savoury bread baked over coals in cast-iron pots. 
 Indian 
 
 Samosa , or  samoosa —a savoury stuffed  Indian  pastry that is fried. Very popular in South Africa. 
 Kota ,  Skhambane  (aka  Bunny Chow )—a sandwich, quarter-loaf of bread usually stuffed with  polony  (bologna), cheese,  atchar  ( South Asian pickle ) and chips (French fries). 
 Relishes [ edit ] 
 Chakalaka —a spicy South African vegetable relish. 
 blatjang , or Mrs Balls Chutney, a sweet sauce made from fruit that is usually poured on meat. 
 Monkey gland sauce —made of chopped onion, garlic and ginger, with a combination of chutney, soy sauce, mustard, Worcestershire sauce, ketchup, and wine (there are no  monkeys  involved.) 
 Fruits and plants [ edit ] 
 Makataan —a wild fruit that grows in the Kalahari desert. It is soaked in  limewater  overnight (to remove the bitter taste) before processing into a jam known as  Makataan konfyt . [16] 
 Marula —the yellow fruit of a local tree. This fruit is eaten and beloved by both the people and animals.  Amarula liqueur  is made from this fruit. The ripe fruit lying on the ground is processed into jams, wine and beer. Many local communities depend on this fruit for extra income. The jam is enjoyed with roosterkoek and on version steaks, such as kudu. 
 Morogo —spinach-like wild plant sometimes seen as a weed. Traditionally boiled and served with  pap , or dried in small lumps for  extended shelf life . The traditional Afrikaner/Boer preparation usually incorporates onion, potato, or both. 
 Sweet [ edit ] 
 
 
 
 
 Koeksisters 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hertzoggie 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Melktert 
 
 
 
 
 Hertzoggie —a tartlet with an apricot jam filling and dried coconut meringue topping. 
 Koeksisters —come in two forms and are a sweet delicacy among all South Africans. Afrikaans  koeksisters  are twisted  pastries , deep fried and strongly sweetened.  Koeksisters  found in the  Cape Flats  are sweet and spicy, shaped like large eggs, and deep fried. 
 Malva pudding —a sweet spongy  apricot   pudding  of Dutch origin. 
 Melktert —a milk-based tart or dessert. 
 Melkkos —a traditional South African dish. Served as a standalone dish for supper and for lunch in some instances. (Famous traditional cookbooks such as the " Kook en Geniet " don't refer to this a dessert though). 
 Mealie-bread —a sweet bread baked with  sweetcorn . 
 Mosbolletjies —a sweet bun made with aniseed and a grape juice  leavening agent  from the wine-making region of South Africa. Baked twice to make mosbeskuit. 
 Pampoenkoekies  (pumpkin fritters)—flour has been supplemented with or replaced by pumpkin. Some variants are  patatkoekie  (sweet-potato fritter),  aartappelkoekie  (potato fritter),  ryskoekie  (rice fritter), where pumpkin is replaced with either sweet potato, potato or rice. 
 Peppermint crisp tart—a traditional fridge tart made with peppermint crisp chocolate, caramel treat, Tennis biscuits and fresh cream. 
 Rusks —a rectangular, hard, dry biscuit eaten after being dunked in tea or coffee; they are either home-baked or shop-bought (with the most popular brand being  Ouma Rusks ). 
 Vetkoek  (fat cake, doughnut,  Amagwinya《 in isiXhosa 》 )—deep-fried  dough  balls, typically stuffed with meat or served with  snoek  fish or jam. 
 Drinks [ edit ] 
   Boeber 
 Amasi — fermented milk . 
 Boeber —a traditional Cape Malay sweet milk drink, made with vermicelli, sago, sugar, and flavoured with cardamom, stick cinnamon and rose water. 
 Mafi —fermented milk, often consumed with  pap  or by itself. 
 Mageu —a drink made from fermented mealie pap. 
 Rooibos —a herbal tea indigenous to South Africa. 
 Umqombothi —a type of beer made from fermented maize and sorghum. 
 See also [ edit ] 
 
 South Africa portal Africa portal Food portal 
 Amarula 
 List of African cuisines 
 Malay cuisine 
 Indian cuisine 
 Dutch cuisine 
 List of restaurants in South Africa 
 South African wine 
 Footnotes [ edit ] 
 
 
 ^   Arnold, T. H.; Wells, M. J.; Wehmeyer, A. S. (1985),  Wickens, G. E.; Goodin, J. R.; Field, D. V. (eds.), "Khoisan food plants: taxa with potential for future economic exploitation",  Plants for Arid Lands: Proceedings of the Kew International Conference on Economic Plants for Arid Lands held in the Jodrell Laboratory, Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, England, 23–27 July 1984 , Dordrecht: Springer Netherlands, pp. 69–86,  doi : 10.1007/978-94-011-6830-4_6 ,  ISBN   978-94-011-6830-4 
 
 ^   Ives, Sarah (2014).  "Farming the South African "Bush": Ecologies of belonging and exclusion in rooibos tea" .  American Ethnologist .  41  (4): 698–713.  doi : 10.1111/amet.12106 .  ISSN   1548-1425 . 
 
 ^   Erasmus, Sara Wilhelmina; Hoffman, Louwrens Christiaan (1 October 2017).  "What is meat in South Africa?" .  Animal Frontiers .  7  (4): 71–75.  doi : 10.2527/af.2017.0449 .  ISSN   2160-6056 . 
 
 ^   "Sorghum and millet in human nutrition" . Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. 1995. Archived from  the original  on 1 October 2018 . Retrieved  7 January  2012 . 
 
 ^   Bettencourt, Elisa Maria Varela; Tilman, Mário; Narciso, Vanda; Carvalho, Maria Leonor da Silva; Henriques, Pedro Damião de Sousa; Bettencourt, Elisa Maria Varela; Tilman, Mário; Narciso, Vanda; Carvalho, Maria Leonor da Silva; Henriques, Pedro Damião de Sousa (March 2015).  "The Livestock Roles in the Wellbeing of Rural Communities of Timor-Leste" .  Revista de Economia e Sociologia Rural .  53 : 63–80.  doi : 10.1590/1234-56781806-94790053s01005 .  ISSN   0103-2003 . 
 
 ^   Bernie.  "Indigenous cookery of South Africa – Linksfontein Safari Lodge | Northern Cape | South Africa" . Retrieved  25 May  2020 . 
 
 ^   "South African Food | Eating Cape Town" .  Easy Recipe Tips . 27 May 2019 . Retrieved  24 May  2020 . 
 
 ^   "Ting ya Mabele - Arca del Gusto" .  Slow Food Foundation . Retrieved  25 May  2020 . 
 
 ^   "Cape Malay Yellow Rice Recipe" .  Group Recipes . Retrieved  29 January  2019 . 
 
 ^   "SA wine history: On the Impact of the French Huguenots" .  winemag . 30 October 2018 . Retrieved  28 August  2021 . 
 
 ^   Jaffrey, Madhur (2003).  From Curries to Kebabs: Recipes from the Indian Spice Trail . p. 184.  ISBN   9780609607046 . Retrieved  28 September  2015 . 
 
 ^   "Durban largest 'Indian' city outside India - Times Of India" . 12 May 2013. Archived from  the original  on 12 May 2013 . Retrieved  4 June  2021 . 
 
 ^   "Cooking Tour | Cape Town" .  Rufaro . Retrieved  25 May  2020 . 
 
 ^   Dezius, Andreas.  "South Africa Foods" .  The Riseing Southernstar of Africa . Retrieved  25 May  2020 . 
 
 ^   "Umphokoqo – crumbly mealie pap with amasi" .  Food & Home Entertaining . 14 July 2017 . Retrieved  25 May  2020 . 
 
 ^   "Ark of Taste - Makataan" .  Slow Food . Retrieved  17 July  2021 . 
 
 
 
 
 References [ edit ] 
 Citations [ edit ] 
 
 Coetzee, Renata, 1977.  The South African Culinary Tradition , C. Struik Publishers, Cape Town, South Africa. 
 Leipoldt, C. Louis, 1976.  Leipoldt's Cape Cookery , Fleesch and Partners, Cape Town, South Africa. 
 Van Wyk, B. and Gericke, N., 2000.  People's plants: A guide to useful plants of Southern Africa , Briza,  Pretoria , South Africa. 
 Wylie, D., 2001.  Starving on a Full Stomach: Hunger and the Triumph of Cultural Racism in Modern South Africa , University of Virginia Press, Charlottesville, VA., United States of America. 
 Routledge Encyclopaedia of Africa – Farming 
 
 Sources [ edit ] 
 Basemzanzi, B., & Moroka, T. 2004.  South African indigenous foods : a collection of recipes of indigenous foods  . Pretoria, IndiZAFoods.
 
 External links [ edit ] 
 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons has media related to  Cuisine of South Africa . 
 
 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons has media related to  Beverages from South Africa . 
 
 South African cuisine – International Marketing Council of South Africa web site 
 Food tourism 
 DBFOODS.ORG 
 Johannesburg Restaurants 
 v t e South African cuisine Savoury dishes 
 Bobotie 
 Boerewors 
 Bokkoms 
 Bunny chow 
 Chicken feet 
 Dikgobe 
 Frikkadel 
 Gatsby 
 Isidudu 
 Morogo 
 Samp 
 Skilpadjies 
 Sosatie 
 Umngqusho 
 Waterblommetjiebredie 
 Mealie bread 
 Mieliepap  ( Mielie-meal  porridge) 
 Potbrood 
 Potjiekos 
 Spatlo 
 Soetpatats 
 Tomato bredie 
 Vetkoek 
 Snacks, condiments and commodities 
 Biltong 
 Chakalaka 
 Chutney 
 Droëwors 
 Konfyt 
 Monkey gland sauce 
 Peppadew 
 Rusks  ( Ouma Rusks ) 
 Pastries and desserts 
 Koeksisters 
 Koe'sister 
 Malva pudding 
 Melktert 
 Mosbolletjies 
 Tameletjie 
 Hertzoggie 
 Smuts cookies 
 Drinks 
 Amarula 
 Amasi 
 Boeber 
 Mageu 
 Rooibos tea 
 Springbokkie 
 Umqombothi 
 
 v t e South Africa   articles History 
 Timeline  [ nl ] 
 Years 
 Early history 
 Kingdom of Mapungubwe 
 Kingdom of Mutapa 
 Kaditshwene 
 Dutch Cape Colony 
 Mthethwa Paramountcy 
 Ndwandwe 
 Cape Colony 
 Zulu Kingdom 
 Orange Free State 
 Transvaal Republic 
 First Boer War 
 Second Boer War 
 Great Depression 
 World War II 
 Apartheid 
 Border War 
 Democratic South Africa 
 By topic 
 Economy 
 Military 
 Geography 
 Biodiversity 
 Climate 
 Climate change 
 Districts 
 Earthquakes 
 Estuaries 
 Forests 
 Islands 
 Lakes 
 Mountain ranges 
 Municipalities 
 National parks 
 Populated places 
 Provinces 
 Rivers 
 Wildlife 
 Politics 
 Constitution 
 Courts 
 Corruption 
 Elections 
 Foreign relations 
 Government 
 Human rights 
 Law 
 Law enforcement 
 Military 
 Parliament 
 Political parties 
 President 
 State security 
 Economy 
 Agriculture 
 Banking 
 Companies 
 Communications 
 Economic history 
 Energy 
 Foreign trade 
 Mining industry 
 Rand  (currency) 
 Stock exchange 
 State-owned enterprises 
 Taxation 
 Tourism 
 Trade unions 
 Transport 
 Water and sanitation 
 Society 
 Crime 
 Disability 
 Education 
 Feminism 
 Health 
 Healthcare 
 Immigration 
 Intersex 
 Languages 
 LGBT 
 Racism 
 Religion 
 Sexual violence 
 Slum clearance 
 Smoking 
 Social movements 
 Xenophobia 
 Culture 
 Architecture 
 Art 
 Cinema 
 Cuisine 
 HIV/AIDS 
 Homelessness 
 Literature 
 Media 
 Music 
 National symbols 
 Public holidays 
 Sports 
 World Heritage Sites 
 heritage sites 
 Demographics 
 South African Bantu-speaking peoples 
 Ndebele 
 Pedi 
 Sotho 
 Swazi 
 Tsonga 
 Tswana 
 Venda 
 Xhosa 
 Zulu 
 Khoisan 
 Khoekhoe 
 San people 
 Whites 
 Afrikaners 
 British 
 Coloureds 
 Cape Coloureds 
 Cape Malays 
 Griquas 
 Indians 
 Chinese 
 Outline Index 
 Category 
 Portal 
 v t e African cuisine National cuisines 
 Algeria 
 Angola 
 Benin 
 Botswana 
 Burkina Faso 
 Burundi 
 Cameroon 
 Cape Verde 
 Central African Republic 
 Chad 
 Comoros 
 Democratic Republic of the Congo 
 Djibouti 
 Egypt 
 Equatorial Guinea 
 Eritrea 
 Eswatini (Swaziland) 
 Ethiopia 
 Gabon 
 Gambia 
 Ghana 
 Guinea 
 Guinea-Bissau 
 Ivory Coast 
 Kenya 
 Lesotho 
 Liberia 
 Libya 
 Madagascar 
 Malawi 
 Mali 
 Mauritania 
 Mauritius 
 Morocco 
 Mozambique 
 Namibia 
 Niger 
 Nigeria 
 Republic of the Congo 
 Rwanda 
 Saint Helena 
 São Tomé and Príncipe 
 Senegal 
 Seychelles 
 Sierra Leone 
 Somalia 
 South Africa 
 South Sudan 
 Sudan 
 Tanzania 
 Togo 
 Tunisia 
 Uganda 
 Western Sahara 
 Zambia 
 Zimbabwe 
 Ethnic and regional cuisines 
 Arab 
 Berber 
 Jewish 
 Ethiopian 
 Mizrahi 
 Sephardi 
 Mediterranean 
 North African 
 West African 
 Zanzibar 
 Lists 
 List of African cuisines 
 List of African dishes 
 
   Category 
 
 v t e Cuisines Continental 
 African 
 North 
 West 
 list 
 Americas 
 Caribbean 
 North 
 South 
 list 
 Asian 
 Caucasian 
 Central 
 Indian subcontinent 
 Levantine 
 list 
 European 
 Balkan 
 Central 
 Eastern 
 list 
 Oceanic 
 Intercontinental
 Global 
 Latin American 
 Mediterranean 
 Middle Eastern 
 National  and regional 
 Afghan 
 Albanian 
 Algerian 
 American 
 Californian 
 Floribbean 
 Hawaiian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Lowcountry (South Carolina) 
 New England 
 New Mexico 
 Pacific Northwest 
 Pennsylvania Dutch 
 Puerto Rican 
 Southern US 
 Southwest US 
 Texas 
 Angolan 
 Argentine 
 Armenian 
 Australian 
 Austrian 
 Azerbaijani 
 Bahraini 
 Bangladeshi 
 Barbadian 
 Belarusian 
 Belgian 
 Belizean 
 Beninese 
 Bhutanese 
 Bolivian 
 Bosnian-Herzegovinian 
 Botswana 
 Brazilian 
 British 
 Channel Islands 
 English 
 Gibraltarian 
 Northern Irish 
 Saint Helena 
 Scottish 
 Welsh 
 Bruneian 
 Bulgarian 
 Burkinabé 
 Burmese 
 Burundian 
 Cambodian 
 Cameroonian 
 Canadian 
 Acadian 
 Québécois 
 Central African Republic 
 Chadian 
 Chilean 
 Chinese 
 Cantonese 
 Hong Kong 
 Macanese 
 Tibetan 
 Xinjiang 
 Colombian 
 Congolese 
 Corsican 
 Croatian 
 Cuban 
 Cypriot 
 Czech 
 Danish 
 Faroese 
 Greenlandic 
 Djiboutian 
 Dominican 
 Dominican Republic 
 Dutch 
 East Timorese 
 Ecuadorian 
 Egyptian 
 Emirati 
 Equatorial Guinean 
 Eritrean 
 Estonian 
 Ethiopian 
 Fijian 
 Filipino 
 Finnish 
 French 
 Occitan 
 French Guianan 
 Gabonese 
 Gambian 
 Georgian 
 German 
 Ghanaian 
 Greek 
 Cretan 
 Epirotic 
 Greek Macedonian 
 Heptanesean 
 Guatemalan 
 Guinea-Bissauan 
 Guinean 
 Haitian 
 Honduran 
 Hungarian 
 Icelandic 
 Indian 
 Arunachalese 
 Assamese 
 Bengali 
 Bihari 
 Goan 
 Gujarati 
 Himachal Pradesh 
 Kashmiri 
 Jharkhandi 
 Karnataka 
 Kerala 
 Maharashtrian 
 Manipuri 
 Meghalayan 
 Mizo 
 Naga 
 Odia 
 Punjabi 
 Rajasthani 
 Sikkimese 
 Sindhi 
 Tamil 
 Telangana 
 Telugu 
 Indonesian 
 Acehnese 
 Balinese 
 Banjar 
 Batak 
 Betawi 
 Indo 
 Javanese 
 Madurese 
 Makassar 
 Minahasan 
 Minangkabau 
 Palembangese 
 Sundanese 
 Iranian 
 Iraqi 
 Irish 
 Israeli 
 Italian 
 Abruzzese 
 Ligurian 
 Lombard 
 Lucanian 
 Neapolitan 
 Roman 
 Sardinian 
 Sicilian 
 Venetian 
 Ivorian 
 Jamaican 
 Japanese 
 Okinawan 
 Jordanian 
 Kazakh 
 Kenyan 
 Korean 
 North Korean 
 South Korean 
 Kosovan 
 Kuwaiti 
 Kyrgyz 
 Lao 
 Latvian 
 Lebanese 
 Lesotho 
 Liberian 
 Libyan 
 Liechtensteiner 
 Lithuanian 
 Luxembourg 
 Macedonian 
 Malagasy 
 Malawian 
 Malaysian 
 Sabahan 
 Sarawakian 
 Maldivian 
 Malian 
 Maltese 
 Mauritanian 
 Mauritian 
 Mexican 
 Moldovan 
 Monégasque 
 Mongolian 
 Montenegrin 
 Moroccan 
 Mozambican 
 Namibian 
 Nauruan 
 Nepalese 
 New Zealand 
 Nicaraguan 
 Niger 
 Nigerian 
 Niuean 
 Norwegian 
 Omani 
 Pakistani 
 Palestinian 
 Panamanian 
 Peruvian 
 Polish 
 Portuguese 
 Qatari 
 Romanian  (incl.  Transylvanian Saxon ) 
 Russian 
 Bashkir 
 Chechen 
 Circassian 
 Komi 
 Mordovian 
 Sakha 
 Tatar 
 Udmurt 
 Yamal 
 Rwandan 
 Saint Lucian 
 Salvadoran 
 Sammarinese 
 São Tomé and Príncipe 
 Saudi Arabian 
 Senegalese 
 Serbian 
 Seychellois 
 Sierra Leonean 
 Singaporean 
 Slovak 
 Slovenian 
 Somali 
 South African 
 Spanish 
 Andalusian 
 Asturian 
 Balearic 
 Basque 
 Canarian 
 Cantabrian 
 Catalan 
 Extremaduran 
 Galician 
 Manchegan 
 Valencian 
 Sri Lankan 
 Sudanese 
 Swazi 
 Swedish 
 Swiss 
 Syrian 
 Taiwanese 
 Tajik 
 Tanzanian 
 Zanzibari 
 Thai 
 Togolese 
 Tunisian 
 Turkish 
 Turkmen 
 Trinidadian and Tobagonian 
 Ugandan 
 Ukrainian 
 Uruguayan 
 Uzbek 
 Venezuelan 
 Vietnamese 
 Western Saharan 
 Yemeni 
 Zambian 
 Zimbabwean 
 Ethnic 
 Ainu 
 Arab 
 Indonesian 
 Aromanian 
 Assyrian 
 Balochi 
 Berber 
 Cajun 
 Chinese 
 American 
 Canadian 
 Chifa 
 Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Crimean Tatar 
 Greek American 
 Hazaragi 
 Indian 
 Anglo-Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Indigenous American 
 Inuit 
 Italian American 
 Kurdish 
 Livonian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Malay 
 Ossetian 
 Parsi 
 Pashtun 
 Peranakan 
 Romani 
 Sámi 
 Soul food 
 Sylheti 
 Transylvanian Saxon 
 Yup'ik 
 Religious 
 Buddhist 
 Christian 
 Goan Catholic 
 Mangalorean Catholic 
 Mennonite 
 Hindu 
 Islamic 
 Chinese 
 Ital 
 Jain 
 Jewish 
 American 
 Ashkenazi 
 Bukharan 
 Ethiopian 
 Mizrahi 
 Sephardic 
 Syrian 
 Ritual slaughter 
 Sikh 
 Historical 
 Ancient Egyptian 
 Ancient Greek 
 Ancient Israelite 
 Ancient Roman 
 Antebellum America 
 Aztec 
 Byzantine 
 Early modern European 
 Historical Chinese 
 Historical Indian subcontinent 
 Historical North Indian and Pakistani 
 History of agriculture 
 History of alcoholic drinks 
 History of bread 
 History of seafood 
 History of vegetarianism 
 Historical Argentine 
 Historical Japanese 
 Inca 
 Mayan 
 Muisca 
 Mughal 
 Medieval 
 Ottoman 
 Peasant 
 Soviet 
 Thirteen Colonies 
 Styles 
 Classique 
 Fast food 
 Fusion 
 New American 
 Eurasian 
 Haute 
 Molecular gastronomy 
 Note by Note 
 Nouvelle 
 Lists 
 List of cuisines 
 List of historical cuisines 
 Lists of prepared foods 
 Related 
 Cookbook 
 Cooking 
 Culinary arts 
 Drink 
 Food 
 history 
 Diet 
 Meal preparation 
 
   Food portal 
   Drink portal 
   Category 
   Commons 
   Cookbook 
   WikiProject 
   Outline 
 
 Authority control : National libraries  
 France 
 BnF data 
 Israel 
 United States 
 
  
NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw2412
Cached time: 20230311090632
Cache expiry: 1814400
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc, no‐toc‐conversion]
CPU time usage: 0.688 seconds
Real time usage: 0.925 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3675/1000000
Post‐expand include size: 189468/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 16995/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 16/100
Expensive parser function count: 59/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 102231/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.317/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 8435479/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/400
 
 
Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  653.566      1 -total
 21.73%  141.996      1 Template:Reflist
 18.42%  120.415      1 Template:Culture_of_South_Africa
 17.97%  117.422      1 Template:Culture_of_region
 17.54%  114.652      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 15.71%  102.648      1 Template:South_Africa_topics
 15.39%  100.577      1 Template:Country_topics
  9.53%   62.281      4 Template:Navbox
  9.32%   60.883      2 Template:Commons_category
  9.04%   59.109      1 Template:Citation
 
  Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:idhash:1646548-0!canonical and timestamp 20230311090631 and revision id 1142990940. Rendering was triggered because: page-view
  
 esi <esi:include src="/esitest-fa8a495983347898/content" />  
 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=South_African_cuisine&oldid=1142990940 " 
 Categories :  South African cuisine Southern African cuisine Hidden categories:  Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata EngvarB from July 2016 Use dmy dates from July 2016 Commons category link is on Wikidata Commons category link is locally defined Articles with BNF identifiers Articles with J9U identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  This page was last edited on 5 March 2023, at 10:24  (UTC) . 
 Text is available under the  Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0 ;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the  Terms of Use  and  Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the  Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. 
 
 
 Privacy policy 
 About Wikipedia 
 Disclaimers 
 Contact Wikipedia 
 Mobile view 
 Developers 
 Statistics 
 Cookie statement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
