
 
 
 Jump to content 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle sidebar 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Create account Log in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Personal tools 
 
 
 
 
   Create account   Log in 
 
 
 
 
		Pages for logged out editors  learn more 
 
 
 Contributions Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Navigation 
 
 
 Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate 
 
 
 
 
 Contribute 
 
 
 Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file 
 
 
 
 
 Tools 
 
 
 What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item 
 
 
 
 
 Print/export 
 
 
 Download as PDF Printable version 
 
 
 
 
 In other projects 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons Wikibooks Wikivoyage 
 
 
 
 
 Languages 
 
 On this Wikipedia the language links are at the top of the page across from the article title.  Go to top . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CentralNotice  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Contents 
 move to sidebar 
 hide 
 
 
 
 
 (Top) 
 
 
 
 
 
 1 History 
 
 
				Toggle History subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 1.1 Antiquity 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.2 Middle Ages 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.3 Modern era 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 Meal routines 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 Regional cuisines 
 
 
				Toggle Regional cuisines subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 3.1 Andalusia 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.2 Aragon 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.3 Asturias 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.4 Balearic Islands 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.5 Basque Country 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.6 Canary Islands 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.7 Cantabria 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.8 Castile-La Mancha 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.9 Castile and León 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.10 Catalonia 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.11 La Rioja 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.12 Extremadura 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.13 Galicia 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.14 Madrid 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.15 Murcia 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.16 Navarra 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.17 Valencia 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4 Customs 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5 Notable Spanish chefs 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6 See also 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 7 References 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8 External links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
						Toggle the table of contents
					 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle the table of contents 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Spanish cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 37 languages 
 
 
 
 العربية Azərbaycanca Български Català Čeština Cymraeg Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Jawa ქართული Kurdî Latina Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Tagalog Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 
 Edit links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Article Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 English 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 More 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
 
 
 Culinary traditions of Spain 
 
 
 
 Part of  a series  on the Culture of Spain 
 History 
 People 
 Languages 
 Mythology  and  Folklore 
 Cuisine 
 Festivals 
 Religion 
 Christianity
 Catholicism 
 Protestantism 
 Orthodox 
 Islam 
 Ahmadiyya 
 Judaism 
 Bahá'í 
 Hinduism 
 
 Art 
 Literature 
 Music 
 Media 
 Radio 
 Television 
 Cinema 
 
 Sport 
 Monuments 
 World Heritage Sites 
 
 Symbols 
 Flag 
 Coat of arms 
 National anthem 
 
   Spain portal v t e 
 
 
 
 Wikibooks  Cookbook  has a recipe/module on
 
  Spanish cooking 
 
 Spanish cuisine  consists of the cooking traditions and practices from  Spain .  Olive oil  (of which Spain is the world's largest producer) is heavily used in Spanish cuisine. [1] [2]  It forms the base of many vegetable sauces (known in Spanish as  sofritos ). [3]  Herbs most commonly used include  parsley ,  oregano ,  rosemary  and  thyme . [4]  The use of  garlic  has been noted as common in Spanish cooking. [5]  The most used meats in Spanish cuisine include  chicken ,  pork ,  lamb  and  veal . [6]   Fish  and  seafood  are also consumed on a regular basis. [6]   Tapas  are snacks and appetizers commonly served with drinks in bars and cafes.
 
 History [ edit ] 
 See also:  History of Spain 
 Antiquity [ edit ] 
   Growing of the Mediterranean triad in the province of Huelva 
 Authors like  Strabo  wrote about aboriginal people of Spain using nuts and acorns as staple food. [7]  The extension of the vines along the Mediterranean seems to be due to the colonization of the Greeks and the  Phoenicians  who introduced the cultivation of  olive oil . Spain is the largest producer of olive oil in the world. The growing of crops of the so-called  tríada mediterránea  (the "Mediterranean triad":  wheat ,  grapevines , and  olives ) underpinned the staple meal products for the inhabitants of the south of the Iberian Peninsula during the Roman Era ( bread ,  wine  and  oil ). [8] 
 
 Middle Ages [ edit ] 
 The  Visigoths ’ limited but lasting contributions to Spanish cuisine include the spread of consumption of  fermented milk  and the preference for avoiding the mixing of water and wine. [9] 
 Rice  was possibly introduced for the first time by  Byzantines  in the Iberian Peninsula by the 6th century, while, following the  Muslim conquest of the Iberian peninsula  in the 8th century, Arabs expanded rice cultivation, [10]  bringing new irrigation techniques originally from the Indian subcontinent that also allowed for the cultivation of crops such as  sugar cane ,  watermelon ,  lemon  and  oranges . [11]  Other ingredients introduced in the Iberian Peninsula during the Hispano-Muslim period include  sorghum ,  spinach ,  eggplant ,  peach ,  apricot  and  saffron . [12] 
The most famous Spanish dish,  paella , uses two ingredients introduced by the Moors, rice and saffron. [13] 
 
   Illustration of the "supper of Tarragona" of  James I of Aragon  in an edition of the  Llibre dels fets  published in 1343. 
 Moors  also developed the basis for the art of  pastry -making and introduced  escabeche , [14]  a food preservation technique relying on vinegar. Dishes like  ajo blanco ,  alboronía , [15]   alajú , [16]   hallulla , [ clarification needed ] [17]   albóndigas , [18]   mojama , [19]   arrope , [20]  are some of the many legacies of  Moorish  cuisine. [21] [13] [22]  Although Muslim religion does not allow alcoholic drinks, the consumption of wine was widespread as the Qur'anic precepts never got to overrule the preexisting traditions in this regard. [23]  There are many accounts of the "drinking chats" of  Abd al-Rahman II ,  Abd al-Rahman III  and  Almanzor . [24]   Almodrote  (a formerly popular sauce preparation out of vogue since the late 17th century) was a  Sephardic recipe  in origin. [25]  Observing the  kashrut  regulations, Jews and  judaizantes  opted for blood-drained meat and without fat, outright rejecting bacon. [26]   Potajes  were an important part of the Jewish cuisine in the Middle Ages, most notably  adafina , a local name for a  ḥamin  dish,  [27]  along with other Jewish culinary legacies in Spain since. [28] [29] [30] 
The cookbook history in the country might be traced back to works such as the  Llibre de Sent Soví  (1324) and Ruperto de Nola's  Llibre de Coch  (1520), [31]  both written in the Catalan language.
 
 Modern era [ edit ] 
 See also:  Columbian exchange 
   Old Woman Frying Eggs (The Old Cook)  (c. 1618) by  Diego Velázquez .  Scottish National Gallery . 
   Still-life painting by  Luis Egidio Meléndez  (1774) featuring cucumbers and tomatoes. 
   The kitchen of the Asylum of San Bernardino in Madrid (c. 1908). 
 The arrival of Europeans to the  Americas  in 1492, initiated the advent of new culinary elements, such as  tomatoes ,  potatoes ,  maize ,  bell peppers , spicy  peppers ,  paprika ,  vanilla  and  cocoa , or  chocolate . Spain is where chocolate was first mixed with sugar to temper its natural bitterness. Other ingredients traveled to the Americas, such as rice, grapes, olives and many types of cereals. [32]  Spain was the bridge for the Columbian exchange between the rest of Europe and the New World. [33] 
 Influenced by  Arabic   harisa , grain-based soups such as  farinetes  (along the Mediterranean coast) and, similarly,  gachas  (in Castile) were customary in Early Modern Spain. [34] 
 Foreign visitors noted with disdain the Spaniards' use of  olive oil  and (pig's)  lard  for cooking rather than their preferred (cow's)  butter . The latter was barely available and, according to the 17th-century account of  Madame d'Aulnoy , on the rare occasions that it was, would come "from afar, preserved in pig's tripes and full of worms". Butter was only produced locally in places such as Galicia, Asturias and Soria, or was imported, preserved in  potassium nitrate , (the so-called "Flanders' butter"). [35] 
 By the 18th century, many American ingredients, such as peppers and tomatoes, had been already fully incorporated to the Spanish cuisine, bringing new strong flavours; contemporary foreign visitors such as French ambassador  Jean-François de Bourgoing , judged negatively this gastronomic synthesis happening in Spain by the late part of the century: "Spanish cooking, which they have inherited, is not generally pleasing to foreigners. Spaniards like strong condiments such as pepper, tomato sauce, hot peppers and saffron, which color or infect nearly all their dishes". [36] 
 Many traditional Spanish dishes such as  tortilla de patata  (an omelette made with  potatoes ), would not be possible without the Columbian exchange.  Gazpacho ,  salmorejo , and  pan con tomate  are made with  tomatoes , which traveled from the New World to the Old World. [ citation needed ] 
 For most of the 19th century, the aristocracy consumed a set of dishes that was largely an imitation of French cuisine. That was the available cuisine at the time, together with the degeneration of regional cuisines. [37]  A positive foreign take on the Spanish dishes opposing the largely negative views from foreign commentators was that of  Richard Ford , fond of Spanish specialties such as  Sherry  and  ham . [37] 
 Modern Spanish cuisine was gestated in the late 19th to early 20th century, with gastronomes and writers such as  Mariano Pardo de Figueroa  (Dr. Thebussem),  José Castro y Serrano ,  Ángel Muro ,  Emilia Pardo Bazán  and  Dionisio Pérez , some of which put an effort in developing the idea of a "national cuisine" recognisable by Spaniards as their own. [38] 
 Keen on participating in the Spanish nation-building process, Dr. Thebussem, in an autochthonous example of  culinary nationalism , proposed to the King's Chef that the  olla podrida  (a rustic stew typically made of meat, legumes and other vegetables) should be served at official banquets as a national dish. [39]  This can be considered as an important step to stray away from the French cooking paradigm, [40]  hegemonic in the 19th century in Europe.  Olla podrida  had been indeed previously ridiculed in foreign (most notably French) satires. [41] 
 Although the new foodscape built in opposition to the French centralist culinary model accounted for the awareness of the distinctive regional singularities, subsequent food writers in the country would continue to cope with the tension between the Spanish peripheral and centralist foodscapes. [42] 
 The extremely influential cooking book  1080 recetas de cocina  by  Simone Ortega  (first published in 1972) became a hit in Spain, remaining as of 2019 the third best-selling book ever in the history of the country after  Don Quixote  and the Bible. [43]  This was however not a book exclusively of Spanish traditional recipes, but to a large extent it included French recipes, bringing an exotic penchant to the Spanish homes. [43] 
 Televised  cooking shows  started in the country in 1984 with  Con las manos en la masa . [44] 
 
 Meal routines [ edit ] 
 This section  needs additional citations for  verification .  Please help  improve this article  by  adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.   ( July 2021 )  ( Learn how and when to remove this template message ) 
   Chocolate con  churros , a popular meal served for breakfast 
 A  continental-style   breakfast  ( desayuno ) may be taken just after waking up, or before entering the workplace. Common products taken during breakfast include  coffee , milk, chocolate drink, biscuits (most notably  Marie biscuits ),  magdalenas , toasts (featuring ingredients such as oil, tomato and butter, bread toasts are a staple part of the  desayuno  either consumed at home or in bars) or  churros . [45] 
 Due to the large time span between breakfast and lunch, it is not uncommon to halt the working schedule to take a  mid-morning snack .
 Lunch  ( el almuerzo  or simply  la comida , literally meaning "the food"), the large midday meal in Spain, contains several courses, especially in restaurants. In some regions of Spain, the word  almuerzo  refers to the mid-morning snack, instead of lunch. Lunch usually starts between 2:00 pm or 2:30 pm finishing around 3:00 pm to 3:30 pm, and is usually followed by  sobremesa , which refers to the table talk that Spanish people undertake. Menus are organized according to these courses and include five or six choices in each course. At home, Spanish meals would contain one or two courses and a dessert. The content of this meal is usually a soup dish, salad, a meat or a fish dish and a dessert such as fruit, yoghurt or something sweet.  Tapas  may also be typically served before or during lunch.
 In recent years [ clarification needed ] , the Spanish government took action to shorten the lunch break, in order to end the working day earlier. Most businesses shut down for two or three hours for lunch, then resume the working day until dinner time in the evening. [46] [47] 
 La cena , meaning both  dinner  or  supper , is taken between 8:30pm and 11pm. It typically consists of one course and dessert. Due to the large time span between lunch and dinner, an afternoon snack,  la merienda , equivalent to  afternoon tea , may take place at about 6pm. At merienda, people would typically drink coffee, eat something sweet, a sandwich or a piece of fruit.
 Some country-wide staple dishes common throughout Spain include  croquetas  (croquettes),  paella  (a rice dish incorporating different ingredients as it moves away from the area of origin in the Valencia region),  ensaladilla rusa  (the local name for the Olivier salad),  gazpacho  (a vegetable cold soup) and  tortilla de patatas  (Spanish omelette). [48]  There is a disagreement in Spanish society when it comes to preferring  onion  as an ingredient in the Spanish omelette, often accompanied by exclusionary and vehement takes by either side. [49] 
 
 
 
 
 
 Boquerones en vinagre 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Croquetas 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Processed   gazpacho  carton packages
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pincho de tortilla 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mejillones en escabeche 
 
 
 
 
 Appetizers  right before lunch or dinner, or during them, are common in the form of  tapas  (small portions). It is common for  tapas  to be provided as a complimentary appetizer in bars and cafes when ordering a drink. [50]  Aside from some of the aforementioned specialties, other signature  tapas  include:  mejillones en  escabeche  (marinated mussels),  gildas ,  albóndigas  (meatballs),  callos ,  torreznos  or  raxo de cerdo . [51] 
 
 Regional cuisines [ edit ] 
 This section  needs additional citations for  verification .  Please help  improve this article  by  adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.   ( July 2021 )  ( Learn how and when to remove this template message ) 
 Andalusia [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Andalusian cuisine 
   Gazpacho 
   Boquerones fritos  (deep-fried anchovies). 
 Andalusian cuisine  is twofold: rural and coastal. Of all the Spanish regions, this region uses the most  olive oil  in its cuisine. The Andalusian dish that has achieved the most international fame is  gazpacho , from Hispanic Arabic  gazpáčo . [52]  It is a cold soup made with five vegetables, vinegar, water, salt, olive oil, and stale bread crumbs. Other cold soups include  poleá ,  zoque  and  salmorejo .
 Snacks made with olives are common. Meat dishes include  flamenquín ,  pringá ,  oxtail  stew, and  menudo gitano  (also called Andalusian tripe). Hot soups include  sopa de gato  (made with bread),  caldillo de perro  (fish soup with orange juice) and  migas canas . Fish dishes include  pescaíto frito ,  soldaditos de Pavía , and  parpandúa . A culinary custom is the typical Andalusian breakfast, which is considered to be a traditional characteristic of laborers which is extending throughout Spain.
 Cured meats include  Serrano ham  and  Iberico ham . Typical drinks in the area include  anise , wine (such as  Malaga , Jerez, and  Pedro Ximénez ), and  sherry brandy .
 
 Aragon [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Aragonese cuisine 
 Aragonese cuisine  has a rural and mountainous origin. The central part of Aragon, the flattest, is the richest in culinary specialties. Being in a land where lambs are raised on the slopes of the  Pyrenees , one of its most famous dishes is  roast lamb , or  asado de ternasco . The lamb is cooked with garlic, salt, and bacon fat. Pork dishes are also very popular. Among them,  magras con tomate  [ es ] , roasted pork leg [ clarification needed ] , and  almojábanas de cerdo [ clarification needed ] . [53]  Among the recipes made with bread are  migas de Pastor ,  migas con chocolate  [ es ] ,  regañaos  [ es ] , and  goguera  [ es ] . The most notable condiment is  garlic oil .
 Legumes  are very important, but the most popular vegetables are  borage  and  thistle . In terms of cured meats,  jamón de Teruel  [ es ]  and also ham from  Huesca  are used often. Among the cheeses,  queso de Tronchón  [ es ]  is notable. Fruit-based cuisine includes the very popular fruits of Aragon (Spanish:  frutas de Aragon , which are  candied fruits ) and  maraschino cherries .
 
 Asturias [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Asturian cuisine 
   Asturian  fabada  (bean stew) 
   Cabrales blue cheese 
 Asturian cuisine  has a long and rich history, deeply rooted in Celtic traditions of  Atlantic Europe . [ citation needed ]  One of its most famous dishes is  fabada asturiana .  Fabada  is the traditional stew of the region, made with white beans, sausages (such as  chorizo  and  morcilla  [ es ] ), and pork. A well-known recipe is  fabes con almejas  (beans with  clams ). Asturian beans ( fabes ) can also be cooked with  hare ,  partridge ,  prawns , or  octopus . Also of note are  pote asturiano  [ es ]  (made with white beans, kale, potatoes and a variety of sausages and bacon) and  potaje de vigilia  [ es ] .
 Pork-based foods, for example,  chosco  [ ast ] ,  callos a l'asturiana  [ ast ]  and  bollu preñáu  [ ast ]  (chorizo-stuffed bread rolls), are popular. Common meat dishes include  carne gobernada  [ es ]  (roasted veal),  cachopo  (a crunchy, crumb-coated veal steak stuffed with ham and cheese), and  caldereta  [ es ] . Fish and seafood play an important role in Asturian cuisine. The  Cantabrian Sea  provides a rich variety of species, including tuna, hake and sardines.
 Asturian cheeses  are very popular in the rest of Spain. Among them, the most representative is  Cabrales cheese , a pungent, blue cheese developed in the regions near the  Picos de Europa . Other popular cheese types are  gamonéu   afuega'l pitu , and  queso de Pría  [ es ] . These can be enjoyed with the local  cider , a low-alcohol drink made of Asturian apples, with a distinctive sourness.
 Asturian cider,  Sidra de Asturias  [ es ] , made of a special type of apple, is traditionally poured  escanciada  from a certain height, usually over the head of the waiter/server: one hand holds the glass, slightly tilted, under the hip, while the other hand throws the cider from atop, the arm usually stretched upwards. When the cider falls into the glass from above, the drink "breaks", getting aerated and bubbly. It is consumed immediately after being served, in consecutive, tiny shots.
 Notable desserts are  frisuelos  [ es ]  (similar to  crêpes , usually filled with cream or apple jam),  rice pudding  (white rice cooked with milk, lemon zest and sugar), and  carbayón (dulce)  [ ast ]  ( puff pastry  cakes filled with almond mash and covered with sugar glaze).
 
 Balearic Islands [ edit ] 
 Main articles:  Balearic cuisine  and  Cuisine of Menorca 
 Balearic cuisine  has purely  Mediterranean  characteristics due to its location. The islands have been conquered several times throughout their history by the French and the English, which left some culinary influences. Some well known food items are the  sobrassada ,  arroz brut  [ es ] ,  mahón cheese ,  gin de Menorca  ( pelota ), and  mayonnaise . Among the dishes are  tumbet ,  frito mallorquín  [ es ] , and  roasted suckling pig . Popular deserts include  ensaïmada ,  tambor d'ametlla , and  suspiros de Manacor . Balearic food is an example of the famous Mediterranean diet due to the importance of  olive oil ,  legumes ,  unrefined cereals ,  fruits ,  vegetables  and  fish .
 
 Basque Country [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Basque cuisine 
   Kokotxas al pilpil , traditionally made of hake or cod throats. 
 The  cuisine  of the  Basque Country  has a wide and varied range of ingredients and preparations. The culture of eating is very strong among the inhabitants of this region. [ clarification needed ]  Highlights include meat and fish dishes. Among fish,  cod  ( bacalao ) is produced in various preparations:  bacalao al pil pil  [ es ] ,  bacalao a la vizcaína  [ es ] , to name a few. Also popular are  anchovies ,  bream , and  bonito . Among the most famous dishes is  changurro  [ es ] . Common meat dishes are beef steaks, pork loin with milk, fig leaf quail, and marinated goose.
 Txakoli  or  chacolí  (a  white wine  characterised by its high acidity and a lesser-than-average alcohol content) is a staple drink from the Basque Country, produced in  Álava  and  Biscay . [54] 
 
 Canary Islands [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Canarian cuisine 
   Dish of  puchero canario  [ es ] . 
   Canarian wrinkly potatoes  with red mojo sauce. 
 The  Canary Islands  have a unique cuisine due to their geographical location in the  Atlantic  ocean. The Canary Islands were part of the trading routes to the  Americas , hence creating a melting pot of different culinary traditions.  Fish  (fresh or salted) and  potatoes  are among the most common staple foods in the islands. The consumption of  cheese ,  fruits , and  pork meat  also characterizes Canarian cuisine. The closeness to Africa [ dubious    –  discuss ]  influences climate and creates a range of warm temperatures that in modern times have fostered the agriculture of tropical and semitropical crops:  bananas ,  yams ,  mangoes ,  avocados , and  persimmons  which are heavily used in Canarian cuisine.
 The aboriginal people,  Guanches , based their diet on  gofio  (a type of flour made of different toasted grains),  shellfish , and  goat  and pork products.  Gofio  is still consumed in the islands and has become part of the traditional cuisine.
 A sauce called  mojo  is very common throughout the islands. It has been adapted and developed in many ways, so that it may complement various main dishes. Fish dishes usually require a "green  mojo " made from  coriander  or  parsley , while roasted meats require a red variety made from chilli peppers that are commonly known as  mojo picón .
 Some classic dishes in the Canary Islands include  papas arrugadas ,  almogrote ,  frangollo , rabbit in " salmorejo  sauce", and stewed goat.
 Some popular desserts are:  truchas  (pastries filled with sweet potato or pumpkin), roasted  gofio  (a  gofio -based dough with nuts and honey),  príncipe Alberto  (a mousse-like preparation with almonds, coffee, and chocolate), and  quesillo  (a variety of flan made with condensed milk).
 Wineries are common in the islands. However, only  Malvasia wine  from  Lanzarote  has gained international recognition.
 
 Cantabria [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Cantabrian cuisine 
   Cantabrian  cocido montañés 
 A popular  Cantabrian dish  is  cocido montañés  (highlander stew), a rich  stew  made with  beans ,  cabbage , and pork.
 Seafood  is widely used and  bonito  is present in the typical  sorropotún  or  marmita de bonitu  [ ast ]  ( tuna pot ).
 Recognized quality meats are  Tudanca   veal  and game meat.
 Cantabrian pastries include  sobaos  and  quesadas pasiegas .  Dairy products  include  Cantabrian cream cheese ,  smoked cheeses ,  picón Bejes-Tresviso ,  and  quesucos de Liébana  [ es ] .
 Orujo  is the Cantabrian  pomace brandy .  Cider  ( sidra ) and  chacoli  wine are also favorites. [55] [56] 
 Cantabria has two  wines  labelled  DOC :  Costa de Cantabria  and  Liébana .
 
 Castile-La Mancha [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Castilian-Manchego cuisine 
   Gastronomía manchega ,  Pedro Muñoz , Spain 
 In  Castilla-La Mancha , the culinary habits reflect the origin of foods eaten by  shepherds  and  peasants . It is said that the best La Mancha cuisine cookbook is the novel  Don Quixote  by  Miguel de Cervantes . Wheat and grains are a dominant product and ingredient. They are used in bread, soups,  gazpacho manchego , crumbs [ clarification needed ] ,  porridge , etc. One of the most abundant ingredients in Manchego cuisine is  garlic , leading to dishes such as  ajoarriero  [ es ] ,  ajo puerco , and  garlic marinade [ clarification needed ] .
 Some traditional recipes are  gazpacho manchego ,  pisto manchego , and  migas ruleras  [ es ] . Also popular is  morteruelo  [ es ] , a kind of foie gras manchego.  Manchego cheese  is also renowned.
 Given the fact that its lands are dry, and thus unable to sustain large amounts of  cattle  living on grass, an abundance of small animals, such as  rabbit , and especially birds ( pheasant ,  quail ,  partridge ,  squab ), can be found. This led to  game meat  being incorporated into traditional dishes, such as  conejo al Ajillo  (rabbit in  garlic sauce ),  perdiz escabechada  [ es ]  (marinated partridge) or  huevos de codorniz   ( quail eggs )).
 
 Castile and León [ edit ] 
 Main articles:  Castilian-Leonese cuisine ,  Leonese cuisine , and  Cuisine of the province of Valladolid 
   Roast  lechazo 
 In  Castile and León  characteristic dishes include  morcilla , (a black pudding made with special spices),  judión de la Granja  [ es ] ,  sopa de ajo  (garlic soup),  Cochinillo asado  ( roast piglet ),  lechazo  (roast lamb),  botillo del Bierzo ,  hornazo  from Salamanca,  jamón de Guijuelo  [ es ]  (a cured ham from Guijuelo, Salamanca),  salchicha de Zaratán  [ es ] ,  other sausages, Serrada cheese [ clarification needed ] ,  queso de Burgos  [ es ] , and  Ribera del Duero  wines.
 Major wines in Castilian-Leonese cuisine include the robust wine of  Toro , reds from  Ribera del Duero , whites from  Rueda , and  clarets  from  Cigales .
 
 Catalonia [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Catalan cuisine 
   Escalivada 
 The cuisine of  Catalonia  is based in a rural culture; it is very extensive and has great culinary wealth. It features cuisine from three climates: coastal (seafood), mountains, and the interiors. Some famous dishes include  escudella ,  pa amb tomàquet ,  bean omelette [ clarification needed ] ,  coca de recapte  [ es ] ,  samfaina ,  thyme   soup , and  caragols a la llauna . Notable sauces are  romesco sauce ,  aioli ,  bouillabaisse  of Catalan origin and  picada .
 Cured pork cuisine includes  botifarra  (white and black) and the  fuet  of  Vic .
 Fish dishes include  suquet  [ es ]  ( fish stew ), cod stew, and  arròs negre .
 Among the vegetable dishes, the most famous are  calçots  and  escalivada  (roasted vegetables).
 Desserts dishes include  Catalan cream ,  carquinyolis ,  panellets ,  tortell , and  neules .
 
 La Rioja [ edit ] 
 La Rioja  is recognized by the use of meats such as pork and  cold cuts , which are produced after the traditional slaughter. Lamb is perhaps the second most popular meat product in this region ( chuletillas al sarmiento  [ es ] ). Veal is common in mountainous areas. Another well-known dish is  caparrones ,  Rioja stew. The most famous dish is  Rioja style potatoes  and  fritada . Lesser-known dishes are Holy lunch and  ajo huevo  (garlic eggs) [ clarification needed ] .  Pimientos asados  (roasted peppers) is a notable vegetable dish.
 La Rioja is famously known in Spain for its  red wine , so most of these dishes are served with wine. Rioja wine has designated origin status.
 
 Extremadura [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Extremaduran cuisine 
   Legs of Iberian ham 
 The cuisine of  Extremadura  is austere, with dishes prepared by shepherds. It is very similar to the cuisine of Castilla. Extremaduran cuisine is abundant in pork; it is said that the region is one of the best for  breeding pigs  in Spain, thanks to the  acorns  that grow in their fields.  Iberian pig  herds raised in the fields of  Montánchez  are characterized by dark skin and thin legs. This breed of pig is found exclusively in Southwestern Iberia, both in Spain and Portugal. Iberian pork products such as sausages are common and often added to stews ( cocido extremeño  [ es ] ), as well as  cachuela  [ es ]  (pork liver pâté seasoned with paprika, garlic and other spices).
 Other meat dishes are lamb stew or goat stew ( caldereta de cordero  and  caldereta de cabrito ). Highlights include game meats, such as  wild boar , partridge, pheasant, or venison.
 Distinctive cheeses from the region include the so-called  quesos de torta , sheep milk cheeses typically curdled with the infusion of  thistle : [57]  both the  torta of La Serena  and the  torta of El Casar  enjoy a protected designation of origin. [57]  Among the desserts are  leche frita ,  perrunilla  [ es ] , and  pestiños  ( fritters ), as well as many sweets that have their origins in  convents .
 Cod preparations are known, and  tench  is among the most traditional freshwater fish, with fish and vegetable dishes such as  moje de peces  or  escarapuche .
 
   Pimentón de la Vera 
 Soups are often bread-based and include a variety of both hot and cold ones.  Pennyroyal mint  is sometimes used to season  gazpachos  or soups such as  sopa de poleo . Extremaduran  ajoblanco  ( ajoblanco extremeño ) is a cold soup different from Andalusian  ajoblanco  since it contains egg yolk in the emulsion and vegetables but no almonds.
 The Northeastern  comarca  of  La Vera  produces  pimentón de la Vera  [ es ] , smoked paprika highly valued all over Spain and extensively used in Extremaduran cuisine.
 The region is also known for its  vino de pitarra  tradition, home-made wine made in small earthenware vessels. [58] 
 
 Galicia [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Galician cuisine 
   Mariscada , a plateau de fruits de mer. 
   Lacón con grelos  [ es ] 
 Galician cuisine is known in Spanish territory because of the emigration of its inhabitants. Similarly to neighbouring Asturias, Galicia shares some culinary traditions in stews and soups with the Celtic nations of Atlantic Europe. [59]  One of the most noted Galician dishes is soup. Also notable is pork with turnip tops, a popular component of the Galician carnival meal  laconadas . Another remarkable recipe is  caldo de castañas  [ es ]  (a chestnut broth), which is commonly consumed during winter. Pork products are also popular. [60] 
 The simplicity and authenticity of the Galician cooking methods were extolled already in the early 20th century by popular gastronome  Manuel Puga e Parga  (aka  Picadillo ), praising dishes such as  lacón con grelos  [ es ]  or  caldeiradas  ( fish stew ), opposed to the perceived sophistication of the French cuisine. [61] 
 The seafood dishes are very famous and rich in variety. Among these are the Galician  empanadas , octopus, scallops, crab, and barnacles. 
In the city of  Santiago de Compostela , located along an ancient pilgrim trail from the  Pyrenees , it was customary for travellers to first eat scallops upon arriving in the city. [62] 
 Among the many dairy products is  queso de tetilla .
 The  queimadas  (a folkloric preparation of  orujo ) consists of mixing of the alcoholic beverage with peels of orange or lemon, sugar or  coffee beans , prepared in a nearly ritual ceremony involving the  flambé  of the beverage. [63] 
 Sweets that are famous throughout the Iberian Peninsula are the  tarta de Santiago  and  filloas  [ es ]  ( crêpes ).
 Cattle breeding is very common in Galicia, therefore, a lot of red meat is consumed, typically with potatoes.
 
 Madrid [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Cuisine of the Community of Madrid 
   The  bocadillo de calamares  is a popular fast-food preparation in Madrid. [64] 
 Madrid did not gain its own identity in the Court until 1561, [ clarification needed ]  when  Philip II  moved the capital to Madrid. Since then, due to immigration, many of Madrid's culinary dishes have been made from modifications to dishes from other Spanish regions. Madrid, due to the influx of visitors from the nineteenth century onwards, was one of the first cities to introduce the concept of the restaurant, hosting some of the earliest examples. [ citation needed ] 
 
 Murcia [ edit ] 
   Cocido de pelotas . 
 The cuisine of the  region of Murcia  has two sides with the influence of Manchego cuisine. The region of Murcia is famous for its varied fruit production. Among the most outstanding dishes are:  tortilla murciana ,  zarangollo ,  mojete ,  aubergine a la crème,   pipirrana , etc. A typical sauce of this area is  ajo cabañil , used to accompany meat dishes.
 Regional dishes include  michirones  (beans cooked with bay leaves, hot peppers and garlic),  olla gitana ,  cocido murciano con pelotas ,  sopa de mondongo ,  and others.
 Some meat products from Murcia are  morcilla  ( black pudding ), which is flavored with oregano, and  pastel murciano , made with ground beef.
 Among fish and seafood are the golden salt [ clarification needed ] ,  Mar Menor  prawns and baked octopus.
 Rice dishes are common and include  caldero ,  arroz empedrado ,  paella Valenciana  (rice with rabbit and snails) ,  arroz de escribano , and  arroz viudo . 
 Among confectionery products are  exploradores  and  pastel de Cierva . They are typical in Murcia gastronomy and are found in almost every pastry shop in Murcia. They are both sweet and savoury at the same time.
 Desserts are abundant; among them are  paparajotes , Orchard [ clarification needed ] , stuffed pastries, and others.
 This region also has wine appellation of origin, as the wine from  Jumilla ,  Bullas  wine and wine  Yecla .
 
 Navarra [ edit ] 
   Chorizo de Pamplona . 
 The gastronomy of  Navarra  has many similarities with  Basque cuisine . Two of its flag dishes are  trucha a la navarra  (Navarra-style trout) and  ajoarriero , although we must not forget the  cordero en chilindrón  or  relleno . There are very curious recipes such as the Carlists eggs.
 Salted products are common and include  chorizo de Pamplona , stuffing and sausage. The lamb and beef have, at present, designations of origin. Among the dairy products are  Roncal cheese , the  curd  or  Idiazabal cheese . Typical alcoholic drinks include  claret  and  pacharán .
 
 Valencia [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Valencian cuisine 
 The cuisine of  Valencia  has two components, the rural (products of the field) and the coastal (seafood). One popular Valencia creation is  paella , a rice dish cooked in a circular pan and topped with vegetables and meats (originally rabbit and chicken). [65]  Dishes such as  arroz con costra ,   arròs negre ,  fideuá ,  arròz al horn , and rice with beans and turnips are also common in the city.
 Coastal towns supply the region with fish, leading to popular dishes like  all i pebre  ( fish stew ), typical of the  Albufera .
 Among the desserts are  coffee liqueur , chocolate Alicante, and  arnadí [66]  and  horchata , both of Muslim origin. [67]  Notably, during Christmas,  nougat  is made in  Alicante  and  Jijona ; also well-known are  peladillas  (almonds wrapped in a thick layer of caramel).
 
 Customs [ edit ] 
 It is traditional to prepare and eat small honey cakes ( galletas de miel ) for the feast of  Corpus Christi . [68] 
 
 Notable Spanish chefs [ edit ] 
   Spanish chef  Ferran Adrià 
 Ferran Adrià  of  El Bulli ,  Girona  (closed). [69] 
 Juan Mari Arzak ,  Arzak ,  San Sebastián ,  Guipúzcoa  (1989). [70] 
 Santi Santamaría ,  El Raco ,  Can Fabes ,  Barcelona  (1994). [71] 
 Martín Berasategui   Berasategui   Lasarte ,  Guipúzcoa  (2001). [72] 
 Carme Ruscalleda   Sant Pau  Sant Pol de Mar, Barcelona (2006). [73] 
 José Andrés   Minibar by José Andrés   Washington D.C.  Andres is a student of Adrià. He hosts  Made in Spain  on  PBS . [74] 
 Karlos Arguiñano , celebrity television chef. [75] 
 Sergi Arola,  La Broché ,  Arola  and  Sergi Arola Gastro . Arola is a student of Adrià who has been awarded two  Michelin stars . [76] 
 Penelope Casas , New York-born cookbook author. [77] [78] [79] 
 Carlos Dominguez Cidon  (León 1959–2009), recipient of the "Premio Alimentos" award in 1999 and Michelin Guiding Star award in 2004; author of eight books. [80] [81] 
 María Mestayer de Echagüe  (Bilbao b. 1878 d. 1956), also known as "Marquesa de Parabere", the author of a two-volume cooking encyclopaedia entitled  La Cocina Completa . There are sections dedicated to the  pantry  and table  etiquette . [82] [ self-published source ] 
 Ángel Muro, a 19th-century food expert and author of the book  Practicón . [83] 
 Simone and Ines Ortega , authors of  1080 recetas  ( 1080 Recipes ). [84] 
 Manuel Maria Puga and Parga , an early 20th century food expert and author of  La cocina práctica . [85] 
 Ilan Hall ,  Casa Mono , Manhattan, NY, winner of  Top Chef  Season 2. [86] 
 Joan Roca ,  Jordi Roca i Fontané  and  Josep Roca i Fontané .  El Celler de Can Roca , "Rocambolesc", "Can Roca", "Mas Marroch" and "Cap Roig", in the province of  Girona , and he restaurant "Roca Barcelona" in the province of  Barcelona . Three Michelin stars in 2009. In 2013,  El Celler de Can Roca  was selected as the best restaurant in the world by  Restaurant  magazine. 
 See also [ edit ] 
 
 Spain portal Food portal 
 Early impact of Mesoamerican goods in Iberian society 
 List of Spanish desserts 
 List of Spanish dishes 
 List of Spanish soups and stews 
 Agriculture in Spain 
 List of Spanish cheeses 
 Bread culture in Spain 
 List of cuisines 
 Mediterranean cuisine 
 European cuisine 
 References [ edit ] 
 
 
 ^   "World's olive oil production has tripled" .  International Olive Council  (in Italian). 4 January 2021 . Retrieved  29 September  2022 . 
 
 ^   Akyürek, Suat (2018).  "Investigation of similarities and differences of Turkish and Spanish cuisine cultures" .  Turkish Studies . Ankara.  13  (3): 49–64.  doi : 10.7827/TurkishStudies.12900 .  ISSN   1308-2140 . 
 
 ^   Martínez-Galiano, Juan Miguel; Olmedo-Requena, Rocío (2018).  "Effect of Adherence to a Mediterranean Diet and Olive Oil Intake during Pregnancy on Risk of Small for Gestational Age Infants" .  Nutrients .  10  (9): 1234.  doi : 10.3390/nu10091234 .  PMC   6164545 .  PMID   30189597 . 
 
 ^   Hoffman, Richard; Gerber MD, Mariette (2011).  The Mediterranean Diet: Health and Science .  doi : 10.1002/9781118785027 .  ISBN   9781444330021 . 
 
 ^   Wild 2015 , p. 99. 
 
 ^  a   b   Weichselbaum, Elisabeth; Benelam, Bridget; Costa, Helena Soares (2005).  "Synthesis report No 6: Traditional Foods in Europe"   (PDF) .  European Food Information Resource Network . pp. 51–52. 
 
 ^   Medievalists.net (8 October 2020).  "Acorns in the Middle Ages" .  Medievalists.net . Retrieved  1 February  2021 . 
 
 ^   Ruiz López, Ildefonso David; Ramírez Ruiz, Carmen (2012).  "La tríada mediterránea en las acuñaciones monetarias del sur peninsular"   (PDF) .  Iberian  (4): 57.  ISSN   2174-5633 . 
 
 ^   Díaz Yubero, Ismael (1999).  "Gastronomía española" . Real Academia de Ciencias Veterinarias de España. 
 
 ^   Pons Biescas, Antoni; Tur Marí, Josep A. (2005).  "La alimentación en Bizancio" .  In Salas-Salvadó, Jordi; García-Lorda, Pilar; Sánchez Ripollés, José M.ª (eds.).  La alimentación y la nutrición a través de la historia . Barcelona: Editorial Glosa. p. 180.  ISBN   84-7429-257-3 . 
 
 ^   Gil Cuadrado, Luis Teófilo (2002).  "La influencia musulmana en la cultura hispano-cristiana medieval" .  Anaquel de Estudios Árabes .  13 : 58.  ISSN   1130-3964 . 
 
 ^   Nadeau, Carolyn A. (1 January 2016).  Food Matters: Alonso Quijano's Diet and the Discourse of Food in Early Modern Spain . University of Toronto Press.  ISBN   978-1-4426-3730-6 . 
 
 ^  a   b   "Can I have Some Moor? A Look at Moorish Influence on Spanish Cuisine - Global Foodways" .  Adhc.lib.ua.edu . Retrieved  10 March  2022 . 
 
 ^   Díaz Yubero, Ismael.  "La evolución de la alimentación y la gastronomía en España"   (PDF) .  Biblioteca Nacional de España . pp. 121–154. 
 
 ^   "alboronía | Diccionario de la lengua española" .  «Diccionario de la lengua española» - Edición del Tricentenario . 
 
 ^   "alajú | Diccionario de la lengua española" .  «Diccionario de la lengua española» - Edición del Tricentenario . 
 
 ^   "hallulla | Diccionario de la lengua española" .  «Diccionario de la lengua española» - Edición del Tricentenario . 
 
 ^   "albóndiga | Diccionario de la lengua española" .  «Diccionario de la lengua española» - Edición del Tricentenario . 
 
 ^   "almojama | Diccionario de la lengua española" .  «Diccionario de la lengua española» - Edición del Tricentenario . 
 
 ^   "arrope | Diccionario de la lengua española" .  «Diccionario de la lengua española» - Edición del Tricentenario . 
 
 ^   "Cocinas"   (PDF) .  www.bne.es . Retrieved  17 August  2020 . 
 
 ^   "Influencia árabe | Cocina española" .  www.spanish-food.org . 
 
 ^   Marín, Manuela (2003).  "En los márgenes de la ley: el consumo de alcohol en al Andalus"   (PDF) .  In Puente, Cristina de la (ed.).  Estudios onomástico-biográficos de al Andalus (Identidades marginales) XIII . pp. 273–274. 
 
 ^   Marín 2003 , p. 286. 
 
 ^   Quesada, Fernando (13 March 2017).  Las cosas claras y el chocolate espeso: Historias, curiosidades y anécdotas gastronómicas . Editorial Cultiva Libros S.L.  ISBN   9781635037104  – via Google Books. 
 
 ^   Cantera Montenegro, Enrique (2003).  "La carne y el pescado en el sistema alimentario judío en la España medieval" .  Espacio, Tiempo y Forma, Serie III, Historia Medieval . Madrid:  Universidad Nacional de Educación a Distancia .  16  (16): 24.  doi : 10.5944/etfiii.16.2003.3689 . 
 
 ^   Cantera Montenegro 2003 , p. 32. 
 
 ^   Debora Chomski.  "La Cocina Judia (para celebrar la vida)"   (PDF) .  Academiaaragonesadegastronomia.com . Retrieved  10 March  2022 . 
 
 ^   "Gastronomía sefardí en la Red de Juderías de España - Diario de Gastronomía: Cocina, vino, gastronomía y recetas gourmet" .  Diariodegastronomia.com . Retrieved  9 March  2022 . 
 
 ^   "Bibliografia Sefardi"   (PDF) .  Cervantes.es . Retrieved  10 March  2022 . 
 
 ^   Wild, Matthew J. (2015).  "Eating Spain: National Cuisine Since 1900" .  Theses and Dissertations-Hispanic Studies . Vol. 24. p. 30. 
 
 ^   Medina, Xavier (2005).  Food Culture in Spain (Food Culture around the World) . Greenwood.  ISBN   978-0313328190 . 
 
 ^   Pérez Samper 2014 , p. 33. 
 
 ^   Campbell, Jodi (2017).  At the First Table. Food and Social Identity in Early Modern Spain . Lincoln and London:  University of Nebraska Press . p. 15.  ISBN   9780803296619 . 
 
 ^   Vega de Arlucea, Ana (30 May 2019).  "¿Por qué hace años los extranjeros odiaban la cocina española?" .  La Voz de Galicia . 
 
 ^   Pérez Samper, María de los Ángeles (2014).  "The Early Modern Food Revolution: A Perspective from the Iberian Atlantic" .  In Aram, Bethany; Yun-Casalilla, Bartolomé (eds.).  Global Goods and the Spanish Empire, 1492-1824: Circulation, Resistance and Diversity .  Palgrave Macmillan . p. 33.  doi : 10.1057/9781137324054 .  ISBN   978-1-349-45891-2 . 
 
 ^  a   b   Bueno, Pilar; Ortega, Raimundo (1 August 1998).  "De la fonda nueva a la nueva cocina. La evolución del gusto culinario en España durante los siglos XIX y XX" .  Revista de Libros . 
 
 ^   Aguirregoitia-Martínez, Ainhoa; Fernández-Poyatos, Mª Dolores (2017).  "The Gestation of Modern Gastronomy in Spain (1900-1936)" .  Culture & History Digital Journal .  6  (2): 019.  doi : 10.3989/chdj.2017.019 .  ISSN   2253-797X . 
 
 ^   Anderson, Lara (2013). "The unity and diversity of La olla podrida: an autochthonous model of Spanish culinary nationalism".  Journal of Spanish Cultural Studies .  Routledge .  14  (4): 400–414.  doi : 10.1080/14636204.2013.916027 .  S2CID   143940504 . 
 
 ^   Anderson 2013 , pp. 402–403. 
 
 ^   Anderson 2013 , p. 404. 
 
 ^   Anderson, Lara (2019).  "Writing from and for the Periphery. Carving Out a Place for Spanish Food Studies"   (PDF) .  Repensar los estudios ibéricos desde la periferia . Vol. 13. Edizioni Ca' Foscari. p. 104.  doi : 10.30687/978-88-6969-302-1/006 .  ISBN   978-88-6969-302-1 .  ISSN   2610-8844 .  S2CID   166399222 . 
 
 ^  a   b   Serna, Víctor de la (31 May 2019).  "Así consiguió Simone Ortega que sus '1080 recetas' se vendan tanto como el 'Quijote' " .  El Mundo . 
 
 ^   Massanés, Toni; Guitiá, Jorge (2010).  "Libertad en los fogones. La cocina española y sus libros, de la transición a nuestros días"   (PDF) .  La cocina en su tinta .  Biblioteca Nacional de España . pp. 191–193.  ISBN   978-84-92462-15-5 . 
 
 ^   "¿Qué desayunan los españoles?" .  Korespa . 
 
 ^   Working 9 to 8: Spain seeks to shorten 11-hour working day  The Guardian. Retrieved 2016-12-20. 
 
 ^   Spain, Land of 10 P.M. Dinners, Asks if It’s Time to Reset Clock   The New York Times . Retrieved 2016-12-20. 
 
 ^   Castillo, Toni (13 May 2015).  "Los cinco clásicos de la gastronomía española" .  Bonvieur . 
 
 ^   Taboada, Lucía (27 August 2014).  "Abordamos una cuestión de estado: La tortilla, ¿con o sin cebolla?" .  Revista GQ . 
 
 ^   Jessop, Tara (27 April 2016).  "A Brief History of the World Famous Spanish Tapas" .  Culture Trip . Retrieved  10 July  2020 . 
 
 ^   Bonilla, Mer (20 June 2019).  "Las tapas más famosas de la cocina española y las recetas para que te salgan de lujo" .  El Español . 
 
 ^   "gazpacho | Diccionario de la lengua española" .  «Diccionario de la lengua española» - Edición del Tricentenario . 
 
 ^   "almojábana | Diccionario de la lengua española" .  «Diccionario de la lengua española» - Edición del Tricentenario . 
 
 ^   "El Ministerio de Agricultura incluye en su web la ruta del 'txakoli' " .  El País . 26 January 2015. 
 
 ^   Barreda F.  The chacoli Santander in the 13th to 19th centuries.  Maxtor Editorial Library. 1943. 2001 edition, first reprint.  ISBN   84-95636-84-0 . 
 
 ^   "'Vignobles et vins du Nord-Ouest de l'Espagne, Alain Lemps."  "The txakoli of Burgos Valle de Mena wants OJ" 2005. Accessed 19 January 2008. 
 
 ^  a   b   Iborra, Elisabeth G. (15 December 2019).  "Quesos de torta extremeños: ocho preguntas para convertirnos en unos expertos" .  eldiario.es . 
 
 ^   "Pitarra Wines: Spanish Wines Made with Flor" .  Food and Wine Tours in Portugal and Spain . 3 October 2012. 
 
 ^   "Visualizar obra" .  bvg.udc.es . 
 
 ^   "El tercer Cocido do Porco Celta registra un lleno total en Sarria" .  www.elprogreso.es . 21 February 2011. 
 
 ^   Narváez, Ana (11 September 2019).  "Picadillo, el alcalde que dio nombre al concurso de tapas de A Coruña" .  Quincemil .  El Español . 
 
 ^   Fieldhouse, Paul.  The World Religions Cookbook . Greenwood Press. p. 90. 
 
 ^   "Santiago de Compostela, epicentro gastronómico de Galicia" . Asociación Nacional de Gastronomía y Turismo de Galicia. 
 
 ^   Vega, Ana [Biscayenne] (21 September 2017).  "Bocadillo de Calamares" .  El Comidista .  El País . 
 
 ^   "The Art of Paella" . Retrieved  27 September  2016 . 
 
 ^   "Arnadí | Diccionario de la lengua española" . 
 
 ^   Goldstein, Darra (2015).  The Oxford Companion to Sugar and Sweets .  ISBN   9780199313396 . 
 
 ^   Fieldhouse, Paul.  The World Religions Cookbook . Greenwood Press. p. 89. 
 
 ^   "A laboratory of taste."   The New York Times  Sunday supplement 10 August 2003. 
 
 ^   Hughes H.  "Frommer's 500 places for food and wine lovers."  John Wiley & Sons 2009 p110.  ISBN   0470480645 , 9780470480649. Accessed at Google Books 18 January 2014. 
 
 ^   Keown D.  "A companion to Catalan culture."  Tamesis Books 2011 p247.  ISBN   1855662272 , 9781855662278. 
 
 ^   Facaros D. and Pauls M.  "Bilbao and the Basque lands."  New Holland Publishers 2008 p190.  ISBN   1860114008 , 9781860114007. 
 
 ^   Ruscadella C.  "Carme Ruscadella's mediterranean cuisine."  Salsa Books 2007.  ISBN   8496599159 , 9788496599154. 
 
 ^   "Biography."   Archived  10 February 2009 at the  Wayback Machine  Jose Made In Spain website. Accessed 18 January 2014. 
 
 ^   Barlow J.  "Everything but the squeal."  Clic-books.com 2014 p83. Accessed at Google Books 18 January 2014. 
 
 ^   Stone P.  "Frommer's Barcelona".  John Wiley & Sons 2011.  ISBN   1119994497 , 781119994497. 
 
 ^   Casas P.  The foods and wines of Spain.  (1982). 
 
 ^   Parsons R.  "Penelope Casas, pioneer of English-language Spanish cookbooks, dies."   LA Times  19 August 2013. 
 
 ^   "Penelope Casas, Spanish food author, dies at 70."   The New York Times  18 August 2013. Accessed 9 September 2013. 
 
 ^   Staff (11 January 2009).  "Carlos D. Cidón propone un ambicioso programa de cursos para profesionales de la cocina" .  Diaro de León  (in Spanish). Archived from  the original  on 16 July 2011 . Retrieved  15 August  2010 . 
 
 ^   Staff (12 May 2009).  "Fallece Carlos Domínguez Cidón, uno de los "pilares importantes" de la gastronomía de Castilla y León" .  Europa Press  (in Spanish). Agencia Europa Press . Retrieved  15 August  2010 . 
 
 ^   "The immigrants' universe."  Xlibris [ self-published source ]  Corporation 2010 p128.  ISBN   1456811940 , 9781456811945. [ self-published source ] 
 
 ^   Richardson P.  "A Late Dinner: Discovering the Food of Spain."  Bloomsbury Publishing 2008 p68.  ISBN   0747593809 , 9780747593805. 
 
 ^   Anderson L.  "Cooking Up the Nation: Spanish Culinary Texts and Culinary Nationalization in the Late Nineteenth and Early Twentieth Century."  Boydell & Brewer Ltd 2013 p2.  ISBN   1855662469 , 9781855662469. 
 
 ^   Puga y Parga M.  "La covina práctica."  Everest Galicia, 2001.  ISBN   8440305109 , 9788440305107. 
 
 ^   Food and Wine Magazine.  "Bravo's New Top Chef Tells All" . Retrieved  25 December  2014 . 
 
 
 External links [ edit ] 
 Foods and Wines from Spain 
 
 
 
 Wikibooks  Cookbook  has a recipe/module on
 
  Spanish cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons has media related to  Cuisine of Spain . 
 
 
 
 
 Wikivoyage has a travel guide for  Spanish cuisine . 
 
 
 
 
 Wikivoyage has a travel guide for  Cuisine of Spain . 
 
 v t e Spain   articles History Timeline 
 Prehistoric Iberia 
 Ancient History Timeline 
 Roman Hispania 
 Medieval Spain 
 Reconquista 
 Union 
 Expansion 
 Enlightenment 
 Reaction and revolution 
 First Republic 
 Restoration 
 Second Republic 
 Spain under Franco 
 Transition to democracy 
 Contemporary Spain 
 By topic 
 General overview 
 Pre-Roman Iberia 
 Spanish Empire 
 Golden Age 
 Economic 
 Military 
 Civil War 
 Spanish miracle 
 Geography 
 Autonomous cities 
 Autonomous communities  ( ranked lists ) 
 Biosphere Reserves 
 Borders 
 Climate 
 Comarcas 
 Earthquakes 
 Extreme points 
 Forests 
 Islands 
 Municipalities 
 National parks 
 Natural Sites of Community Importance 
 Plazas de soberanía 
 Provinces 
 Wildlife 
 Politics 
 Constitution 
 Head of State 
 Constitutional Court 
 Cortes Generales 
 Judiciary 
 Government 
 Prime Minister 
 Elections 
 Foreign relations 
 Human rights 
 LGBT 
 Intersex 
 Military 
 Monarchy 
 Political parties 
 Wars and armed conflicts 
 Economy 
 Agriculture 
 Banks 
 Car industry 
 Communities 
 GDP 
 unemployment 
 median income 
 Economic history 
 Energy 
 Financial crisis 
 Forestry 
 Largest companies 
 Taxation 
 Property bubble 
 Science and technology 
 Telecommunications 
 Tourism 
 Trade unions 
 Transport 
 Wine 
 Society 
 Abortion 
 Crime 
 Demographics 
 Education 
 Health care 
 Immigration 
 Languages 
 Pensions 
 People 
 Religion 
 Time 
 Culture 
 Architecture 
 Art 
 Bullfighting 
 Cinema 
 Cuisine 
 Fiestas 
 Languages 
 Literature 
 Mass media 
 Music 
 Myths and legends 
 National and regional identity 
 National Day of Spain 
 Public holidays 
 Sport 
 UNESCO World Heritage Sites 
 UNESCO Intangible Cultural Heritage 
 Symbols 
 Anthem 
 Coat of arms 
 Cultural icons 
 Flag 
 Toro de Osborne 
 Outline Index 
 Category 
 Portal 
 v t e Mediterranean cuisine Regions Southern Maghrebi 
 Algerian 
 Chakhchoukha 
 Berber 
 Libyan 
 Bazin 
 Moroccan 
 Méchoui 
 Tajine 
 Tunisian 
 Shakshouka 
 Regional
 Couscous 
 Egyptian 
 Duqqa 
 Ful medames 
 Kushari 
 Mulukhiyah 
 Levant 
 Israeli 
 Hamin 
 Lebanese 
 Kibbeh 
 Palestinian 
 Musakhan 
 Syrian 
 Regional 
 Baba ghanoush 
 Hummus 
 Northern Turkish 
 Cheeses 
 Desserts 
 Kebabs 
 Rakı 
 Turkish tea 
 Greek 
 Gyros 
 Greek salad 
 Stifado 
 Feta 
 Skordalia 
 Loukaniko 
 Melomakarono 
 Ionian Islands 
 Bourdeto 
 Pastitsada 
 Crete 
 Dakos 
 Paximadi 
 Other Balkan 
 Albanian 
 Aromanian 
 Bosnia and Herzegovina 
 Croatian 
 Montenegrin 
 Slovenian 
 Regional
 Pita 
 Shish kebab 
 Yogurt 
 Baklava 
 Moussaka 
 Italian 
 Regional
 Pasta 
 Pizza 
 Abruzzese 
 Arrosticini 
 Mortadella di Campotosto 
 Maccheroni alla chitarra 
 Pizzelle 
 Timballo 
 Bocconotto 
 Parrozzo 
 Apulian 
 Arbëreshë 
 Ligurian 
 Ciuppin 
 Focaccia 
 Pesto 
 Ravioli 
 Lombard 
 Mantuan 
 Lucanian 
 Neapolitan 
 Neapolitan ragù 
 Pasta e fagioli 
 Roman 
 Carbonara 
 Sardinian 
 Pane carasau 
 Malloreddus 
 Mirto (liqueur) 
 Abbamele 
 Pecorino sardo 
 Culurgiònes 
 Bottarga 
 Seada 
 Sicilian 
 Cannoli 
 Caponata 
 Pasta alla Norma 
 Scaccia 
 Tuscan 
 Ribollita 
 Venetian 
 Carpaccio 
 Polenta 
 Risotto 
 French 
 Corsican 
 Brocciu 
 Occitan 
 Cassoulet 
 Brandade 
 Provencal 
 Bouillabaisse 
 Ratatouille 
 Salade niçoise 
 Spanish 
 Andalusian 
 Gazpacho 
 Sherry 
 Balearic 
 Caldereta 
 Tombet 
 Catalan 
 Escalivada 
 Escudella 
 Ollada 
 Valencian 
 Paella 
 Other 
 Gibraltarian 
 Monégasque 
 Islands 
 Cypriot 
 Afelia 
 Halloumi 
 Maltese 
 Staples 
 Wheat 
 Bread 
 Couscous 
 Pasta 
 Pizza 
 Semolina 
 Olive 
 Olive oil 
 Grape 
 Wine 
 Shared 
 Anise spirits 
 Bottarga 
 Lamb 
 Exemplars 
 Elizabeth David 
 A Book of Mediterranean Food 
 
 Category 
 
 v t e European cuisine Sovereign states European Union 
 Austria 
 Belgium 
 Bulgaria 
 Croatia 
 Cyprus 
 Czech Republic 
 Denmark 
 Estonia 
 Finland 
 France 
 Germany 
 Greece 
 Hungary 
 Republic of Ireland 
 Italy 
 Latvia 
 Lithuania 
 Luxembourg 
 Malta 
 Netherlands 
 Poland 
 Portugal 
 Romania 
 Slovakia 
 Slovenia 
 Spain 
 Sweden 
 Other 
 Albania 
 Andorra 
 Armenia 
 Azerbaijan 
 Belarus 
 Bosnia and Herzegovina 
 Georgia 
 Iceland 
 Kazakhstan 
 Liechtenstein 
 Moldova 
 Monaco 
 Montenegro 
 North Macedonia 
 Norway 
 Russia 
 San Marino 
 Serbia 
 Switzerland 
 Turkey 
 Ukraine 
 United Kingdom 
 Vatican City 
 States with limited recognition 
 Abkhazia 
 Kosovo 
 Nagorno-Karabakh 
 Northern Cyprus 
 South Ossetia 
 Transnistria 
 Dependencies  and other territories 
 Faroe Islands 
 Gibraltar 
 Guernsey 
 Isle of Man 
 Jersey 
 
 v t e Cuisines Continental 
 African 
 North 
 West 
 list 
 Americas 
 Caribbean 
 North 
 South 
 list 
 Asian 
 Caucasian 
 Central 
 Indian subcontinent 
 Levantine 
 list 
 European 
 Balkan 
 Central 
 Eastern 
 list 
 Oceanic 
 Intercontinental
 Global 
 Latin American 
 Mediterranean 
 Middle Eastern 
 National  and regional 
 Afghan 
 Albanian 
 Algerian 
 American 
 Californian 
 Floribbean 
 Hawaiian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Lowcountry (South Carolina) 
 New England 
 New Mexico 
 Pacific Northwest 
 Pennsylvania Dutch 
 Puerto Rican 
 Southern US 
 Southwest US 
 Texas 
 Angolan 
 Argentine 
 Armenian 
 Australian 
 Austrian 
 Azerbaijani 
 Bahraini 
 Bangladeshi 
 Barbadian 
 Belarusian 
 Belgian 
 Belizean 
 Beninese 
 Bhutanese 
 Bolivian 
 Bosnian-Herzegovinian 
 Botswana 
 Brazilian 
 British 
 Channel Islands 
 English 
 Gibraltarian 
 Northern Irish 
 Saint Helena 
 Scottish 
 Welsh 
 Bruneian 
 Bulgarian 
 Burkinabé 
 Burmese 
 Burundian 
 Cambodian 
 Cameroonian 
 Canadian 
 Acadian 
 Québécois 
 Central African Republic 
 Chadian 
 Chilean 
 Chinese 
 Cantonese 
 Hong Kong 
 Macanese 
 Tibetan 
 Xinjiang 
 Colombian 
 Congolese 
 Corsican 
 Croatian 
 Cuban 
 Cypriot 
 Czech 
 Danish 
 Faroese 
 Greenlandic 
 Djiboutian 
 Dominican 
 Dominican Republic 
 Dutch 
 East Timorese 
 Ecuadorian 
 Egyptian 
 Emirati 
 Equatorial Guinean 
 Eritrean 
 Estonian 
 Ethiopian 
 Fijian 
 Filipino 
 Finnish 
 French 
 Occitan 
 French Guianan 
 Gabonese 
 Gambian 
 Georgian 
 German 
 Ghanaian 
 Greek 
 Cretan 
 Epirotic 
 Greek Macedonian 
 Heptanesean 
 Guatemalan 
 Guinea-Bissauan 
 Guinean 
 Haitian 
 Honduran 
 Hungarian 
 Icelandic 
 Indian 
 Arunachalese 
 Assamese 
 Bengali 
 Bihari 
 Goan 
 Gujarati 
 Himachal Pradesh 
 Kashmiri 
 Jharkhandi 
 Karnataka 
 Kerala 
 Maharashtrian 
 Manipuri 
 Meghalayan 
 Mizo 
 Naga 
 Odia 
 Punjabi 
 Rajasthani 
 Sikkimese 
 Sindhi 
 Tamil 
 Telangana 
 Telugu 
 Indonesian 
 Acehnese 
 Balinese 
 Banjar 
 Batak 
 Betawi 
 Indo 
 Javanese 
 Madurese 
 Makassar 
 Minahasan 
 Minangkabau 
 Palembangese 
 Sundanese 
 Iranian 
 Iraqi 
 Irish 
 Israeli 
 Italian 
 Abruzzese 
 Ligurian 
 Lombard 
 Lucanian 
 Neapolitan 
 Roman 
 Sardinian 
 Sicilian 
 Venetian 
 Ivorian 
 Jamaican 
 Japanese 
 Okinawan 
 Jordanian 
 Kazakh 
 Kenyan 
 Korean 
 North Korean 
 South Korean 
 Kosovan 
 Kuwaiti 
 Kyrgyz 
 Lao 
 Latvian 
 Lebanese 
 Lesotho 
 Liberian 
 Libyan 
 Liechtensteiner 
 Lithuanian 
 Luxembourg 
 Macedonian 
 Malagasy 
 Malawian 
 Malaysian 
 Sabahan 
 Sarawakian 
 Maldivian 
 Malian 
 Maltese 
 Mauritanian 
 Mauritian 
 Mexican 
 Moldovan 
 Monégasque 
 Mongolian 
 Montenegrin 
 Moroccan 
 Mozambican 
 Namibian 
 Nauruan 
 Nepalese 
 New Zealand 
 Nicaraguan 
 Niger 
 Nigerian 
 Niuean 
 Norwegian 
 Omani 
 Pakistani 
 Palestinian 
 Panamanian 
 Peruvian 
 Polish 
 Portuguese 
 Qatari 
 Romanian  (incl.  Transylvanian Saxon ) 
 Russian 
 Bashkir 
 Chechen 
 Circassian 
 Komi 
 Mordovian 
 Sakha 
 Tatar 
 Udmurt 
 Yamal 
 Rwandan 
 Saint Lucian 
 Salvadoran 
 Sammarinese 
 São Tomé and Príncipe 
 Saudi Arabian 
 Senegalese 
 Serbian 
 Seychellois 
 Sierra Leonean 
 Singaporean 
 Slovak 
 Slovenian 
 Somali 
 South African 
 Spanish 
 Andalusian 
 Asturian 
 Balearic 
 Basque 
 Canarian 
 Cantabrian 
 Catalan 
 Extremaduran 
 Galician 
 Manchegan 
 Valencian 
 Sri Lankan 
 Sudanese 
 Swazi 
 Swedish 
 Swiss 
 Syrian 
 Taiwanese 
 Tajik 
 Tanzanian 
 Zanzibari 
 Thai 
 Togolese 
 Tunisian 
 Turkish 
 Turkmen 
 Trinidadian and Tobagonian 
 Ugandan 
 Ukrainian 
 Uruguayan 
 Uzbek 
 Venezuelan 
 Vietnamese 
 Western Saharan 
 Yemeni 
 Zambian 
 Zimbabwean 
 Ethnic 
 Ainu 
 Arab 
 Indonesian 
 Aromanian 
 Assyrian 
 Balochi 
 Berber 
 Cajun 
 Chinese 
 American 
 Canadian 
 Chifa 
 Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Crimean Tatar 
 Greek American 
 Hazaragi 
 Indian 
 Anglo-Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Indigenous American 
 Inuit 
 Italian American 
 Kurdish 
 Livonian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Malay 
 Ossetian 
 Parsi 
 Pashtun 
 Peranakan 
 Romani 
 Sámi 
 Soul food 
 Sylheti 
 Transylvanian Saxon 
 Yup'ik 
 Religious 
 Buddhist 
 Christian 
 Goan Catholic 
 Mangalorean Catholic 
 Mennonite 
 Hindu 
 Islamic 
 Chinese 
 Ital 
 Jain 
 Jewish 
 American 
 Ashkenazi 
 Bukharan 
 Ethiopian 
 Mizrahi 
 Sephardic 
 Syrian 
 Ritual slaughter 
 Sikh 
 Historical 
 Ancient Egyptian 
 Ancient Greek 
 Ancient Israelite 
 Ancient Roman 
 Antebellum America 
 Aztec 
 Byzantine 
 Early modern European 
 Historical Chinese 
 Historical Indian subcontinent 
 Historical North Indian and Pakistani 
 History of agriculture 
 History of alcoholic drinks 
 History of bread 
 History of seafood 
 History of vegetarianism 
 Historical Argentine 
 Historical Japanese 
 Inca 
 Mayan 
 Muisca 
 Mughal 
 Medieval 
 Ottoman 
 Peasant 
 Soviet 
 Thirteen Colonies 
 Styles 
 Classique 
 Fast food 
 Fusion 
 New American 
 Eurasian 
 Haute 
 Molecular gastronomy 
 Note by Note 
 Nouvelle 
 Lists 
 List of cuisines 
 List of historical cuisines 
 Lists of prepared foods 
 Related 
 Cookbook 
 Cooking 
 Culinary arts 
 Drink 
 Food 
 history 
 Diet 
 Meal preparation 
 
   Food portal 
   Drink portal 
   Category 
   Commons 
   Cookbook 
   WikiProject 
   Outline 
 
 Portal :   Food 
 Authority control   National libraries 
 France 
 BnF data 
 Israel 
 United States 
 Latvia 
 Japan 
 Other 
 IdRef 
 
  
NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw2390
Cached time: 20230310193935
Cache expiry: 1814400
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc, no‐toc‐conversion]
CPU time usage: 1.652 seconds
Real time usage: 2.012 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 32322/1000000
Post‐expand include size: 420713/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 34194/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 16/100
Expensive parser function count: 131/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 269114/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.815/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 13117563/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/400
 
 
Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1594.921      1 -total
 28.37%  452.495      1 Template:Reflist
 19.75%  315.056      8 Template:Navbox
 11.83%  188.643     36 Template:Cite_web
  9.56%  152.488      1 Template:European_topic
  8.37%  133.549     45 Template:Ill
  7.59%  121.039      1 Template:Culture_of_Spain
  7.43%  118.547      1 Template:Culture_of_region
  7.28%  116.147      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  6.61%  105.448     13 Template:Clarify
 
  Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:idhash:27669-0!canonical and timestamp 20230310193933 and revision id 1140981461. Rendering was triggered because: page-view
  
 esi <esi:include src="/esitest-fa8a495983347898/content" />  
 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Spanish_cuisine&oldid=1140981461 " 
 Categories :  Spanish cuisine Mediterranean cuisine Hidden categories:  CS1 Italian-language sources (it) Webarchive template wayback links CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) All articles with self-published sources Articles with self-published sources from December 2017 All accuracy disputes Accuracy disputes from December 2017 Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from October 2020 Pages using photo montage without center alignment Wikipedia articles needing clarification from February 2021 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2021 Articles needing additional references from July 2021 All articles needing additional references Articles with unsourced statements from October 2020 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from October 2020 Articles with disputed statements from October 2020 Articles with unsourced statements from February 2021 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from March 2021 Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with BNF identifiers Articles with J9U identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers Articles with LNB identifiers Articles with NDL identifiers Articles with SUDOC identifiers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  This page was last edited on 22 February 2023, at 19:22  (UTC) . 
 Text is available under the  Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0 ;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the  Terms of Use  and  Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the  Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. 
 
 
 Privacy policy 
 About Wikipedia 
 Disclaimers 
 Contact Wikipedia 
 Mobile view 
 Developers 
 Statistics 
 Cookie statement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
