
 
 
 Jump to content 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle sidebar 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Create account Log in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Personal tools 
 
 
 
 
   Create account   Log in 
 
 
 
 
		Pages for logged out editors  learn more 
 
 
 Contributions Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Navigation 
 
 
 Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate 
 
 
 
 
 Contribute 
 
 
 Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file 
 
 
 
 
 Tools 
 
 
 What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item 
 
 
 
 
 Print/export 
 
 
 Download as PDF Printable version 
 
 
 
 
 In other projects 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons Wikibooks 
 
 
 
 
 Languages 
 
 On this Wikipedia the language links are at the top of the page across from the article title.  Go to top . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CentralNotice  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Contents 
 move to sidebar 
 hide 
 
 
 
 
 (Top) 
 
 
 
 
 
 1 General features 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 History 
 
 
				Toggle History subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 2.1 Husmanskost 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 Dishes 
 
 
				Toggle Dishes subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 3.1 Meals 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.2 Breakfast 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.3 Main courses 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.4 Seafood 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.5 Desserts 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4 Pastries and treats 
 
 
				Toggle Pastries and treats subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 4.1 Kaffebröd (coffee bread) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.2 Treats 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5 Drinks 
 
 
				Toggle Drinks subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 5.1 Christmas beverages 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5.2 Sweet drinks 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5.3 Liquor 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5.4 Beer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6 Food and society 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 7 See also 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8 References 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 9 Further reading 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 10 External links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
						Toggle the table of contents
					 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle the table of contents 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Swedish cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 28 languages 
 
 
 
 Беларуская Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Español فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Jawa ქართული Kurdî Lietuvių Magyar Nederlands 日本語 Português Русский Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 
 Edit links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Article Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 English 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 More 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
 
 
 Culinary traditions of Sweden 
 
 
   Swedish meatballs  with  cream sauce ,  mashed potatoes ,  broccoli , and  lingonberry jam 
 Part of  a series  on the Culture of Sweden 
 History 
 People 
 Languages 
 Mythology  and  Folklore 
 Cuisine 
 Festivals 
 Religion 
 Bahá'í 
 Buddhism 
 Christianity
 Church of Sweden 
 Catholicism 
 Judaism 
 Islam 
 Ahmadiyya 
 
 Art 
 Literature 
 Music 
 Media 
 Radio 
 Television 
 Cinema 
 
 Sport 
 Monuments 
 World Heritage Sites 
 
 Symbols 
 Flag 
 Coat of arms 
 National anthem 
 
   Sweden portal v t e 
 Swedish cuisine  ( Swedish :  Svenska köket ) is the traditional food of  Sweden . Due to Sweden's large north-to-south expanse, there are regional differences between the cuisine of  North  and  South Sweden . [1] 
 Historically, in the far north, meats such as  reindeer , and other (semi-) game  dishes were eaten, some of which have their roots in the  Sami culture , while fresh vegetables have played a larger role in the South. Many traditional dishes employ simple, contrasting flavours, such as the traditional dish of  meatballs  and brown cream  sauce  with tart, pungent  lingonberry jam  (slightly similar in taste to cranberry sauce).
 Swedes have traditionally been very open to foreign influences, ranging from French cuisine during the 17th and 18th centuries, to the  sushi  and  caffé latte  of today.
 
 
 General features [ edit ] 
 Swedish cuisine could be described as centered around cultured  dairy products , crisp and soft (often sugared) breads, berries and  stone fruits ,  beef ,  chicken ,  lamb ,  pork , eggs, and  seafood .  Potatoes  are often served as a side dish, often boiled. Swedish cuisine has a wide variety of breads of different shapes and sizes, made of rye, wheat, oat, white, dark, sourdough, and whole grain, and including flatbreads and crispbreads. There are many sweetened bread types and some use spices. Many meat dishes, especially meatballs, are served with  lingonberry  jam. Fruit soups with high viscosity, like  rose hip soup  and  blueberry  soup ( blåbärssoppa ) served hot or cold, are typical of Swedish cuisine. Butter and margarine are the primary fat sources, although  olive oil  is becoming more popular. Sweden's pastry tradition features a variety of yeast buns, cookies, biscuits and cakes; many of them are in a very sugary style and often eaten with coffee ( fika ). [2] 
 
 History [ edit ] 
 The importance of fish has governed Swedish population and trade patterns far back in history. For preservation, fish were salted and cured. Salt became a major trade item at the dawn of the  Scandinavian   middle ages , which began  c.  1000 AD.  Cabbage  preserved as  sauerkraut  and various kinds of preserved berries, apples, and other fruit were used once as a source of  vitamin C  during the winter (today sauerkraut is very seldom used in Swedish cuisine).  Lingonberry jam , still a favourite, may be the most traditional and typical Swedish way to add freshness to sometimes rather heavy food, such as steaks and stews. [ citation needed ] 
 Sweden's long winters explain the lack of fresh vegetables in many traditional recipes. In older times, plants that would sustain the population through the winters were cornerstones; various  turnips  such as the  kålrot  ( rutabaga ) (aptly named "swede" in  British English ) were gradually supplanted or complemented by the potato in the 18th century. A lack of distinct  spices  made everyday food rather bland by today's standards, although a number of local herbs and plants have been used since ancient times. This tradition is still present in today's Swedish dishes, which are still rather sparingly spiced. [ citation needed ] 
 Both before and after this period, some new  Germanic  dishes were also brought in by immigrants, such as people related to the  Hanseatic League , settling in Stockholm,  Visby , and  Kalmar . Swedish  traders  and  aristocrats  naturally also picked up some food traditions in foreign countries; cabbage rolls ( kåldolmar ) being one example. An  early version  of  kåldolmar  was first published in 1765 in the fourth edition of  Hjelpreda i Hushållningen för Unga Fruentimber  by  Cajsa Warg , though it was closer to the Turkish  dolma  than later dishes.
 
 Husmanskost [ edit ] 
 Swedish  husmanskost  denotes traditional Swedish dishes with local ingredients, the classical everyday Swedish cuisine. The word  husmanskost  stems from  husman , meaning 'house owner', and the term was originally used for most kinds of simple countryside food outside of towns. Genuine Swedish  husmanskost  used predominantly local ingredients such as  pork  in all forms, fish,  cereals , milk, potato,  root vegetables , cabbage, onions, apples, berries etc.;  beef  and  lamb  were used more sparingly. Beside berries, apples are the most used traditional fruit, eaten fresh or served as  apple pie ,  apple sauce , or apple cake. Time-consuming cooking methods such as  redningar  ( roux ) and  långkok  (literally 'long boil') are commonly employed and spices are sparingly used. Examples of Swedish husmanskost are pea soup ( ärtsoppa ), boiled and mashed carrots, potato and  rutabaga  served with pork ( rotmos med fläsk ), many varieties of salmon (such as  gravlax ,  inkokt lax , fried, pickled), varieties of herring (most commonly pickled, but also fried,  au gratin , etc.), fishballs ( fiskbullar ), meatballs ( köttbullar ), potato dumplings with meat or other ingredients ( palt ), potato pancake ( raggmunk ), varieties of porridge ( gröt ), a fried mix of pieces of potato, different kind of meats, sausages, bacon and onion ( pytt i panna ), meat stew with onion ( kalops ), and potato dumplings with a filling of onions and pork ( kroppkakor ). Many of the dishes would be considered  comfort food  for the nostalgic value. [ citation needed ] 
 Dishes akin to Swedish  husmanskost  and food traditions are found also in other Scandinavian countries; details may vary.
 Sweden is part of the  vodka belt  and historically  distilled  beverages, such as  brännvin  and  snaps , have been a traditional daily complement to food.
Consumption of wine in Sweden has increased during the last fifty years, partly at the expense of  beer  and stronger alcoholic beverages.
In many countries, locally produced  wines  are combined with local  husmanskost .
 Husmanskost  has undergone a renaissance during the last decades as well known (or famous) Swedish  chefs , such as  Tore Wretman , have presented modernised variants of classical Swedish dishes. In this  nouvel husman  the amount of fat (which was needed to sustain hard manual labour in the old days) is reduced and some new ingredients are introduced. The cooking methods are tinkered with as well, in order to speed up the cooking process or enhance the  nutritional  value or flavour of the dishes. Many Swedish restaurateurs mix traditional  husmanskost  with a modern, gourmet approach.
 
 Dishes [ edit ] 
   Pytt i panna 
 Swedish traditional dishes, some of which are many hundreds of years old, others perhaps a century or less, are still a very important part of Swedish everyday meals, in spite of the fact that modern Swedish cuisine adopts many international dishes.
 Internationally, the most renowned Swedish culinary tradition is the  smörgåsbord  and, at Christmas, the  julbord , including well-known Swedish dishes such as  gravlax  and meatballs.
In Sweden, traditionally, Thursday has been "soup day" because the maids had half the day off and soup was easy to prepare in advance. One of the most traditional Swedish soups,  ärtsoppa , is still served in many restaurants and households every Thursday, [3]  a tradition since the Middle Ages.  Ärtsoppa  is a yellow  pea soup , commonly served with pancakes as dessert. This is a simple meal, a very thick soup, basically consisting of boiled yellow peas, a little onion, salt and small pieces of pork. It is often served with mustard and followed by a dessert of thin pancakes ( pannkakor ). The  Swedish Armed Forces  also serve their conscripts pea soup and pancakes every Thursday.
 Potatoes are eaten year-round as the main source of carbohydrates, and are a staple in many traditional dishes. Not until the last 50 years have pasta or rice become common on the dinner table.
There are several different kinds of potatoes; the most appreciated is the "new potato", a potato which ripens in early summer and is enjoyed at the traditional midsummer feast. New potatoes at  midsummer  are served with pickled herring,  chives , and sour cream, and the first strawberries of the year are traditionally served as dessert.
 The most highly regarded  mushroom  in Sweden is the  chanterelle , which is considered a delicacy. The chanterelle is usually served as a side dish together with steaks, or fried with onions and sauce served on an  open sandwich . Second to the chanterelle, and considered almost as delicious, is the  porcini  mushroom, or  karljohansvamp , named after  Charles XIV John  (Karl XIV Johan) who introduced its use as food.
 In August, at the traditional feast known as  kräftskiva ,  crayfish party , Swedes eat large amounts of  crayfish , boiled and then marinated in a broth with salt, a little bit of sugar, and a large amount of  dill  weed.
 Some Swedish dishes are:
 
 Meals [ edit ] 
 Meals consists of breakfast in the early morning ( frukost ), a light lunch before noon ( lunch ), and a heavy dinner ( middag ) around six or seven in the evening. It is also common to have a snack, often a sandwich or fruit, in between meals ( mellanmål ). Most Swedes also have a coffee break in the afternoon, often together with a pastry ( fika ). In all primary schools, and most, but not all  secondary schools , a hot meal is served at lunch as part of Sweden's  welfare state . According to Swedish school law, this meal has to be nutrient-dense. [4] 
 
 Breakfast [ edit ] 
   Swedish  knäckebröd , or  crisp bread . 
 Breakfast  usually consists of open  sandwiches  ( smörgås ), possibly on  crisp bread  ( knäckebröd ). The sandwich is most often buttered, with toppings such as hard cheese,  cold cuts ,  caviar ,  messmör  (a Norwegian sweet spread made from butter and whey), ham ( skinka ), and tomatoes or cucumber. [5]   Filmjölk  (fermented milk/buttermilk), or sometimes  yogurt , is also traditional breakfast food, usually served in a bowl with  cereals  such as  cornflakes .   Muesli , or porridge ( gröt ) is sometimes eaten at breakfast, made of oatmeal or cream of wheat, eaten with milk and jam or  cinnamon  with sugar. [5]  Common drinks for breakfast are  milk ,  juice ,  tea , or  coffee . Swedes are among the most avid milk and coffee drinkers in the world.
 Swedes sometimes have sweet toppings on their breads, such as jam (like the French and Americans), or  chocolate  (like the Danes), although many older Swedes chose not to use these sweet toppings. However, orange marmalade on white bread is common, usually with morning coffee or tea.
 Many traditional kinds of Swedish bread, such as  sirapslimpa  (less fashionable today, but still very popular) are somewhat sweetened in themselves, baked with small amounts of  syrup . [5]  Like in many other European countries, there are also many non-sweetened breads, often made with  sourdough  ( surdeg ). Swedish breads may be made from  wholegrain , fine grain, or anything in between, and there are white, brown, and very dark (like in Finland) varieties which are all common.  Barkis  or  bergis  is a localised version of  challah  usually made without eggs and at first only available in Stockholm and Göteborg where Jews first settled but now available elsewhere.
 
 
 Main courses [ edit ] 
 
 
 Swedish
 
 English
 
 Definition
 
 
 Ärtsoppa
 
 Pea soup 
 
 Yellow  Pea soup .
 
 
 Blåbärspalt
 
 Dumplings  with blueberries
 
 
 Blodpalt 
 
 Dumplings  made out of blood
 
 
 Blodpudding
 
 Black pudding 
 
 The Swedish name literally means 'blood pudding'. Sweetened and spiced, it is eaten with lingonberry jam, and sometimes bacon.
 
 
 Blodkorv
 
 Blood sausage 
 
 Other than pig blood, the ingredients include flour, pork, raisins and spices.
 
 
 Bruna bönor  och  fläsk 
 
 A classical Swedish dish consisting of pork with stewed brown beans.
 
 
 Falukorv 
 
 Sausage, big and thick, originating from  Falun . The lifts and pumps at the Kopparberg copper mine in Falun were, during the 16th and 17th centuries before the introduction of steam engines, powered by oxen. When these oxen died from strain or old age, the skin was turned into leather ropes used in the mine, and some of the meat was turned into  Falukorv  sausages.
 
 
 Fiskbullar
 
 Fishballs , made from minced white fish meat.
 
 
 Fläskkorv 
 
 Sausages, pork.
 
 
 Fläskpannkaka 
 
 A thick  pancake  with diced pork, baked in a form in the oven.
 
 
 Flygande Jacob 
 
 Flying Jacob
 
 Casserole based on chicken with cream, chili sauce, bananas, peanuts and bacon. Invented in the 1970s.
 
 
 Gravlax 
 
 Salmon cured with salt and sugar with herbs.
 
 
 Grisfötter
 
 Pig's trotters  served with  rödbetor .
 
 
 Inkokt lax
 
 Boiled  salmon , together with onion and carrots, in a mixture of water, vinegar, salt, sugar and some other spices. Usually eaten cold, commonly together with mayonnaise spiced with dill and lemon.
 
 
 Inlagd sill 
 
 Pickled  herring .
 
 
 Isterband 
 
 Sausage, from Småland, made of coarsely ground pork, barley and potatoes. It is prepared by first fermenting it and then lightly smoking it. This method of cooking creates a distinct, both acidic and slightly smoky flavour. It is traditionally eaten with dill-stewed potatoes and pickled beetroot.
 
 
 Janssons frestelse 
 
 Jansson's temptation
 
 Potato  casserole  made of grated potatoes, onion,  anchovy  and cream; the fish used is usually the  sprat , a different species spiced with herbs. [6] 
 
 
 Julskinka 
 
 Cured ham, boiled and breaded with mustard, bread crumbs and egg; translates as  Christmas  ham. The Swedish equivalent to Christmas turkey.
 
 
 Kåldolmar 
 
 Cabbage rolls . These are a Swedish variation of the Turkish  dolma , and date back to when  Charles XII  returned to Sweden from the  Ottoman Empire . [7] 
 
 
 Kalops
 
 Meat stewed with onion, vegetables and spices.
 
 
 Köttbullar 
 
 Meatballs made from meat and herbs tightly rolled together, frequently served with mashed potatoes and pickles.
 
 
 Korv Stroganoff
 
 Sliced sausage pieces (usually  falukorv ) served in a creamy tomato sauce, a cheaper Swedish variation of  beef Stroganoff .
 
 
 Köttsoppa  med klimp
 
 Soup, made from beef and  root vegetables , served with klimp, a Swedish dumpling.
 
 
 Kroppkakor 
 
 Dumplings  made of pre-boiled potatoes, filled with pork. [8] 
 
 
 Leverpalt
 
 Dumplings  with liver.
 
 
 Lutfisk 
 
 Lye fish made of  stockfish .
 
 
 Palt 
 
 Dumplings  made of unboiled potatoes, filled with pork.
 
 
 Paltbröd
 
 A type of  tunnbröd  baked with blood. Traditionally served leached with white sauce and fried pork.
 
 
 Pannkakor 
 
 A thin  pancake  fried in an ordinary frying pan. In some parts of Sweden, all thin pancakes are called  plättar .
 
 
 Pitepalt 
 
 Dumplings  from  Piteå .
 
 
 Plättar
 
 A  plätt  is a very small pancake, usually made in a  plättlagg , a sort of normal size frying pan with indentations to allow for several, normally seven, smaller (usually around 10 cm in diameter) pancakes to be made at once. See  Pannkakor 
 
 
 Pölsa 
 
 Similar to  hash  or Scottish  haggis  without casing.
 
 
 Prinskorv 
 
 Small sausages, hot dog-style.
 
 
 Pyttipanna 
 
 Mix of chopped and fried meat, onions, pre-boiled potatoes, often prepared from leftovers. Other ingredients are often added as well, such as sausages, beetroot, fried egg, bacon or even salmon (instead of the meat). [9] 
 
 
 Raggmunk
 
 Potato pancakes . Usually eaten with lingonberry jam and sometimes fried slices of pork belly.
 
 
 Rotmos med fläsk
 
 Mashed root vegetables, usually rutabaga, carrots and sometimes potatoes, served with long-boiled salted pork loin.
 
 
 Räksmörgås
 
 Open sandwich with prawns, egg and mayonnaise. Lettuce, tomato or cucumber are commonly added, usually topped with lemon and dill.
 
 
 Sillsallad 
 
 Herring salad
 
 A Russian style chopped cold-salad side dish made with pickled herring, boiled cold potatoes, boiled cold beets, minced raw onion, fresh dill, and sour cream.
 
 
 Smörgåstårta 
 
 Sandwich cake
 
 Like a very big multi-layer sandwich. Comes with many different fillings and toppings, often including shrimp, ham, mayonnaise, salad, and preserved fruits.
 
 
 S.O.S.  (smör, ost och sill)
 
 Butter, cheese and herring
 
 Appetizer dish made with butter, cheese, and herring.
 
 
 Stekt fläsk  med löksås och  potatis 
 
 Pork with  onion  sauce and potatoes.
 
 
 Stekt strömming
 
 Fried herring
 
 Fileted fresh herring, two filets put flesh to flesh, skin out, with dill, salt and ground white pepper between and breadcrumbs on the outside, and then fried in butter until golden. Eaten with mashed potatoes and lingonberry jam. Very different from  surströmming .
 
 
 Surströmming 
 
 Fermented Baltic herring
 
 Being fermented,  surströmming  has a strong odour and unique flavour and is considered an acquired taste even among Swedes. Usually eaten with thin, hard bread.
 
 
 Sylta 
 
 Swedish head cheese
 
 Made primarily from finely chopped pork pulled soft from a boiled pig head and mixed with the gelatin from the skull and various spices and pressed to form a loaf that is served chilled so that the gelatin sets.
 
 
 Wallenbergare 
 
 Patty of ground veal, cream, and egg yolks, coated in breadcrumbs.
 
 Seafood [ edit ] 
 Fish and other seafood are an important part of Swedish cuisine. Farmed salmon from Norway has become increasingly popular. Pickled, sweetened  herring ,  inlagd sill , is a traditional Swedish appetizer.  Shrimp  and lobster are specialties of the  Skagerrak  coast.  Surströmming  is a fermented  Baltic herring  famous for its pungent aroma, both loved and hated.
 
 Desserts [ edit ] 
 See also:  List of Swedish desserts 
   Ris à la Malta  ( Ris à l'amande ), a Christmas dessert. 
   Äggost 
 Common desserts include:
 
 
 
 Swedish
 
 English
 
 Definition
 
 
 Gotländsk saffranspannkaka
 
 Rice pudding dessert with  saffron  originating in  Gotland  usually served with jam or whipped cream, or  dewberry  jam.
 
 
 Kalvdans 
 
 A classic  Scandinavian  dessert made from unpasteurized  colostrum  milk, the first milk produced by a cow after giving birth.
 
 
 Klappgröt
 
 Semolina pudding mixed with juice from either red  currant ,  lingonberries ,  raspberries ,  blackberries , or comparable fruits, then stirred or blended until the texture is fluffier. Eaten cold.
 
 
 Ostkaka 
 
 Swedish cheesecake (very different from  American cheesecake ).
 
 
 Pannkaka
 
 Pancakes  are almost never served for breakfast ('American-style') but either as dessert with sweet jam or whipped cream, or as a meal in itself, using fewer sweet toppings. Pancakes for dinner can be thick  oven -baked pancakes with pork meat or apples inside.
 
 
 Smördegspaj 
 
 Butter dough based pie.
 
 Various kinds of pies and cookies are typical desserts, mostly served with coffee. Typical pies are  apple pie ,  blueberry pie  and  rhubarb pie .
 
 
 Smulpaj 
 
 Crumb pie
 
 
 Spettekaka 
 
 A sweet dry hollow Swedish cake, shaped like a cylinder, and similar to  meringue , found only in a southern province of Sweden,  Scania .
 
 
 Våfflor
 
 Waffles 
 
 Often served with jam and whipped cream or  ice cream . Waffles also have their  own day  on 25 March.
 
 
 Äggost
 
 A dish originating from  Bohuslän . In the southern parts of the county it is traditionally served as a dessert along with whipped cream, sugar and blackberry jam, but in the northern parts it is usually seen as a main dish or breakfast and often served with pickled herring.
 
 Pastries and treats [ edit ] 
   Cinnamon roll ( kanelbulle ) 
 Kaffebröd (coffee bread) [ edit ] 
 Bakelser  and other types of  kaffebröd  (or more colloquially  fikabröd ) are various forms of  pastries , cake, cookies, and buns that are usually consumed with coffee (see  fika ). Popular kinds of  kaffebröd  available in a traditional Swedish  konditori  ( coffee shop  /  pâtisserie ) include:
 
 
 
 Swedish
 
 English
 
 Definition
 
 
 Kanelbulle
 
 Cinnamon roll , optionally made with  cardamom  dough
 
 
 Wienerbröd 
 
 A Danish pastry; comes in several varieties and shapes; very similar to a  Danish pastry  in the US.
 
 
 Chokladboll 
 
 Chocolate ball.
 
 A round  chocolate -flavoured butter ball with oatmeal, cocoa and sugar, coated in coconut flakes or  pearl sugar .
 
 
 Kringla 
 
 A small  pretzel -shaped (sweet) cookie with  pearl sugar  on top.
 
 
 Punschrulle
 
 Punsch-roll 
 
 A small cylindrical pastry covered with green marzipan with the ends dipped in chocolate, and inside a mix of crushed  cookies , butter, and cacao, flavoured with  punsch  liqueur. This pastry is often called  dammsugare  ('vacuum cleaner'), referring to its cylindrical shape, similar to many older vacuum cleaners. Other names are  arraksrulle  (as  arrak  ( arrack ) is an ingredient in  punsch ) and '150-ohmer' (owing to the brown-green-brown colouring).
 
 
 Biskvi 
 
 A small round pastry with a base: made from  almonds  and sugar, filled with  butter cream  and covered with a thin layer of chocolate. First made in France during the 19th century.
 
 
 Prinsesstårta
 
 Princess cake 
 
 A large cake, made of sponge cake layered with whipped cream, and  custard  under a green  marzipan  coating with  powdered sugar  on the top; often decorated with a pink marzipan rose.
 
 
 Budapestbakelse 
 
 Budapest pastry
 
 Basically made from sugar,  egg white ,  hazelnuts , whipped cream, and pieces of fruit like  apricot  or  mandarine , decorated with a little chocolate and powdered sugar.
 
 
 Napoleonbakelse
 
 Napolitain
 
 Made of pastry dough, whipped cream, custard and jam, topped with icing and currant jelly.
 
 
 Napoleon pastry 
 
 
 Kladdkaka 
 
 A chocolatey and sticky flat cake.
 
 
 Toscakaka
 
 Light sponge topped with caramelized almonds.
 
 
 Arraksboll
 
 A ball flavoured with  arrak , similar in appearance to a  chokladboll  but very different taste.
 
 Treats [ edit ] 
   Saffron bun, also called St. Lucia bun ( lussebulle ) 
 During the  winter holidays , traditional candy and pastries include:
 
 
 
 Treats
 
 Definition
 
 
 Knäck 
 
 Christmas  toffee. (Hard, usually to be sucked, not chewed. The soft variety is called kola, which is chewy, and may be flavoured. )
 
 
 Ischoklad 
 
 Coconut oil mixed with chocolate.
 
 
 Marmelad
 
 ' Marmalade  candy', rectangular fruit and  pectin  based candy in various colours.
 
 
 Lussekatt
 
 Saffron bun , a Swedish saffron bun eaten on the  Saint Lucia  celebration (13 December).
 
 
 Pepparkaka
 
 Similar to a  ginger snaps  (has been eaten since the 14th century and baked at the  monastery  of  Vadstena  since 1444); associated with Christmas.
 
 
 Semla 
 
 With the new year, the  fastlagsbulle  (Lenten bun), or  semla , is baked. It is a wheat bun with a cream and  almond paste  filling, traditionally eaten on  Shrove Tuesday . [2] 
 
 Other typical Swedish candy includes:
 
 
 
 Candy
 
 Definition
 
 
 Saltlakrits 
 
 Liquorice candy flavoured with  ammonium chloride .
 
 
 Polkagris 
 
 Traditional peppermint  stick candy  from  Gränna , also made in other flavours.
 
 
 Ahlgrens bilar 
 
 A marshmallow candy shaped like a car. Marketed as "Sweden's most purchased car" (Swedish: Sveriges mest köpta bil).
 
 
 Sockerbitar 
 
 Similar to square, chewy  marshmallows .
 
 
 Geléhallon 
 
 An early form of  gelatine -based candy.
 
 
 Daim 
 
 Formerly called Dime in the UK.
 
 Drinks [ edit ] 
 Sweden is in second place among the heaviest  coffee -drinking countries in the world. [10]   Milk  consumption in Sweden is also very high, second only to Finland. Milk is bought in milk cartons;   Tetra Pak , the world's largest maker of milk cartons, was founded in Sweden. Milk is considered the standard drink to have with meals during weekdays in many families, for both children and adults.
 
 Christmas beverages [ edit ] 
   Julmust 
 
 
 Drink
 
 Definition
 
 
 Mumma
 
 A traditional Christmas beverage. [11]  Usually a mix of porter or another dark beer, some light beer (pilsner), port wine (or some other wine), and something sweet ( sockerdricka  or  julmust ); commonly spiced with  cardamom . [12] 
 
 
 Glögg 
 
 Mulled wine 
 
 Sweet drinks [ edit ] 
   A cup of blueberry soup, ( blåbärssoppa ) topped with cereals 
 
 
 Swedish
 
 English
 
 Definition
 
 
 Blåbärssoppa 
 
 Bilberry Soup
 
 Sweet soup or drink made from  bilberries , served either hot or cold
 
 
 Enbärsdricka 
 
 Juniper berry  soft drink
 
 
 Sockerdricka 
 
 Sugar Drink
 
 Sweet-sour soft drink (carbonated)
 
 
 Fruktsoda 
 
 Traditional  lemon-lime  soft drink (carbonated)
 
 
 Champis 
 
 Soft drink alternative to sparkling wine (carbonated)
 
 
 Pommac 
 
 
 Trocadero 
 
 Soft drink with the taste of apple and oranges, with its roots in the north of Sweden
 
 
 Julmust 
 
 Sweet seasonal carbonated soft drink ( jul  ‒ a cognate of the English yule ‒ means Christmas in Swedish)
 
 
 Lingondricka 
 
 Lingonberry drink
 
 
 Nyponsoppa 
 
 Rose Hip Soup
 
 Sweet soup or drink made from  rose hips , served either hot or cold
 
 Liquor [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Alcoholic beverages in Sweden 
   Caloric punsch advertistement  c.  1885 
 The production of  liquor  has a tradition dating back to the 18th century and was at a high in the 1840s. [ citation needed ]  Since the 1880s, the state-owned  Systembolaget  has a monopoly on selling spirits with more than 3.5%  ABV , limiting access.  Hembränt  (moonshine) used to be made in rural Sweden, but production has lessened in recent years due to more liberal rules for the import of alcohol as well as increased smuggling.
 Punsch  is a traditional  liqueur  in Sweden that was immensely popular during the 19th century. It was adopted as the drink of choice by university students, and many traditional songs from that time are about the consumption of  punsch  or are meant to be sung during the collective festivities that were part of the cultural life in the universities' student associations at the time and still is.
 
 Beer [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Beer in Sweden 
 Beer is also widely consumed in Sweden and the typical Swedish beer is  lager  of a bright and malty kind. The brands  Pripps Blå  and  Norrlands Guld  are common examples. In the last few decades, many small breweries ( microbreweries ) have emerged all over Sweden offering a wide range of styles and brands.  Nils Oscar Brewery ,  Dugges Ale och Porterbryggeri  and Närke Kulturbryggeri are examples of these young Swedish microbreweries. Many microbreweries in Sweden are inspired by the US craft beer movement, brewing American styles or styles commonly associated with American craft breweries, e.g.  American Pale Ale  and  American IPA .
 
 Food and society [ edit ] 
 Brödinstitutet ('The Bread Institute') once campaigned with a quotation from the  Swedish National Board of Health and Welfare , recommending [13]  eating six to eight slices of bread daily. Drinking milk [14]  has also been recommended and campaigned for by the Swedish National Board of Health and Welfare; [ citation needed ]  it is often recommended to drink two [15]  to three glasses of milk per day. [16] [17] [18]  A survey conducted on behalf of Mjölkfrämjandet, an organisation promoting consumption of Swedish milk, concluded that 52% of Swedes surveyed drink milk at least once a day, usually one glass with lunch and another glass or two in the evening or morning. [19] 
 Low-fat  products, wholemeal bread and other alternatives are common; grocery stores usually sell milk in four or five different fat levels, from 3% to 0.1%. [20] 
 
 See also [ edit ] 
 
 Sweden portal Food portal 
 Sami cuisine 
 Cuisine of Finland 
 Cuisine of Norway 
 Culture of Sweden 
 Danish cuisine 
 Icelandic cuisine 
 List of Christmas dishes 
 Swedish festivities 
 References [ edit ] 
 
 
 ^   "Food in Sweden – Swedish Food, Swedish Cuisine" .  www.foodbycountry.com . Retrieved  17 July  2019 . 
 
 ^  a   b   Rob Hincks, " Swedish semla: more than just a bun   Archived  2011-06-06 at the  Wayback Machine ", 20 February 2012. 
 
 ^   Nationalencyklopedin 
 
 ^   "School lunches" .  www.livsmedelsverket.se . Retrieved  3 October  2017 . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   Rutiga kokboken, 2002,  ISBN   91-534-1950-2 
 
 ^   "DLC.fi" . 
 
 ^   Ringström, Jenny (30 November 2012).  "the Cabbage rolls historical day" .  Svenska Dagbladet . 
 
 ^   "Swedish Kroppkakor Recipe" .  Food.com . Retrieved  14 May  2015 . 
 
 ^   "Pyttipanna Recipe" .  Honest Cooking . 13 December 2013 . Retrieved  14 May  2015 . 
 
 ^   Jones, Lora (13 April 2018).  "Coffee: Who grows, drinks and pays the most?" .  BBC News . Retrieved  13 May  2018 . 
 
 ^   Carl Deleen,  Tysk och swensk ordbok  Örebro 1836, p. 554. 
 
 ^   "Mumma recept" . Archived from  the original  on 18 January 2014 . Retrieved  27 January  2014 . 
 
 ^   "Regionkansliet" . Archived from  the original  on 11 February 2009. 
 
 ^   "Norrmejerier.se" . 
 
 ^   "2glasomdagen" . 
 
 ^   Mjölkfrämjandet   Archived  11 December 2007 at the  Wayback Machine 
 
 ^   Ostfrämjandet [ permanent dead link ] 
 
 ^   "Mjölk" . Archived from  the original  on 24 July 2011 . Retrieved  1 March  2009 . 
 
 ^   "93 % av svenska folket tycker mjölk är nyttigt" . June 2004. Archived from  the original  on 7 November 2007 . Retrieved  5 March  2009 . 
 
 ^   Mjolkframjandet.se [ permanent dead link ] 
 
 
 Further reading [ edit ] 
 Schildt-Lundgren, Margareta (2000)  Simply Swedish .  ISBN   91-974561-7-9 
 Widenfelt, Sam, ed. (1950)  Swedish Food . Gothenburg: Esselte 
 External links [ edit ] 
 
 
 
 Wikibooks  Cookbook  has a recipe/module on
 
  Cuisine of Sweden 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons has media related to  Cuisine of Sweden . 
 
 VisitSweden  ‒ Sweden's official website for tourism and travel information ‒ Gastronomy in Sweden 
 Sweden.se  ‒ Swedish culinary classics ‒ recipes with history and originality 
 Gretchen's Cookbook ‒ Swedish Recipes   Archived  3 February 2006 at the  Wayback Machine 
 v t e Sweden  articles History 
 Prehistory 
 800–1521 
 Kalmar Union 
 1523–1611 
 Rise to become Great Power 
 Swedish Empire 
 Great Northern War 
 Age of Liberty 
 Coup of 1756 
 December Crisis (1768) 
 Revolution of 1772 
 Gustavian era 
 Coup of 1809 
 Sweden–Norway union 
 Famine of 1867–1869 
 Modernization 
 Industrialization 
 World War I 
 World War II 
 timeline 
 1945–1967 
 1967–1991 
 Since 1991 
 Geography 
 Cities 
 Counties 
 Extreme points 
 Forests 
 Islands 
 Lakes 
 Lands 
 Metropolitan areas 
 National parks 
 Provinces 
 Rivers 
 Wildlife 
 Politics 
 Administrative division 
 Constitution 
 Elections 
 Foreign relations 
 Government 
 State agencies 
 Judiciary 
 Law 
 Law enforcement 
 Legislature 
 Military 
 Monarchy 
 Political parties 
 Economy 
 Agriculture 
 Automotive industry 
 Energy 
 Krona  (currency) 
 Labour unions 
 Rehn–Meidner model 
 Stock exchange 
 Taxation 
 Telecommunications 
 Transport 
 Tourism 
 Society 
 Crime 
 Demographics 
 Education 
 Healthcare 
 Immigration 
 Languages 
 People 
 Welfare 
 Culture 
 Anthem 
 Architecture 
 Art 
 Cinema 
 Coat of arms 
 Cuisine 
 Fashion 
 Flag 
 Literature 
 Media 
 Music 
 National Day 
 Public holidays 
 Religion 
 Sport 
 World Heritage Sites 
 Outline 
 Category 
 Portal 
 v t e European cuisine Sovereign states European Union 
 Austria 
 Belgium 
 Bulgaria 
 Croatia 
 Cyprus 
 Czech Republic 
 Denmark 
 Estonia 
 Finland 
 France 
 Germany 
 Greece 
 Hungary 
 Republic of Ireland 
 Italy 
 Latvia 
 Lithuania 
 Luxembourg 
 Malta 
 Netherlands 
 Poland 
 Portugal 
 Romania 
 Slovakia 
 Slovenia 
 Spain 
 Sweden 
 Other 
 Albania 
 Andorra 
 Armenia 
 Azerbaijan 
 Belarus 
 Bosnia and Herzegovina 
 Georgia 
 Iceland 
 Kazakhstan 
 Liechtenstein 
 Moldova 
 Monaco 
 Montenegro 
 North Macedonia 
 Norway 
 Russia 
 San Marino 
 Serbia 
 Switzerland 
 Turkey 
 Ukraine 
 United Kingdom 
 Vatican City 
 States with limited recognition 
 Abkhazia 
 Kosovo 
 Nagorno-Karabakh 
 Northern Cyprus 
 South Ossetia 
 Transnistria 
 Dependencies  and other territories 
 Faroe Islands 
 Gibraltar 
 Guernsey 
 Isle of Man 
 Jersey 
 
 v t e Cuisines Continental 
 African 
 North 
 West 
 list 
 Americas 
 Caribbean 
 North 
 South 
 list 
 Asian 
 Caucasian 
 Central 
 Indian subcontinent 
 Levantine 
 list 
 European 
 Balkan 
 Central 
 Eastern 
 list 
 Oceanic 
 Intercontinental
 Global 
 Latin American 
 Mediterranean 
 Middle Eastern 
 National  and regional 
 Afghan 
 Albanian 
 Algerian 
 American 
 Californian 
 Floribbean 
 Hawaiian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Lowcountry (South Carolina) 
 New England 
 New Mexico 
 Pacific Northwest 
 Pennsylvania Dutch 
 Puerto Rican 
 Southern US 
 Southwest US 
 Texas 
 Angolan 
 Argentine 
 Armenian 
 Australian 
 Austrian 
 Azerbaijani 
 Bahraini 
 Bangladeshi 
 Barbadian 
 Belarusian 
 Belgian 
 Belizean 
 Beninese 
 Bhutanese 
 Bolivian 
 Bosnian-Herzegovinian 
 Botswana 
 Brazilian 
 British 
 Channel Islands 
 English 
 Gibraltarian 
 Northern Irish 
 Saint Helena 
 Scottish 
 Welsh 
 Bruneian 
 Bulgarian 
 Burkinabé 
 Burmese 
 Burundian 
 Cambodian 
 Cameroonian 
 Canadian 
 Acadian 
 Québécois 
 Central African Republic 
 Chadian 
 Chilean 
 Chinese 
 Cantonese 
 Hong Kong 
 Macanese 
 Tibetan 
 Xinjiang 
 Colombian 
 Congolese 
 Corsican 
 Croatian 
 Cuban 
 Cypriot 
 Czech 
 Danish 
 Faroese 
 Greenlandic 
 Djiboutian 
 Dominican 
 Dominican Republic 
 Dutch 
 East Timorese 
 Ecuadorian 
 Egyptian 
 Emirati 
 Equatorial Guinean 
 Eritrean 
 Estonian 
 Ethiopian 
 Fijian 
 Filipino 
 Finnish 
 French 
 Occitan 
 French Guianan 
 Gabonese 
 Gambian 
 Georgian 
 German 
 Ghanaian 
 Greek 
 Cretan 
 Epirotic 
 Greek Macedonian 
 Heptanesean 
 Guatemalan 
 Guinea-Bissauan 
 Guinean 
 Haitian 
 Honduran 
 Hungarian 
 Icelandic 
 Indian 
 Arunachalese 
 Assamese 
 Bengali 
 Bihari 
 Goan 
 Gujarati 
 Himachal Pradesh 
 Kashmiri 
 Jharkhandi 
 Karnataka 
 Kerala 
 Maharashtrian 
 Manipuri 
 Meghalayan 
 Mizo 
 Naga 
 Odia 
 Punjabi 
 Rajasthani 
 Sikkimese 
 Sindhi 
 Tamil 
 Telangana 
 Telugu 
 Indonesian 
 Acehnese 
 Balinese 
 Banjar 
 Batak 
 Betawi 
 Indo 
 Javanese 
 Madurese 
 Makassar 
 Minahasan 
 Minangkabau 
 Palembangese 
 Sundanese 
 Iranian 
 Iraqi 
 Irish 
 Israeli 
 Italian 
 Abruzzese 
 Ligurian 
 Lombard 
 Lucanian 
 Neapolitan 
 Roman 
 Sardinian 
 Sicilian 
 Venetian 
 Ivorian 
 Jamaican 
 Japanese 
 Okinawan 
 Jordanian 
 Kazakh 
 Kenyan 
 Korean 
 North Korean 
 South Korean 
 Kosovan 
 Kuwaiti 
 Kyrgyz 
 Lao 
 Latvian 
 Lebanese 
 Lesotho 
 Liberian 
 Libyan 
 Liechtensteiner 
 Lithuanian 
 Luxembourg 
 Macedonian 
 Malagasy 
 Malawian 
 Malaysian 
 Sabahan 
 Sarawakian 
 Maldivian 
 Malian 
 Maltese 
 Mauritanian 
 Mauritian 
 Mexican 
 Moldovan 
 Monégasque 
 Mongolian 
 Montenegrin 
 Moroccan 
 Mozambican 
 Namibian 
 Nauruan 
 Nepalese 
 New Zealand 
 Nicaraguan 
 Niger 
 Nigerian 
 Niuean 
 Norwegian 
 Omani 
 Pakistani 
 Palestinian 
 Panamanian 
 Peruvian 
 Polish 
 Portuguese 
 Qatari 
 Romanian  (incl.  Transylvanian Saxon ) 
 Russian 
 Bashkir 
 Chechen 
 Circassian 
 Komi 
 Mordovian 
 Sakha 
 Tatar 
 Udmurt 
 Yamal 
 Rwandan 
 Saint Lucian 
 Salvadoran 
 Sammarinese 
 São Tomé and Príncipe 
 Saudi Arabian 
 Senegalese 
 Serbian 
 Seychellois 
 Sierra Leonean 
 Singaporean 
 Slovak 
 Slovenian 
 Somali 
 South African 
 Spanish 
 Andalusian 
 Asturian 
 Balearic 
 Basque 
 Canarian 
 Cantabrian 
 Catalan 
 Extremaduran 
 Galician 
 Manchegan 
 Valencian 
 Sri Lankan 
 Sudanese 
 Swazi 
 Swedish 
 Swiss 
 Syrian 
 Taiwanese 
 Tajik 
 Tanzanian 
 Zanzibari 
 Thai 
 Togolese 
 Tunisian 
 Turkish 
 Turkmen 
 Trinidadian and Tobagonian 
 Ugandan 
 Ukrainian 
 Uruguayan 
 Uzbek 
 Venezuelan 
 Vietnamese 
 Western Saharan 
 Yemeni 
 Zambian 
 Zimbabwean 
 Ethnic 
 Ainu 
 Arab 
 Indonesian 
 Aromanian 
 Assyrian 
 Balochi 
 Berber 
 Cajun 
 Chinese 
 American 
 Canadian 
 Chifa 
 Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Crimean Tatar 
 Greek American 
 Hazaragi 
 Indian 
 Anglo-Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Indigenous American 
 Inuit 
 Italian American 
 Kurdish 
 Livonian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Malay 
 Ossetian 
 Parsi 
 Pashtun 
 Peranakan 
 Romani 
 Sámi 
 Soul food 
 Sylheti 
 Transylvanian Saxon 
 Yup'ik 
 Religious 
 Buddhist 
 Christian 
 Goan Catholic 
 Mangalorean Catholic 
 Mennonite 
 Hindu 
 Islamic 
 Chinese 
 Ital 
 Jain 
 Jewish 
 American 
 Ashkenazi 
 Bukharan 
 Ethiopian 
 Mizrahi 
 Sephardic 
 Syrian 
 Ritual slaughter 
 Sikh 
 Historical 
 Ancient Egyptian 
 Ancient Greek 
 Ancient Israelite 
 Ancient Roman 
 Antebellum America 
 Aztec 
 Byzantine 
 Early modern European 
 Historical Chinese 
 Historical Indian subcontinent 
 Historical North Indian and Pakistani 
 History of agriculture 
 History of alcoholic drinks 
 History of bread 
 History of seafood 
 History of vegetarianism 
 Historical Argentine 
 Historical Japanese 
 Inca 
 Mayan 
 Muisca 
 Mughal 
 Medieval 
 Ottoman 
 Peasant 
 Soviet 
 Thirteen Colonies 
 Styles 
 Classique 
 Fast food 
 Fusion 
 New American 
 Eurasian 
 Haute 
 Molecular gastronomy 
 Note by Note 
 Nouvelle 
 Lists 
 List of cuisines 
 List of historical cuisines 
 Lists of prepared foods 
 Related 
 Cookbook 
 Cooking 
 Culinary arts 
 Drink 
 Food 
 history 
 Diet 
 Meal preparation 
 
   Food portal 
   Drink portal 
   Category 
   Commons 
   Cookbook 
   WikiProject 
   Outline 
 
 Authority control : National libraries  
 France 
 BnF data 
 Israel 
 United States 
 
  
NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw2361
Cached time: 20230310193959
Cache expiry: 1814400
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc, no‐toc‐conversion]
CPU time usage: 0.983 seconds
Real time usage: 1.265 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 20305/1000000
Post‐expand include size: 189741/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 21100/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 54/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 83432/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.477/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 25560706/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/400
 
 
Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1016.712      1 -total
 30.57%  310.855      3 Template:Navbox
 17.97%  182.752      1 Template:Reflist
 15.73%  159.975      1 Template:European_topic
 13.59%  138.132      1 Template:Culture_of_Sweden
 13.45%  136.729      1 Template:Culture_of_region
 13.19%  134.126      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 10.75%  109.284      1 Template:Sweden_topics
 10.56%  107.396      1 Template:Country_topics
 10.30%  104.689     11 Template:Cite_web
 
  Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:idhash:28490-0!canonical and timestamp 20230310193958 and revision id 1140696493. Rendering was triggered because: page-view
  
 esi <esi:include src="/esitest-fa8a495983347898/content" />  
 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Swedish_cuisine&oldid=1140696493 " 
 Category :  Swedish cuisine Hidden categories:  Webarchive template wayback links All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from December 2017 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from February 2023 Articles containing Swedish-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2022 Articles with unsourced statements from February 2017 Articles with unsourced statements from April 2017 Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with BNF identifiers Articles with J9U identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  This page was last edited on 21 February 2023, at 08:49  (UTC) . 
 Text is available under the  Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0 ;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the  Terms of Use  and  Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the  Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. 
 
 
 Privacy policy 
 About Wikipedia 
 Disclaimers 
 Contact Wikipedia 
 Mobile view 
 Developers 
 Statistics 
 Cookie statement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
