
 
 
 Jump to content 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle sidebar 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Create account Log in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Personal tools 
 
 
 
 
   Create account   Log in 
 
 
 
 
		Pages for logged out editors  learn more 
 
 
 Contributions Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Navigation 
 
 
 Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate 
 
 
 
 
 Contribute 
 
 
 Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file 
 
 
 
 
 Tools 
 
 
 What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item 
 
 
 
 
 Print/export 
 
 
 Download as PDF Printable version 
 
 
 
 
 In other projects 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons Wikibooks 
 
 
 
 
 Languages 
 
 On this Wikipedia the language links are at the top of the page across from the article title.  Go to top . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CentralNotice  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Contents 
 move to sidebar 
 hide 
 
 
 
 
 (Top) 
 
 
 
 
 
 1 Agriculture and foods 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 National dishes 
 
 
				Toggle National dishes subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 2.1 Muesli 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.2 Rösti 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.3 Fondue and raclette 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 Regional cuisine 
 
 
				Toggle Regional cuisine subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 3.1 From the German-speaking part of Switzerland 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.2 From the French-speaking part of Switzerland 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.3 From the Italian-speaking part of Switzerland 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.4 From the canton of Graubünden 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4 Restaurants and  haute cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5 Beverages 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6 See also 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 7 Notes and references 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8 External links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
						Toggle the table of contents
					 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle the table of contents 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Swiss cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 25 languages 
 
 
 
 Alemannisch العربية Беларуская Čeština Deutsch Español فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Italiano עברית ქართული Bahasa Melayu 日本語 Polski Português Русский Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 
 Edit links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Article Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 English 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 More 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
 
 
 Culinary traditions of Switzerland 
   A cart displaying food produced in Switzerland. 
 Part of  a series  on the Culture of Switzerland 
 History 
 People 
 Languages 
 Mythology  and  Folklore 
 Cuisine 
 Festivals 
 Religion 
 Christianity
 Catholicism 
 Protestantism 
 Islam 
 Ahmadiyya 
 Judaism 
 Hinduism 
 
 Art 
 Architecture 
 
 Literature 
 Music 
 Media 
 Television 
 Cinema 
 
 Sport 
 Monuments 
 World Heritage Sites 
 Castles 
 Heritage Sites 
 
 Symbols 
 Flag 
 Coat of arms 
 National anthem 
 
   Switzerland portal v t e 
 Swiss cuisine  ( German :  Schweizer Küche ,  French :  cuisine suisse ,  Italian :  cucina svizzera ,  Romansh :  cuschina svizra ) is an ensemble of national, regional and local dishes, consisting of the  ingredients ,  recipes  and  cooking techniques  developed in  Switzerland  or assimilated from other cultures, particularly neighboring countries. The diversity and comprehensiveness of Swiss gastronomy reflects the  linguistic ,  cultural  and  geographical  diversity. The  climate of Switzerland  allows for a large variety of  terroirs , therefore a wide range of indigenous food, from simple  cereals  to refined products like  cheese  and  wine . [1] [2] 
 Switzerland is historically an agricultural country, with many regions being isolated from each other by the  Alps . Therefore one of the main characteristics of Swiss cuisine is its simplicity, with many dishes made up of few but hearty ingredients, often  of dairy origin. Swiss cuisine evolved dramatically during the last centuries to become what it is today. Probably the most significant changes occurred after colonization of the Americas and the introduction of now widely used ingredients such as potatoes, maize and cocoa. The increase in purchasing power and a certain homogenization of taste have allowed the emergence of some emblematic national dishes such as  fondue  and  rösti .
 Well-known and worldwide exported products include cheese, wine and  chocolate . A large number of them are protected by  a geographical indication (AOP) . A strong food industry, often related to chocolate, has developed over the past centuries in Switzerland. [3] 
 
 
 Agriculture and foods [ edit ] 
 The climatic and cultural diversity of Switzerland is reflected in the diversity of its food products. Various cereals and fruits are cultivated in the lower regions, while the warmest and sunniest areas in the south lend themselves to growing  grapes ,  chestnuts , and even  olives . The other most common fruits cultivated in Switzerland are apples, pears, apricots, cherries, plums and strawberries. [4]  The mountainous and coldest areas feature the perhaps most emblematic agricultural practices of Switzerland:  dairy farming  and  alpine transhumance .
 Swiss cuisine comprises a variety of  staple foods . These typically include  bread ,  potatoes ,  pasta ,  rice  and  polenta . Potatoes are particularly ubiquitous in Swiss cuisine, although it is only the case since the late 18th century. [5]  They are notably used in  rösti , a popular dish that is eaten all over Switzerland, and originally a  breakfast  food. [6]   Bread  and cereals are eaten on a daily basis in Switzerland.  Muesli , which is commonly eaten for breakfast goes by the name of "Birchermüesli" ("Birchermiesli" in some regions). For breakfast, most Swiss enjoy sliced bread with  butter  and  jam ; bread also accompanies most meals. There is a  wide variety of breads  made in Switzerland, from  Pain de seigle  to  Zopf .  Tarts and quiches  are also traditional Swiss dishes. Tarts in particular are made with all sorts of toppings, from sweet  apple  to  onion . [7] 
 Pork ,  poultry  and  beef  are the most consumed  meats  in Switzerland. [8]  Pork is particularly omnipresent in Swiss cuisine; is it both consumed as cooked and  cured meat .  Swiss meat specialties  are highly diversified: all sorts of pork  sausages ,  bratwursts , smoked ham, salami, prosciutto, etc. Famous meat products include  Grisons Meat  (air-dried beef) and the "national sausage",  cervelat .  Fish  is eaten in moderation, traditionally once in a week.  Swiss lakes and rivers  provide a small fraction of  fish and shellfish  consumed in the country. These include the popular  perch  and  fera , which are served in lakeshore restaurants. [9] 
 Foods associated with Switzerland often use milk as an essential ingredient; butter and cream are classic ingredients in Swiss cuisine. [10] [11]  They notably include hard cheeses and chocolate.  Swiss cheeses , in particular  Emmental ,  Gruyère ,  Vacherin , and  Appenzeller , are famous Swiss products. [12]  Two of the most popular Swiss dishes are  fondue  and  raclette , which essentially consist of melted cheese accompanied with bread or potatoes. Chocolate is also strongly associated with Switzerland since the existence of  milk chocolate , the  Swiss chocolate  industry being very flourishing since then.
 Food preferences vary within Switzerland, often reflecting languages: the German-speaking north and east (the predominant linguistic area) has strong ties with  Central Europe , whereas the French-speaking west and the Italian-speaking south tend to have more ties with Western and  Mediterranean Europe . [13]  This applies notably to starchy foods, dairy products and fish. While potatoes, rice and pasta are commonly eaten everywhere in Switzerland, the proportion of pasta and rice is larger in the Italian-speaking regions. [14]  Conversely, fats like cream and butter are eaten in larger proportions in the German-speaking regions. [15]  Fish is also more commonly eaten in French- and Italian-speaking Switzerland. [13]  Those differences are also noticeable in  wine and beer drinking habits .
 
 
 
 
 
 Cheeses 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sausages 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Chocolate 
 
 
 
 
 National dishes [ edit ] 
 A few dishes have become emblematic of Swiss cuisine and highly popular throughout the country. [16] [17]  All of them have also become popular outside Switzerland's borders.
 
 Muesli [ edit ] 
   Muesli with  berries 
 Muesli , known in Switzerland as  Birchermüesli , is a breakfast or snack consisting of cereal (oat) flakes, chopped fruit and milk. There are many ways of making a muesli, for example with honey, yoghurt and nuts. Muesli was created by the Swiss nutritionist  Max Bircher-Benner  in the early the 20th century. His 'apple diet dish', developed as part of a raw food diet, was originally served to sanatorium patients as an easily digestible evening meal. After the Second World War, muesli became very popular throughout Switzerland thanks to home cooking courses and being served to the armed forces. Nowadays muesli is a staple in Western breakfast culture and is especially popular among athletes as a nutritional supplement. [18] 
 
 Rösti [ edit ] 
 Rösti  is a kind of fried  potato  cake served as a main course or side dish. As a main dish, rösti is usually accompanied with cheese, onions and cold meat or eggs. This dish, originally from Zurich, was first simply made by frying grated raw potatoes in a pan. It has then spread towards Bern where it is made with boiled potatoes instead. This is where it took the name  Rösti . [19]  There are many variants in Switzerland and outside the borders. [20]  This culinary specialty gives its name to the  röstigraben , which designates the cultural differences between the German and French speaking parts of the country.
 
 Fondue and raclette [ edit ] 
   Fondue 
 Fondue  is a dish of usually several hard cheeses, such as  Gruyère  and  Emmental , which are melted with white wine and eaten hot with bread. It is served in a  caquelon  in which each guest dips their piece of bread using a special fork. At the base of the fondue pot is the heat source (stove or candles). Fondue was first described in 1699 in a  Zurich  manuscript by Albert Hauser. It is entitled  To cook cheese with wine  and resembles the recipe of today. Fondue was also promoted by the  Swiss Cheese Union  in the early 20th century. [21]  Today, it is often considered to be  the  national dish. [22] 
 Raclette  is also a dish of melted cheese, originating from Valais. Traditionally, half a cheese wheel is heated on the cut side and, as it melts, the cheese is scraped off onto a plate. In modern day, this is often performed using an electric oven. Raclette is served with skin-on potatoes and mixed pickles, and often accompanied by  Fendant  as a drink. Melting cheese in front of a fire is attested in the 16th century. Since 1875, the French term  raclette  is commonly used for this dish. At the 1909 Cantonal Exhibition of Sion, Raclette was promoted as a national dish of Valais. Raclette eventually gained national (and international) popularity from the  1964 National Exhibition . [23] 
 Contrary to muesli and rösti, fondue and raclette are not meant to be staple foods, but rather convivial dishes intended for special occasions. Both fondue and raclette are especially popular during cold weather and have become associated with mountain culture and  winter sports .
 
 Regional cuisine [ edit ] 
 This section  needs additional citations for  verification .  Please help  improve this article  by  adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.   ( May 2010 )  ( Learn how and when to remove this template message ) 
 From the German-speaking part of Switzerland [ edit ] 
   Älplermagronen 
   Berner Platte 
   Magenbrot 
   Vermicelles 
   Zürcher Geschnetzeltes  with  rösti 
   Zopf 
 Aargauer  Rüblitorte  mit Zitronenzuckerguss (AG): Carrot cake, a baked sponge cake made of nuts and carrots. Often spread with a glaze made out of powdered sugar and lemon juice, and decorated with small carrots made of marzipan. 
 Älplermagronen  (Alpine herdsman's macaroni): This dish is a frugal all-in-one dish making use of the ingredients the herdsmen had at hand in their alpine cottages: macaroni, potatoes, onions, small pieces of bacon, and melted cheese. Traditionally Älplermagronen is served with applesauce instead of vegetables or salad. 
 Appenzeller Käsefladen: The Appenzeller cheese tart, also called Chäsflade, is made with either a bread dough or a yeast dough. The topping consists of Appenzeller cheese, finely chopped onions, eggs, cream and milk, spices to taste. 
 Appenzeller Mostbröckli 
 Basler Mehlsuppe (BS): In Basel, flour soup has been eaten early in the morning of carnival since the 19th century. Flour is roasted dark and deglazed with broth. Often served with grated cheese. 
 Basler Käsewähe (BS) 
 Basler Läckerli 
 Bauernbrot 
 Berner Platte (BE) 
 Berner Rösti (BE) 
 Berner Lebkuchen (BE) 
 Biber(li) (Appenzell): The Biber is a gingerbread specialty from the Appenzellerland. The large Biber, the actual Biberfladen, contain natural honey and are unfilled. Smaller Biber, called Biberli, are filled with an almond paste. 
 Bündner Nusstorte  (GR) 
 Bündnerfleisch  (GR) 
 Emmental  Apple Rösti ( German :  Emmentaler Apfelrösti : Made from old bread, apple, and sugar, this used to be a very popular sweet dish made from leftovers, since the ingredients were usually at hand and the preparation is very simple. The recipe comes from the Emmental ("Emmen Valley") in the  canton of Bern , the home of the famous Emmentaler cheese. 
 Fotzelschnitten : A variant of  french toast . The exact origin of the name remains unclear (literally,  Fotzel  means "torn-off scrap of paper"). 
 Cholera  (VS) 
 Cholermus  (OW) 
 Cordon Bleu 
 Fasnachtschüechli: Deep fried dough disks, often sprinkled with powdered sugar. Traditionally served at the carnival season. 
 Fastenwähe  (BS) 
 Fleischvogel 
 Gehacktes mit Hörnli: Minced meat in either tomato- or brown sauce, served over small elbow macaroni, sometimes with apple sauce on the side. 
 Glarner  Birnbrot  (GL): Pear bread is a traditional pastry from the Swiss Alps and foothills of the Alps with a filling of dried pears. Besides pears, the filling contains raisins, tree nuts and often figs and dried apple slices. It is spiced with candied orange peel, candied lemon peel, coriander, cinnamon, star anise, anise, and cloves, as well as with marc, kirsch, or wine. 
 Gnottene/Gottus (VS) 
 Kalberwurst (GL): A sausage with a distinctive, creamy flavor that originated in the  canton of Glarus , kalberwurst is made with veal, milk, ground crackers, and mild spices. It has a smooth texture and mild taste, and although most sausages are smoked, kalberwurst is not. It is often cooked with onions and gravy. 
 Kappeler Milchsuppe: The so-called 'Kappel Milk Soup' is at the center of an important event in the history of Switzerland. In 1529, Zurich troops marched against the central Swiss cantons. According to the reports, the common foot people of the two armies took advantage of the time when the leaders were negotiating to fraternize and placed a large cooking pot on a fire in Kappel am Albis, exactly on the border between the two cantons. The Zugers are said to have contributed the milk and the Zurichers the bread for a milk soup, which was then eaten together by both armies. 
 Landjäger : A semi-dried sausage traditionally made in Switzerland, but also in Southern Germany, Austria, and Alsace. It is popular as a snack food during activities such as hiking. It also has a history as soldier's food because it keeps without refrigeration and comes in single-meal portions. Landjäger tastes similar to dried salami. 
 Innerschweizer Chäs-Chueche 
 Innerschweizer Zigerkrapfen 
 Luzerner Birrenbrot (LU) 
 Luzerner Chügelipastetli (LU): Lucerne Chügelipastete is a regional pastry dish from Lucerne. The name is derived from the spherical shape (Chügeli = little balls) of most of the ingredients used. Oldest mentions of the dish date back to the 18th century. The basic form consists of a puff pastry filled with a ragout of meat, mushrooms and raisins. 
 Luzerner Lebkuchen (LU) 
 Magenbrot  (BS) 
 Meitschibei (BE) 
 Meringue  (Meiringen) 
 Neuenburger Wurst im Schlafrock 
 Nüsslisalat 
 Nussstängeli: (Nut sticks) is a Swiss hazelnut pastry, ideal for dunking in a hot coffee. 
 Osterfladen 
 Rahmschnitzel 
 Riz Casimir  is a preparation of rice with curry sauce and minced pork blended with tropical fruits: pineapple, banana and cherries, sometimes with currant grape. It was first served in 1952 by the international chain of hotel and resorts  Mövenpick . 
 Nidelwähe: Similar to the 'Wähen' (swiss tarts), these are flat, round cakes with little dough. However, these tarts are filled with a mildly sweet and creamy filling of thick cream, which in Switzerland is called nidle or nidel, depending on the region. 
 Nidwaldner Lebkuchen (NW) 
 Ribel (Rheintal) 
 Schenkele 
 Schinkengipfeli(i): Popular small ham croissants, consisting of a ham mousse filling and puff pastry. 
 Schwyzer Krapfen (SZ) 
 St. Galler (Kalbs)bratwurst  (Veal Sausage, SG) 
 St. Galler Brot (SG) 
 St. Galler Schüblig (SG) 
 suuri Lääberli (Basel) 
 Tirggel  (ZH) are traditional  Christmas   biscuits  from  Zurich . Made from  flour  and  honey , they are thin, hard, and sweet. 
 Zopf  (bread): There are dozens of types of bread in Switzerland. However, Zopf is a typical Swiss specialty for Sundays. 
 Vermicelles 
 Wähe /Kuchen/Dünnen/Fladen/Gateau 
 Walliser Roggenbrot (VS) 
 Schweizer  Wurstsalat 
 Wurzelbrot 
 Zibelechueche (BE) 
 Zuger Kirschtorte  (ZG) 
 Zürcher Geschnetzeltes  (English: cut meat, Zurich style; French: émincé de veau a la Zurichoise). This dish typically consists of sliced strips of  veal  in a creamy white wine sauce. Zürcher Geschnetzeltes is often served with  Rösti . 
 From the French-speaking part of Switzerland [ edit ] 
 Brisolée (VS): roasted chestnuts served in autumn with local cheeses and meats 
 Carac : A distinctively green-colored chocolate and shortcrust pastry 
 Gâteau bullois: A walnut pie (comparable to the  Bündner Nusstorte ) with chocolate [24] 
 Malakoff : Fried cheese balls or sticks from the canton of Vaud 
 Meringue : A dessert made of whipped egg whites, traditionally accompanied by double  Gruyère cream 
 Papet Vaudois : the  canton of Vaud  is home to this filling dish of  leeks  and  potatoes . It is usually served with  saucisse au chou  ( cabbage   sausage ). 
 
 
 
 
 Brisolée
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Papet Vaudois 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Meringue with double cream
 
 
 
 
 From the Italian-speaking part of Switzerland [ edit ] 
 The Italian-speaking part of Switzerland essentially coincides with  Ticino , but also with the southern valleys of  Graubünden . Popular dishes are polenta and risotto, often accompanied by the Luganighe and Luganighetta, a type of artisan  sausages . Typical food from Ticino can be found in a Grotto, the local type of restaurant. [25]   Chestnut  is also a  historical staple food of southern Switzerland . The chestnut tree, introduced there 2000 years ago, was referred to as the "bread tree". [26]  Another specific product of Ticino is  olive oil ;  olive cultivation was revived  in the late 20th century. [27] 
 
 Polenta : For centuries polenta was regarded as a meal for the poor. Corn was introduced to the south of what is now Ticino as long ago as the beginning of the 17th century, which led to a change in the monotonous cuisine. But it took another 200 years before polenta - at first made of mixed flour, only later of pure cornmeal - became the staple dish of the area. 
 Risotto  is another common dish from Ticino. [28]  It is made with either  mushrooms ,  saffron  or cheese. It is often accompanied with either cooked pork sausages ( Luganighe ) or other regional cured meats, like salami, coppa and prosciutto. 
 Pizzoccheri 
 
 
 
 
 Polenta
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Risotto
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pizzoccheri
 
 
 
 
 From the canton of Graubünden [ edit ] 
   A dish of  maluns  accompanied by various specialties of the canton 
 Bündner Nusstorte : There are several different regional recipes for nut cake, but the most famous is probably the one from the  Engadin  valley in the  canton of Graubünden . 
 Chur  meat pie 
 Bündner  barley  soup: The most famous soup from Graubünden 
 Capuns : Typical speciality of western Graubünden 
 Maluns 
 Pizokel with cabbage: Pizokel were eaten in a wide variety of ways. In some places when eaten by themselves they are known in  Romansh  as "bizochels bluts", or “bald pizokel”. If someone leaves a small amount of any kind of food on the serving dish for politeness's sake, in the Engadine this is called "far sco quel dal bizoccal", meaning more or less “leaving the last pizokel”. 
 Restaurants and  haute cuisine [ edit ] 
 See also:  List of restaurants in Switzerland 
   Haute cuisine served in a Geneva restaurant 
 A large variety of restaurants can be found in Switzerland. The  Stube ,  Stübli  or  Stiva  (German and Romansh),  Brasserie  (French) and  Osteria  (Italian)  typically serve simple and traditional dishes. This is even more the case in mountain restaurants or  mountain huts .
 A unique type of restaurant is found in  Ticino : the  Grotto . Grottoes are rustic eateries, offering traditional food, such as polenta. Authentic grottoes are old  wine caves  re-functioned into restaurants. Due to their nature they are mostly found in or around forests and built against a rocky background. Typically, the facade is built from granite blocks and the outside tables and benches are made of the same stone as well. Grottoes are popular with locals and tourists alike, especially during the hot summer months. [29] 
 As a culinary hotspot in the middle of Europe where high-quality ingredients are readily available, [30]  Switzerland boasts a high number of luxury restaurants. It also has a long tradition of hospitality, which is reflected in the palace hotels found in numerous localities. [31]  In the 2018  Michelin Guide , Switzerland ranked first worldwide in terms of Michelin-starred restaurants per capita. [32]  As of 2022, four restaurants were awarded 3 stars: the Restaurant de l'Hôtel de Ville in  Crissier , the Schloss Schauenstein in  Fürstenau , the Cheval Blanc in  Basel  and the Memories in  Bad Ragaz . [33]  Among famous Swiss chefs are  Frédy Girardet  and  Anton Mosimann .
 
 Beverages [ edit ] 
 See also:  Beer in Switzerland  and  Swiss wine 
   Wine shop in the  Lavaux 
 Wine  is produced in many regions of Switzerland, particularly the  Valais , the  Vaud , the  Ticino , the  Neuchâtel  and the  Zurich  cantons. Wine economy notably shaped the landscapes of Valais and the  Lavaux , which have the most extensive terraced vineyards.  Riesling X Sylvaner  is a common white wine produced in German-speaking parts of the country, while  Chasselas  is the most common white wine in the French-speaking parts of the country.  Pinot noir  is the most popular red grape in both the French-speaking and the German-speaking part, while this position is held by  Merlot  in the Italian-speaking part. [34] 
 Beer  is second to wine in terms of consumption among Swiss. [35]  The country has a long tradition of brewing, with significant domestic beer production and a growing  craft brewing  sector. [36] [37]  Most contemporary large-scale breweries are in German-speaking Switzerland. The  Feldschlösschen  brewery in  Rheinfelden  dwarfs all others in the country in terms of output.  Calanda  brewery in  Chur  is the largest in Graubünden.  Zurich  hosts the country's largest beer festival annually, and has a number of microbreweries. [38] [39] 
 
   Beer served at a mountain restaurant 
 Absinthe  is perhaps the most famous Swiss  spirit . It is legally distilled again in its  Val-de-Travers  birthplace, in the  Jura  region of Switzerland. Long banned by a specific anti-Absinthe article in the  Swiss Federal Constitution , it was legalized again in 2005, with the adoption of the new constitution. Swiss absinthe is exported to many countries, with  Kübler  and  La Clandestine Absinthe  amongst the first new brands to emerge. Wine and  beer  can legally be purchased by youths aged 16 and up. Spirits and beverages containing distilled alcohol (including wine coolers like  Bacardi Breezer ) can be bought at age 18.
 Damassine  is a liqueur produced by distillation of the Damassine  prune  from the Damassinier  tree  and is produced in the  canton of Jura .
 Bon Père William is a famous regional Swiss pear brandy containing 43%  ABV . It is usually paired with fondue or raclette dishes or drunk after dinner, and sometimes poured into coffee alongside dessert. Some bottles are available with the full-size pear inside the bottle, grown with the bud placed in the bottle. [40]  There are many other types of regional brandies made from local fruit, the most popular being cherries ( kirschwasser ).
 Rivella , a carbonated Swiss drink based on  lactose , is one of the most popular drinks in Switzerland.  Apple juice , both still and sparkling, is popular in many areas of Switzerland, as is apple  cider . The chocolate drink  Ovomaltine  (also known as "Ovaltine") originates in Switzerland and enjoys ongoing popularity, particularly with young people. Aside from being a beverage, the powder is also eaten sprinkled on top of a slice of buttered bread.
 Switzerland has the seventh highest per capita coffee consumption worldwide. [41] 
 
 See also [ edit ] 
 Culinary Heritage of Switzerland , an online encyclopedia of Swiss food 
 Health in Switzerland 
 Notes and references [ edit ] 
 
 
 ^   "Swiss cuisine" . Retrieved  13 December  2022 . 
 
 ^   Tourismus, Schweiz.  "Typical food" .  Switzerland Tourism . Retrieved  2020-08-06 . 
 
 ^   OECD Rural Studies Enhancing Innovation in Rural Regions of Switzerland .  OECD . 2022. p. 124.  ISBN   9789264807648 . 
 
 ^   "Rapport agricole 2022 - Fruits" . Federal Office of Agriculture . Retrieved  7 January  2023 .  Parmi les principaux types de fruits frais cultivés en Suisse (pommes, poires, abricots, cerises, pruneaux/prunes, fraises ; sans les fruits à cidre et le raisin)...  [Among the main types of fresh fruit grown in Switzerland (apples, pears, apricots, cherries, plums, strawberries; excluding cider fruit and grapes)...] 
 
 ^   Meyer, Benedikt.  "Étrange tubercule" .  Swiss National Museum . Retrieved  17 January  2023 .  Ce n'est qu'avec les disettes de 1770/71 et 1816/17 que le tubercule commença à se faire une réputation: les gens se rendirent compte qu'il était moins fragile que les céréales et qu'il offrait un rendement supérieur. [...] Devenue un classique, elle s'éleva au rang de symbole identitaire de la cuisine suisse.  [It was not until the food shortages of 1770/71 and 1816/17 that potatoes began to gain a reputation: people realized that it was less fragile than cereals and that it offered a higher yield. [...] Having become a classic, it rose to the rank of an identity symbol of Swiss cuisine.] 
 
 ^   Field, Michael; Field, Frances (1971).  A quintet of cuisines . New York: Time-Life Books. p. 11. 
 
 ^   "Geliebte Wähe: Die besten Rezepte und Tipps von Betty Bossi" .  Betty Bossi . Retrieved  7 January  2023 .  Die Wähe ist eine Klassikerin der Schweizer Küche. Chueche, Dünne, Flade, Tüle oder Wäie werden sie in der Deutschschweiz genannt, Gâteau, Tarte oder Quiche in der Romandie.  [The tart is a classic of Swiss cuisine. They are called Chueche, Dünne, Flade, Tül or Wäie in German-speaking Switzerland, Gâteau, tarte or quiche in French-speaking Switzerland.] 
 
 ^   Baumann, Kurt (20 May 2020).  "Consommation de viande en hausse ?" .  Revue UFA . Retrieved  17 January  2023 .  Ces dix dernières années, la consommation de viande par habitant est restée stable. En 2019, elle était de 51 kg par personne. La viande de bœuf (22%), de veau (5%), de porc (41%) et de volaille (28%) représentent 96% de la consommation totale de viande. La viande de mouton, de cheval, de chèvre, de lapin et de chasse ne représentent qu'une part infime de la consommation totale (env. 4%).  [Over the past ten years, meat consumption per capita has remained stable. In 2019, it was 51 kg per person. Beef (22%), veal (5%), pork (41%) and poultry (28%) account for 96% of total meat consumption. Mutton, horse, goat, rabbit and game meat represent only a tiny part of total consumption (approx. 4%).] 
 
 ^   "Le poisson suisse : une niche de marché en devenir" . Paysans Suisses . Retrieved  17 January  2023 .  Les Suisses consomment de plus en plus de poisson. Néanmoins, la part indigène de poissons et de crustacés n'est que de 2,4 %. Pas étonnant, vu que la Suisse ne dispose pas d'accès à la mer. Cependant, certains Suisses pratiquent la pêche non seulement comme hobby, mais aussi comme métier sur certains lacs. Les pêcheurs professionnels pêchent toutes sortes de poissons : perches, féras, sandres et brochets.  [The Swiss consume more and more fish. Nevertheless, the indigenous share of fish and shellfish is only 2.4%. No wonder, since Switzerland does not have access to the sea. However, some Swiss people practice fishing not only as a hobby, but also as a job on certain lakes. Professional fishermen catch all kinds of fish: perch, whitefish, zander and pike.] 
 
 ^   "Butter / Beurre / Burro" .  Culinary Heritage of Switzerland . Retrieved  17 February  2023 .  La Suisse, eu égard à la qualité de ses pâturages et au développement précoce de son économie laitière, est reconnue depuis plusieurs décennies comme un haut lieu de l'excellence beurrière. La culture culinaire de ce pays a durablement intégré le beurre comme ingrédient de base de nombreuses spécialités ou préparations, quoiqu'il n'ait pas toujours été une denrée abondante.  [Switzerland, given the quality of its pastures and the early development of its dairy economy, has been recognized for several decades as a center of butter excellence. The culinary culture of this country has permanently integrated butter as a basic ingredient of many specialties or preparations, although it has not always been an abundant commodity.] 
 
 ^   "Crème de Gruyère" .  Culinary Heritage of Switzerland . Retrieved  17 February  2023 .  Nul doute que l'utilisation de la crème est aussi ancienne que la production laitière et fromagère, et à ce sujet la réputation de la Gruyère est attestée au moins depuis le 13ème siècle...  [There is no doubt that the use of cream is as old as dairy and cheese production, and on this subject the reputation of Gruyère has been attested at least since the 13th century...] 
 
 ^   "7 Swiss Cheeses You Should Know" .  The Cheese Professor . Retrieved  2022-09-23 . 
 
 ^  a   b   "Bulletin nutritionnel suisse 2021" .  Swiss Confederation . Federal Food Safety and Veterinary Office . Retrieved  17 January  2023 .  Les différences régionales correspondent bien pour certains groupes de denrées alimentaires, notamment pour le poisson et les produits laitiers. Il ressort clairement que l'on vend, achète et consomme plus de poisson dans la région lémanique, la région francophone de l'espace Mittelland et au Tessin que dans les régions de Suisse alémanique. Par contre, on vend, achète et consomme plus de produits laitiers en Suisse alémanique. [...] Avec 18 % de l'apport énergétique total, la part d'énergie qu'apporte le petit-déjeuner en Suisse est donc comparable à celle des pays nordiques. Pour le dîner (27 %), la Suisse, un peu comme l'Allemagne, se situe entre les pays nordiques (22 %), l'Europe centrale (22 %) et les pays méditerranéens (41 %), où ce repas semble avoir une importance beaucoup plus grande. L'apport énergétique via le souper est de 33 % de l'apport journalier en Suisse, ce qui est comparable au reste de l'Europe (30 à 33 %). [...] La Suisse est un pays multiculturel et les apports alimentaires sont fortement liés à la culture régionale, par exemple les influences méditerranéennes au Tessin.  [The regional differences correspond well for certain food groups, notably for fish and dairy products. It is clear that more fish are sold, bought and consumed in the Lake Geneva region, the French-speaking region of the Mittelland area and in Ticino than in the regions of German-speaking Switzerland. On the other hand, more dairy products are sold, bought and consumed in German-speaking Switzerland. [...] With 18% of the total energy intake, the share of energy provided by breakfast in Switzerland is therefore comparable to that of the Nordic countries. For dinner (27%), Switzerland, much like Germany, is between the Nordic countries (22%), Central Europe (22%) and the Mediterranean countries (41%), where this meal seems have a much greater importance. The energy intake via dinner is 33% of the daily intake in Switzerland, which is comparable to the rest of Europe (30 to 33%).[...] Switzerland is a multicultural country and dietary intake is strongly linked to regional culture, for example Mediterranean influences in Ticino.] 
 
 ^   "Fiche thématique sur la nutrition - Consommation de céréales, de pommes de terre et de légumineuses en Suisse en 2014 et 2015" .  Swiss Confederation . Retrieved  7 January  2023 .  Tant en Suisse alémanique qu'en Suisse italienne, la consommation quotidienne de féculents se chiffre à 301 g par personne. L'on relève toutefois des différences entre les catégories. Alors que la consommation de pain est plus d'un quart supérieure en Suisse alémanique, les Suisses italiens mangent davantage de riz (50% de plus) et de pâtes (20% de plus). Dans l'ensemble, les Suisses romands consomment légèrement moins de féculents (289 g par personne).  [In both German-speaking Switzerland and Italian-speaking Switzerland, the daily consumption of starches amounts to 301 g per person. However, there are differences between the categories. While bread consumption is more than a quarter higher in German-speaking Switzerland, Italian Swiss eat more rice (50% more) and pasta (20% more). Overall, French-speaking Swiss consume slightly less starchy foods (289 g per person).] 
 
 ^   "Fiche thématique sur la nutrition - Consommation d'huiles, de matières grasses et de fruits à coque en Suisse en 2014 et 2015" .  Swiss Confederation . Retrieved  7 January  2023 .  La Suisse italienne affiche la consommation d'huiles végétales la plus élevée (16 g par jour), suivie par la Suisse romande (15g) et la Suisse alémanique (13g). L'on constate davantage de différences en ce qui concerne les matières grasses: avec une moyenne de 44 g par personne, la population de Suisse alémanique en consomme plus de deux fois plus que celle de Suisse italienne (20 g), tandis qu'en Suisse romande cette valeur s'élève à 30 g.  [Italian-speaking Switzerland has the highest consumption of vegetable oils (16g per day), followed by French-speaking Switzerland (15g) and German-speaking Switzerland (13g). There are more differences with regard to fats: with an average of 44 g per person, the population of German-speaking Switzerland consumes more than twice as much as that of Italian-speaking Switzerland (20 g), while in French-speaking Switzerland this value amounts to 30 g.] 
 
 ^   "Switzerland's national dishes" .  Swiss Confederation . Retrieved  7 January  2023 .  Some traditional Swiss dishes, such as fondue and raclette, are more typically eaten in the winter. Others, such as muesli – also known in Switzerland as Birchermüesli – and rösti are popular all year round and come in many variations. 
 
 ^   "Typical food: Custom and Tradition" .  Swiss Confederation . Switzerland Tourism . Retrieved  18 January  2023 .  Mind you, many dishes have crossed the local borders and become firm favourites throughout Switzerland. These dishes include, among others: Cheese fondue [...] Raclette [...] Älplermagronen [...] Rösti [...] Birchermüesli 
 
 ^   "Birchermüesli" .  Culinary Heritage of Switzerland . Retrieved  7 January  2023 . 
 
 ^   Rösti Recipes  consulted on June 24, 2008. 
 
 ^   Bern tourist guide  consulted on June 16, 2008. 
 
 ^   The Oxford Companion to Cheese .  Oxford University Press . 2016. p. 692.  ISBN   978-0-19-933089-8 .  One highly successful campaign focused on popularizing fondue, formerly a regional dish. Over many decades advertisements and slogans promoted the wholesomeness of fondue and associated fondue parties with stylish living. 
 
 ^   Susan Fuller Slack (2001).  Fondues and Hot Pots .  Penguin Books . p. 1.  ISBN   9781557883698 .  Fondue is Switzerland's national dish. It has become an international friendship dish and symbol of goodwill. 
 
 ^   "Raclette du Valais (AOP)" .  Culinary Heritage of Switzerland  (in French) . Retrieved  16 January  2023 .  Le fait de fondre le fromage devant un feu est également attesté dès 1574 en Valais, de manière particulièrement détaillée, dans un document rédigé par Gaspard Ambuel, dit Collinus, médecin et pharmacien à Sion. Concernant les fromages utilisés, on y apprend qu'ils sont "savoureux, gras, doux et tendres". [...] Le terme « raclette », désignant ce mets au fromage rôti, apparaît en de nombreuses sources écrites en langue française dès 1875, ce qui suggère que le terme est déjà bien connu alors. [...]  En 1909, elle est présentée comme "mets national valaisan" à l'Exposition cantonale de Sion, qui attire de nombreux visiteurs de l'extérieur du canton. [...] L'événement grâce auquel la raclette gagne une notoriété nationale puis internationale est l'Exposition nationale de 1964 à Lausanne.  [Melting the cheese in front of a fire is also attested in 1574 in Valais, in a particularly detailed manner, in a document written by Gaspard Ambuel, known as Collinus, doctor and pharmacist in Sion. Regarding the cheeses used, we learn that they are "tasty, fatty, soft and tender". [...] The term "raclette", designating this roasted cheese dish, appears in numerous sources written in the French language as early as 1875, which suggests that the term was already well known then. [...] In 1909, it was presented as a "national Valais dish" at the Cantonal Exhibition in Sion, which attracted many visitors from outside the canton. [...] The event thanks to which raclette gained national and then international notoriety was the 1964 National Exhibition in Lausanne.] 
 
 ^   "Gâteau bullois" .  Culinary Heritage of Switzerland . Retrieved  1 March  2023 . 
 
 ^   "IL GROTTO TICINESE - Ticino.ch" . 27 September 2007. Archived from  the original  on 27 September 2007 . Retrieved  17 March  2018 . 
 
 ^   Stefano Mazzoleni (2004).  Recent Dynamics of the Mediterranean Vegetation and Landscape .  John Wiley & Sons . p. 237.  ISBN   9780470093702 .  Thus, for many centuries the chestnut was the "bread tree"  par excellence , the principal – if not the only – source of subsistence in the mountains for the local population. Concerning southern Switzerland, we know that the introduction of the chestnut took place 2000 years ago, triggering a revolution in landscape management, namely from a slash-and-burn agricultural approach to chestnut grove and coppice management. 
 
 ^   "Olio d'oliva ticinese" .  Culinary Heritage of Switzerland . Retrieved  9 March  2022 .  Nel 1494, 1600 e 1709, gli oliveti vennero quasi completamente distrutti dal gelo. Anni dopo, furono accantonati in favore dei gelsi, così da promuovere l'allevamento dei bachi da seta. Verso la fine degli anni '80 del secolo scorso, la coltivazione dell'olivo è stata ripresa  [In 1494, 1600 and 1709, frost destroyed almost all the olive trees. Later, they were replaced by mulberry trees to promote the breeding of silkworms. Olive cultivation in Ticino was revived at the end of the 1980s] 
 
 ^   Expatica (2022).  "The top 10 Swiss foods – with recipes" . 
 
 ^   "IL GROTTO TICINESE - Ticino.ch" . 27 September 2007. Archived from  the original  on 27 September 2007 . Retrieved  17 March  2018 . 
 
 ^   Reaney, Patricia (15 January 2015).  "Netherlands is country with most plentiful, healthy food - Oxfam" .  Reuters . Retrieved  17 February  2023 .  The Netherlands nudged past France and Switzerland as the country with the most nutritious, plentiful and healthy food, while the United States and Japan failed to make it into the top 20, a new ranking released by Oxfam on Tuesday showed. 
 
 ^   Swiss Office for the Development of Trade Zurich and Lausanne (1945).  Directory of Swiss Manufacturers and Producers . Schweizerische Zentrale für Handelsförderung.  Noblesse oblige, and Switzerland has remained true to her ancient tradition of hospitality. Her health resorts and watering places, her towns and villages provide all the comforts and attractions which the most fastidious as well as the most frugal visitor could wish for. 
 
 ^   "Swiss Gastronomic Week: Seven days of Swissness and unique culinary enjoyment" .  Swiss Confederation . Retrieved  7 January  2023 .  Did you know that Switzerland, as a culinary hotspot, boasts the highest number of Michelin-starred restaurants per capita in the world, and its food is enriched by creative influences from neighboring countries and beyond? 
 
 ^   "3 stars Michelin restaurants" . Retrieved  7 January  2023 . 
 
 ^   Albala, Ken (2011).  Food Cultures of the World Encyclopedia . ABC-CLIO. p. 370.  ISBN   9780313376269 . 
 
 ^   "GHO | By category | Recorded alcohol per capita consumption, from 2010 - Updated May 2021" .  WHO . Retrieved  2021-06-01 . 
 
 ^   "Food and Drink in Switzerland | Frommer's" .  www.frommers.com . Retrieved  2021-06-10 . 
 
 ^   "Swiss drinking culture: popular drinks and traditions | Expatica" .  Expat Guide to Switzerland | Expatica . Retrieved  2021-06-10 . 
 
 ^   "Beer from Zurich" .  www.inyourpocket.com . Retrieved  2021-06-10 . 
 
 ^   "Zurich Beer Festival | zuerich.com" .  www.zuerich.com . Retrieved  2021-06-10 . 
 
 ^   "Cocktailsspiritsliquors.com" .  www.cocktailsspiritsliquors.com . Retrieved  17 March  2018 . 
 
 ^   Jones, Lora (2018-04-13).  "Coffee: Who grows, drinks and pays the most?" .  BBC News . Retrieved  2018-05-13 . 
 
 
 External links [ edit ] 
 Culinary Heritage Switzerland in de, fr, it 
 swiss meal cooking with cc videos   Archived  2020-09-25 at the  Wayback Machine 
 
 
 v t e Cuisine and foods of Switzerland Foods by type 
 Beer 
 Bread
 list of breads 
 Cheeses and dairy products 
 list of cheeses 
 Chestnut 
 Chocolate 
 Olive 
 Fish 
 Sausages and cured meats 
 Wine 
 AOP and IGP products 
 Berner Alpkäse 
 Bündnerfleisch 
 Damassine 
 Emmentaler 
 L'Etivaz 
 Gruyère 
 Pain de seigle valaisan 
 Raclette du Valais 
 Sbrinz 
 St. Galler Bratwurst 
 Tête de Moine 
 Vacherin Fribourgeois 
 Vacherin Mont d'Or 
 Williamine 
 Zuger Kirschtorte 
 National dishes 
 Fondue 
 Muesli 
 Raclette 
 Rösti 
 Related 
 Culinary Heritage of Switzerland 
 
   Switzerland portal 
   Food portal 
 
 v t e European cuisine Sovereign states European Union 
 Austria 
 Belgium 
 Bulgaria 
 Croatia 
 Cyprus 
 Czech Republic 
 Denmark 
 Estonia 
 Finland 
 France 
 Germany 
 Greece 
 Hungary 
 Republic of Ireland 
 Italy 
 Latvia 
 Lithuania 
 Luxembourg 
 Malta 
 Netherlands 
 Poland 
 Portugal 
 Romania 
 Slovakia 
 Slovenia 
 Spain 
 Sweden 
 Other 
 Albania 
 Andorra 
 Armenia 
 Azerbaijan 
 Belarus 
 Bosnia and Herzegovina 
 Georgia 
 Iceland 
 Kazakhstan 
 Liechtenstein 
 Moldova 
 Monaco 
 Montenegro 
 North Macedonia 
 Norway 
 Russia 
 San Marino 
 Serbia 
 Switzerland 
 Turkey 
 Ukraine 
 United Kingdom 
 Vatican City 
 States with limited recognition 
 Abkhazia 
 Kosovo 
 Nagorno-Karabakh 
 Northern Cyprus 
 South Ossetia 
 Transnistria 
 Dependencies  and other territories 
 Faroe Islands 
 Gibraltar 
 Guernsey 
 Isle of Man 
 Jersey 
 
 v t e Cuisines Continental 
 African 
 North 
 West 
 list 
 Americas 
 Caribbean 
 North 
 South 
 list 
 Asian 
 Caucasian 
 Central 
 Indian subcontinent 
 Levantine 
 list 
 European 
 Balkan 
 Central 
 Eastern 
 list 
 Oceanic 
 Intercontinental
 Global 
 Latin American 
 Mediterranean 
 Middle Eastern 
 National  and regional 
 Afghan 
 Albanian 
 Algerian 
 American 
 Californian 
 Floribbean 
 Hawaiian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Lowcountry (South Carolina) 
 New England 
 New Mexico 
 Pacific Northwest 
 Pennsylvania Dutch 
 Puerto Rican 
 Southern US 
 Southwest US 
 Texas 
 Angolan 
 Argentine 
 Armenian 
 Australian 
 Austrian 
 Azerbaijani 
 Bahraini 
 Bangladeshi 
 Barbadian 
 Belarusian 
 Belgian 
 Belizean 
 Beninese 
 Bhutanese 
 Bolivian 
 Bosnian-Herzegovinian 
 Botswana 
 Brazilian 
 British 
 Channel Islands 
 English 
 Gibraltarian 
 Northern Irish 
 Saint Helena 
 Scottish 
 Welsh 
 Bruneian 
 Bulgarian 
 Burkinabé 
 Burmese 
 Burundian 
 Cambodian 
 Cameroonian 
 Canadian 
 Acadian 
 Québécois 
 Central African Republic 
 Chadian 
 Chilean 
 Chinese 
 Cantonese 
 Hong Kong 
 Macanese 
 Tibetan 
 Xinjiang 
 Colombian 
 Congolese 
 Corsican 
 Croatian 
 Cuban 
 Cypriot 
 Czech 
 Danish 
 Faroese 
 Greenlandic 
 Djiboutian 
 Dominican 
 Dominican Republic 
 Dutch 
 East Timorese 
 Ecuadorian 
 Egyptian 
 Emirati 
 Equatorial Guinean 
 Eritrean 
 Estonian 
 Ethiopian 
 Fijian 
 Filipino 
 Finnish 
 French 
 Occitan 
 French Guianan 
 Gabonese 
 Gambian 
 Georgian 
 German 
 Ghanaian 
 Greek 
 Cretan 
 Epirotic 
 Greek Macedonian 
 Heptanesean 
 Guatemalan 
 Guinea-Bissauan 
 Guinean 
 Haitian 
 Honduran 
 Hungarian 
 Icelandic 
 Indian 
 Arunachalese 
 Assamese 
 Bengali 
 Bihari 
 Goan 
 Gujarati 
 Himachal Pradesh 
 Kashmiri 
 Jharkhandi 
 Karnataka 
 Kerala 
 Maharashtrian 
 Manipuri 
 Meghalayan 
 Mizo 
 Naga 
 Odia 
 Punjabi 
 Rajasthani 
 Sikkimese 
 Sindhi 
 Tamil 
 Telangana 
 Telugu 
 Indonesian 
 Acehnese 
 Balinese 
 Banjar 
 Batak 
 Betawi 
 Indo 
 Javanese 
 Madurese 
 Makassar 
 Minahasan 
 Minangkabau 
 Palembangese 
 Sundanese 
 Iranian 
 Iraqi 
 Irish 
 Israeli 
 Italian 
 Abruzzese 
 Ligurian 
 Lombard 
 Lucanian 
 Neapolitan 
 Roman 
 Sardinian 
 Sicilian 
 Venetian 
 Ivorian 
 Jamaican 
 Japanese 
 Okinawan 
 Jordanian 
 Kazakh 
 Kenyan 
 Korean 
 North Korean 
 South Korean 
 Kosovan 
 Kuwaiti 
 Kyrgyz 
 Lao 
 Latvian 
 Lebanese 
 Lesotho 
 Liberian 
 Libyan 
 Liechtensteiner 
 Lithuanian 
 Luxembourg 
 Macedonian 
 Malagasy 
 Malawian 
 Malaysian 
 Sabahan 
 Sarawakian 
 Maldivian 
 Malian 
 Maltese 
 Mauritanian 
 Mauritian 
 Mexican 
 Moldovan 
 Monégasque 
 Mongolian 
 Montenegrin 
 Moroccan 
 Mozambican 
 Namibian 
 Nauruan 
 Nepalese 
 New Zealand 
 Nicaraguan 
 Niger 
 Nigerian 
 Niuean 
 Norwegian 
 Omani 
 Pakistani 
 Palestinian 
 Panamanian 
 Peruvian 
 Polish 
 Portuguese 
 Qatari 
 Romanian  (incl.  Transylvanian Saxon ) 
 Russian 
 Bashkir 
 Chechen 
 Circassian 
 Komi 
 Mordovian 
 Sakha 
 Tatar 
 Udmurt 
 Yamal 
 Rwandan 
 Saint Lucian 
 Salvadoran 
 Sammarinese 
 São Tomé and Príncipe 
 Saudi Arabian 
 Senegalese 
 Serbian 
 Seychellois 
 Sierra Leonean 
 Singaporean 
 Slovak 
 Slovenian 
 Somali 
 South African 
 Spanish 
 Andalusian 
 Asturian 
 Balearic 
 Basque 
 Canarian 
 Cantabrian 
 Catalan 
 Extremaduran 
 Galician 
 Manchegan 
 Valencian 
 Sri Lankan 
 Sudanese 
 Swazi 
 Swedish 
 Swiss 
 Syrian 
 Taiwanese 
 Tajik 
 Tanzanian 
 Zanzibari 
 Thai 
 Togolese 
 Tunisian 
 Turkish 
 Turkmen 
 Trinidadian and Tobagonian 
 Ugandan 
 Ukrainian 
 Uruguayan 
 Uzbek 
 Venezuelan 
 Vietnamese 
 Western Saharan 
 Yemeni 
 Zambian 
 Zimbabwean 
 Ethnic 
 Ainu 
 Arab 
 Indonesian 
 Aromanian 
 Assyrian 
 Balochi 
 Berber 
 Cajun 
 Chinese 
 American 
 Canadian 
 Chifa 
 Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Crimean Tatar 
 Greek American 
 Hazaragi 
 Indian 
 Anglo-Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Indigenous American 
 Inuit 
 Italian American 
 Kurdish 
 Livonian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Malay 
 Ossetian 
 Parsi 
 Pashtun 
 Peranakan 
 Romani 
 Sámi 
 Soul food 
 Sylheti 
 Transylvanian Saxon 
 Yup'ik 
 Religious 
 Buddhist 
 Christian 
 Goan Catholic 
 Mangalorean Catholic 
 Mennonite 
 Hindu 
 Islamic 
 Chinese 
 Ital 
 Jain 
 Jewish 
 American 
 Ashkenazi 
 Bukharan 
 Ethiopian 
 Mizrahi 
 Sephardic 
 Syrian 
 Ritual slaughter 
 Sikh 
 Historical 
 Ancient Egyptian 
 Ancient Greek 
 Ancient Israelite 
 Ancient Roman 
 Antebellum America 
 Aztec 
 Byzantine 
 Early modern European 
 Historical Chinese 
 Historical Indian subcontinent 
 Historical North Indian and Pakistani 
 History of agriculture 
 History of alcoholic drinks 
 History of bread 
 History of seafood 
 History of vegetarianism 
 Historical Argentine 
 Historical Japanese 
 Inca 
 Mayan 
 Muisca 
 Mughal 
 Medieval 
 Ottoman 
 Peasant 
 Soviet 
 Thirteen Colonies 
 Styles 
 Classique 
 Fast food 
 Fusion 
 New American 
 Eurasian 
 Haute 
 Molecular gastronomy 
 Note by Note 
 Nouvelle 
 Lists 
 List of cuisines 
 List of historical cuisines 
 Lists of prepared foods 
 Related 
 Cookbook 
 Cooking 
 Culinary arts 
 Drink 
 Food 
 history 
 Diet 
 Meal preparation 
 
   Food portal 
   Drink portal 
   Category 
   Commons 
   Cookbook 
   WikiProject 
   Outline 
 
 v t e Switzerland   articles Major topics History 
 Timeline 
 Enlargement 
 Early history 
 Roman era 
 Old Confederacy 
 Federal Charter 
 Rütli Oath 
 Growth 
 Reformation 
 Early Modern era 
 Napoleonic era 
 Restoration 
 Federal state 
 World wars 
 Modern history 
 Military history 
 list of wars 
 Historiography 
 Geography Physiographic areas 
 Swiss Alps 
 Swiss Plateau 
 Jura Mountains 
 Subdivisions 
 Cantons 
 AI 
 AG 
 AR 
 BE 
 BL 
 BS 
 FR 
 GE 
 GL 
 GR 
 JU 
 LU 
 NE 
 NW 
 OW 
 SG 
 SH 
 SO 
 SZ 
 TG 
 TI 
 UR 
 VD 
 VS 
 ZG 
 ZH 
 Districts 
 Municipalities 
 list of cities and towns 
 Statistical regions 
 By topic 
 Climate 
 Extreme points 
 Fauna 
 Forests 
 Glaciers 
 Hydrology 
 Islands 
 Lakes 
 Mountain passes 
 Mountains 
 Parks 
 Rivers 
 Politics 
 Administrative divisions 
 Constitution 
 Courts 
 Supreme Court 
 Elections 
 Foreign relations 
 Government
 Federal Council 
 President of the Confederation 
 Federal administration 
 Human rights 
 LGBT 
 Landsgemeinde 
 Law 
 Law enforcement 
 Military 
 National Redoubt 
 Neutrality 
 Parliament 
 National Council 
 Council of States 
 Political parties 
 Popular initiative 
 Voting 
 Economy 
 Economic history 
 Banking 
 Central bank 
 Private banks 
 Companies 
 Energy 
 Fishing 
 Franc  (currency) 
 Pharmaceutical industry 
 Science and technology 
 Stock exchange 
 Swiss made 
 Taxation 
 Telecommunications 
 Tourism 
 Trade unions 
 Transport 
 air 
 rail 
 road 
 Waste management 
 Society 
 Abortion 
 Capital punishment 
 Conscription 
 Corruption 
 Crime 
 Demographics 
 Education 
 Firearms regulation 
 Health 
 Healthcare 
 Homelessness 
 Immigration 
 Pensions 
 Prisons 
 Poverty 
 Social security 
 Swiss people 
 Welfare 
 Women 
 Culture 
 Anthem 
 Architecture 
 Cinema 
 Coat of arms 
 Cuisine 
 Flag 
 Folklore 
 Helvetia 
 Languages 
 German 
 French 
 Italian 
 Romansh 
 Röstigraben 
 Literature 
 Media 
 Music 
 Public holidays 
 National Day 
 Religion 
 Sport 
 Symbols 
 Cultural Property of National Significance 
 World Heritage Sites 
 Outline Index 
 Category 
 Portal 
 Authority control : National libraries  
 France 
 BnF data 
 Israel 
 United States 
 
 Portals :   Food   Society   Switzerland 
  
NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw2339
Cached time: 20230310194848
Cache expiry: 1814400
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc, no‐toc‐conversion]
CPU time usage: 0.956 seconds
Real time usage: 1.170 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 19488/1000000
Post‐expand include size: 275027/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 25802/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 16/100
Expensive parser function count: 56/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 173426/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.493/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 24739528/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/400
 
 
Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  938.289      1 -total
 33.15%  310.996      5 Template:Navbox
 24.92%  233.816      1 Template:Reflist
 16.35%  153.425     29 Template:Cite_web
 15.12%  141.836      1 Template:European_topic
 13.37%  125.408      1 Template:Culture_of_Switzerland
 13.16%  123.467      1 Template:Culture_of_region
 12.90%  121.002      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  9.26%   86.900     55 Template:Iso2country
  8.56%   80.330      2 Template:Lang-de
 
  Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:idhash:851627-0!canonical and timestamp 20230310194847 and revision id 1143297214. Rendering was triggered because: page-view
  
 esi <esi:include src="/esitest-fa8a495983347898/content" />  
 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Swiss_cuisine&oldid=1143297214 " 
 Category :  Swiss cuisine Hidden categories:  CS1 French-language sources (fr) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing German-language text Articles containing French-language text Articles containing Italian-language text Articles containing Romansh-language text Articles needing additional references from May 2010 All articles needing additional references Articles containing Alemannic German-language text Webarchive template wayback links Articles with BNF identifiers Articles with J9U identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  This page was last edited on 6 March 2023, at 23:03  (UTC) . 
 Text is available under the  Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0 ;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the  Terms of Use  and  Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the  Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. 
 
 
 Privacy policy 
 About Wikipedia 
 Disclaimers 
 Contact Wikipedia 
 Mobile view 
 Developers 
 Statistics 
 Cookie statement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
