
 
 
 Jump to content 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle sidebar 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Create account Log in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Personal tools 
 
 
 
 
   Create account   Log in 
 
 
 
 
		Pages for logged out editors  learn more 
 
 
 Contributions Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Navigation 
 
 
 Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate 
 
 
 
 
 Contribute 
 
 
 Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file 
 
 
 
 
 Tools 
 
 
 What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item 
 
 
 
 
 Print/export 
 
 
 Download as PDF Printable version 
 
 
 
 
 In other projects 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons Wikibooks 
 
 
 
 
 Languages 
 
 On this Wikipedia the language links are at the top of the page across from the article title.  Go to top . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CentralNotice  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Contents 
 move to sidebar 
 hide 
 
 
 
 
 (Top) 
 
 
 
 
 
 1 History and development 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 Ingredients and culture 
 
 
				Toggle Ingredients and culture subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 2.1 Vegetarianism and veganism 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 Regional specialities 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4 Typical dishes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5 Desserts 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6 Night market dishes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 7 Food of the Taiwanese Aborigines 
 
 
				Toggle Food of the Taiwanese Aborigines subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 7.1 Modern aboriginal cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8 Beverages 
 
 
				Toggle Beverages subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 8.1 Beer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8.2 Coffee 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8.3 Kaoliang liquor 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8.4 Rum 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8.5 Tea 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8.6 Whisky 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8.7 Wine 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8.8 Sake 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 9 Fine dining 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 10 Foreign cuisine in Taiwan 
 
 
				Toggle Foreign cuisine in Taiwan subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 10.1 Fusion 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 10.2 Italian 
 
 
 
 
 
 10.2.1 Pizza 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 10.3 Indian 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 10.4 Russian 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 10.5 Nordic 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 10.6 Hong Kong 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 10.7 Japanese 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 11 Taiwanese cuisine abroad 
 
 
				Toggle Taiwanese cuisine abroad subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 11.1 United States 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 12 Culinary education 
 
 
				Toggle Culinary education subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 12.1 Culinary schools 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 13 See also 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 14 References 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 15 Further reading 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 16 External links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
						Toggle the table of contents
					 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle the table of contents 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Taiwanese cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 18 languages 
 
 
 
 Bân-lâm-gú Български Čeština Deutsch Español Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Jawa ქართული Bahasa Melayu 日本語 Português Suomi Svenska Tiếng Việt 中文 
 Edit links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Article Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 English 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 More 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
 
 
 Culinary traditions of Taiwan 
 This article  needs additional citations for  verification .  Please help  improve this article  by  adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources:   "Taiwanese cuisine"  –  news   ·   newspapers   ·   books   ·   scholar   ·   JSTOR   ( January 2010 )  ( Learn how and when to remove this template message ) 
 
 Taiwanese cuisine  ( 臺灣 料理 ;  Táiwān liàolǐ ;  Tâi-oân liāu-lí ,  Bopomofo :ㄊㄞˊㄨㄢˉㄌㄧㄠˋㄌㄧˇ, or  Chinese :  臺灣菜 ;  pinyin :  Táiwāncài ;  Pe̍h-ōe-jī :  Tâi-oân-chhài ,  Bopomofo :ㄊㄞˊㄨㄢˉㄘㄞˋ) has several variations. The earliest known cuisines of Taiwan are that of the  Taiwanese indigenous peoples . Over hundred years of historical development; mainstream Taiwanese cuisine has been influenced by  Hakka cuisine , the cuisines of the  waishengren ,   Japanese cuisine , and  American cuisine . Although southern  Fujian cuisine  has had the most profound impact.
 
 
 History and development [ edit ] 
   At a fruit and vegetable market in Taihoku Prefecture (now Taipei) 1938-1942. 
 Taiwanese culinary history is murky and is intricately tied to patterns of migration and colonization. Local and international Taiwanese cuisine, including its history, is a politically contentious topic. [1]  Taiwan's complex and diverse identity makes Taiwanese cuisine hard to communicate. [2] 
 The history of Taiwanese cuisine began with the cuisine of aboriginal peoples on the island of Taiwan, which existed in the ancient times without written records. From the  Ming dynasty  in  16th century , a large number of immigrants from the southern provinces of  China , especially the Hoklo people, brought the rich Chinese culinary culture to Taiwan. At the same time,  Hakka people  from Fujian developed a separate cuisine culture from Hoklo people. Because of the influence of Chinese immigration, Taiwanese cuisine often leads to it being classified as 'Southern Chinese cuisine'. Due to the period of  Japanese rule , Taiwanese cuisine was also strongly influenced by Japanese  washoku  and  yōshoku . After WWII, the  Kuomintang  retreat to Taiwan brought along many Chinese cuisines outside the province of  Fujian  or Southeast China. After that, the dishes from whole  mainland China  especially  Guangdong ,  Chaoshan ,  Shanghai ,  Sichuan  and  Beijing  could be easily found in  Taiwan . [ citation needed ]  In the decades since the KMT's retreat these regional dishes have evolved and become part of Taiwanese cuisine. [2] 
 According to Taiwanese chef  Fu Pei-mei , authentic Chinese culinary traditions were properly preserved in Taiwan. This claim to authenticity, common among Fu's generation, was in part due to the Kuomintang's Chinese nationalist political messaging which extended well beyond cuisine. [3] : 56–72  
 In the early 21st century ideas about sustainability and local food became more prominent in Taiwanese culinary and agricultural circles. [4] 
 
 Ingredients and culture [ edit ] 
 Further information:  Agriculture in Taiwan  and  Maritime industries of Taiwan 
   Paddy field  in  Hualien County . 
   Vegetable farmland  in  Lienchiang County . 
   Fishing port in  Penghu County . 
 Pork ,  seafood ,  chicken ,  rice , and  soy  are common ingredients. [5]  Traditionally, rice formed the basis of most Taiwanese diets. Before the Japanese colonial period, most rice grown in Taiwan was long-grained  indica rice . The Japanese introduced short-grained  japonica rice  which quickly changed both the farming and eating patterns of the Taiwanese. Due to Japanese influence, the Taiwanese generally prefer rice that is plump, aromatic, slightly firm, and sweet. Differences between the Taiwanese and Japanese rice preferences are demonstrated by differences in their cuisine with Taiwan's more flavorful and aggressive cooking methods calling for highly aromatic rice while the Japanese prefer a more subtle and pure taste and smell. [6]  During the Japanese Colonial period, Taiwanese cuisine was divided. High-end restaurants, or wine houses, served Chinese cuisine such as  Peking duck , shark fin with  bird's nest soup , and braised turtle to the colonial elite. In the meantime, those without wealth or connections primarily ate rice,  porridge ,  pickled vegetables , and  sweet potato leaves .  Cooking oil  was considered a luxury and was only used for special occasions. [7] 
 Taiwan's cuisine has also been influenced by its geographic location. Living on a crowded island, the Taiwanese had to look aside from the farmlands for sources of protein. As a result,  seafood  figures prominently in their cuisine. This seafood encompasses many different things, from large fish such as  tuna  and  grouper , [8]  to  sardines  and even smaller fish such as  anchovies .  Crustaceans ,  squid , and  cuttlefish  are also eaten. [9] [ citation needed ]   Milkfish  is the most popular fish in Taiwanese cuisine; it is valued for its versatility as well as its tender meat and economical price. [10] 
 Beef  is less common than other proteins, and some Taiwanese (particularly the elderly generation) still refrain from eating it. [5]  This stems from traditional reluctance toward slaughtering precious  cattle  needed for  agriculture , and an emotional attachment and feeling of gratitude and thanks to the animals traditionally used for very hard labor. [5]  However, due to influences from the influx of mainland Chinese in the 1900s, the Taiwanese version of  beef noodle soup  is now one of the most popular dishes in Taiwan. American  food aid  in the decades following WWII which primarily consisted of wheat, beef, and processed meats like  Spam  forever changed the Taiwanese diet with wheat-based noodles, breads, and dumplings taking a more central role in the cuisine. [1]  Rice consumption in Taiwan reached a height of 80-90 kilograms per person per year in the 1960s and 1970s before falling as consumers shifted consumption to wheat-based foods. However, the Taiwanese still consume a large quantity of rice, particularly brown rice and exotic varieties like black, purple, and red rice. Recently rice consumption in Taiwan has enjoyed a renaissance with both growers and consumers devoting the level of care and attention to the rice that is given to high-value crops like tea. [6] 
 Because of the island's sub-tropical location, Taiwan has an abundant supply of various fruit, such as  papayas ,  starfruit ,  melons , and  citrus  fruit. A wide variety of tropical fruits, imported and native, are also enjoyed in Taiwan. Other agricultural products in general are  rice ,  corn ,  tea ,  pork ,  poultry ,  beef ,  fish  and other fruits and vegetables. Fresh ingredients in Taiwan are readily available from markets. [11] 
 In many of their dishes, the Taiwanese have shown their creativity in their selection of spices. Taiwanese cuisine relies on an abundant array of seasonings for flavor:  soy sauce ,  rice wine ,  sesame oil ,  fermented black beans , pickled  radish , pickled  mustard greens ,  peanuts ,  chili peppers ,  cilantro  (sometimes called Chinese parsley) [12]  and a local variety of  basil  ( 九層塔 ;  káu-chàn-tha̍h ; 'nine-story pagoda'). [13] 
 Taiwanese  black vinegar  has more in common with  Worcestershire sauce  than other black vinegars and is considered an outlier among black vinegars. Its base is sticky rice which is then aged with other ingredients in clay pots. It is used as a condiment and seasoning. Kong Yen is the largest producer of Taiwanese black vinegar. According to  Bon Appetit , compared to Chinese black vinegars it is "simpler, fruitier, and cleaner." [14] 
 An important part of Taiwanese cuisine is  xiaochi  (小吃), [15]  substantial snacks along the lines of  Spanish   tapas  or  Levantine   meze . [1] 
 The Taiwanese  xiaochi  has gained much reputation internationally. Many travelers go to Taiwan just for xiǎochī. The most common place to enjoy xiǎochī in Taiwan is in a  night market . Each night market also has its own famous xiǎochī. [1] 
 Moreover, the Taiwanese xiǎochī has entered more "refined" eating environments. Nowadays, Taiwanese xiǎochī can be found in luxury and high-end restaurants. These restaurants use higher quality ingredients and creative presentations, reinventing dishes whilst keeping the robust flavors. The prices usually jump by twice the price or even higher in the restaurants. The Taiwanese government supports the Taiwanese xiǎochī and has held national xiǎochī events in Taiwan regularly. [ citation needed ] 
 Modern Taiwanese cuisine is influenced by Taiwan's freedom and openness which enables chefs to innovate and experiment. [16] 
 Roadside banquet chefs are ubiquitous in Taiwan; these small (often single-person) catering firms provide on-location cooking for wedding banquets and other celebrations often held on the roadside. During the COVID-19 pandemic these chefs saw a significant downturn in business due to the lack of people hosting large traditional functions, especially those around the  Lunar New Year . [17] 
 
 Vegetarianism and veganism [ edit ] 
 Vegetarian  restaurants are commonplace with a wide variety of dishes, mainly due to the influence of  Buddhism  and other syncretistic religions like  I-Kuan Tao . [5]  These vegetarian restaurants vary in style from all-you-can-eat to pay-by-the-weight and the regular order-from-a-menu. Vegetarian restaurants and foods are often marked with a left-facing  swastika . [18] 
 In the 21st century Taiwan has seen a rise in non-religious vegetarians, especially among the young. There has also been a rise in  veganism  with concerns about animal welfare, personal health, environmental sustainability, and climate change driving both trends. [19]  Taiwan's traditional vegetarian products companies have also expanded into the booming  fake meat  market. The traditional culinary use of fake meat in Taiwan has given Taiwanese companies an edge and Taiwan is now a market leader in the fake meat sector. Taiwanese companies do a significant amount of export business, particularly in the European, North American, and Southeast Asian markets. Hung Yang Foods, one of the largest producers of fake meat products, does 80% of their business overseas with their products being stocked in 90% of Australian supermarkets. [20] 
 
 Regional specialities [ edit ] 
 
 Defining dishes by Region
 
 
 Region 
 Dish 
 Han Characters 
 Taiwanese Hokkien  ( Tâi-lô ) 
 Description 
 Photo
 
 
 Changhua 
 ba-wan 
 肉圓 
 bah-ôan 
 Literally meaning 'meat sphere'. They are a kind of large dumpling made from a gelatinous tapioca starch dough and stuffed with pork and vegetables, most commonly mushrooms and  bamboo  shoots. [10] 
 
 
 
 Chiayi 
 turkey rice 
 火雞肉飯 
 hoe-koe bah-pn̄g 
 Bowls of rice with shredded turkey layered on top, often accompanied by pickled  radish . The rice is drizzled with a kind of  gravy  made from the turkey drippings and soy sauce. [21] 
 
 
 
 Chiayi / Tainan 
 Coffin bread 
 棺材板 
 koann-chhâ-páng 
 Similar to  French toast  or bread bowl soups, but filled with savory fillings, such as black pepper beef or  curried  chicken. Thick-cut bread is dipped in egg,  deep fried , cut along three sides, opened and filled, and eaten. [22] 
 
 
 
 Daxi 
 Daxi dried  tofu 
 大溪豆乾 
 Tāi-khe tāu-koaⁿ 
 Firm tofu fried and braised in a sweet soy-based sauce and then dried. [23] 
 
 
 
 Hsinchu 
 pork balls 
 貢丸 
 kòng-ôan 
 Often eaten in soup ( 湯 ;  thng ). [24] 
 
 
 
 Hsinchu 
 rice vermicelli 
 米粉 
 bí-hún 
 Thin al-dente rice noodles. Often eaten 'dry' ( 乾 ;  ta / kan , without soup) with mushroom and ground pork. [25] 
 
 
 
 Nantou 
 yi mein 
 意麵 
 ì-mī 
 Soft tender noodles in soup. [ citation needed ] 
 
 
 
 Taichung 
 suncake 
 太陽餅 
 
 One of the most noted pastries of Taichung. It is a baked layered puff pastry with a sweet center often made with  honey  or  molasses . [26] [27] 
 
 
 
 Tainan 
 milkfish congee 
 虱目魚肚粥 
 
 Breakfast dish consisting of a congee with milkfish belly. 
 
 
 
 Tainan 
 ta-a mi 
 擔仔麵 
 tàⁿ-á-mī 
 Also known as slack season noodles. Yellow "oily noodles" served with minced pork, shrimp, bean sprouts, cilantro, black vinegar, garlic, soy sauce and egg. [10] 
 
 
 
 Tainan 
 shrimp and pork meatballs 
 蝦仁肉丸 
 hê-jîn bah-ôan 
 Shrimp crackers/biscuits are among the most notable local dishes. Another popular dish originating in Tainan is "oily rice" ( 台南油飯 ; Tâi-lâm iû-pn̄g), a rice dish containing savory oils and shredded pork meat,  mushrooms  and dried shrimp. [28] 
 
 
 
 Tamsui 
 a-gei 
 阿給 
 a-geh 
 Deep-fried tofu that have been stuffed with crystal noodles and sealed with fish paste and drizzled with spicy sauce on the outside. [29] 
 
 
 
 Tamsui 
 Tamsui fish ball 
 魚丸 
 hî-ôan 
 Tamsui is near the ocean, therefore, it is a good place to try their fish balls, which are balls of fish paste stuffed with meat and  garlic  cooked in light broth. [30] 
 
 
 
 Tamsui 
 iron eggs 
 鐵蛋 
 thih-nn̄g 
 Eggs that have been repeatedly stewed in a mix of spices and air-dried. The resulting eggs are dark brown, chewy and more flavorful than ordinary boiled eggs. [10] 
 
 
 Typical dishes [ edit ] 
 
 
 Common English term 
 Han Characters 
 Taiwanese Hokkien (Tâi-lô) 
 Mandarin Pinyin 
 Influence 
 Description 
 Photo
 
 
 Gua bao 
 刈包 
 koah-pau 
 guàbāo 
 Fujian 
 A flat, clam-shaped steamed white bun with soy sauce braised porkbelly,  pickled mustard vegetables ,  peanut powder , sugar, and  cilantro  inside. [1] 
 
 
 
 Cuttlefish geng 
 魷魚羹 
 jiû-hî keⁿ 
 yóuyúgēng 
 Local 
 A clear thick soup with  cuttlefish  covered in  fish paste . 
 
 
 
 Oyster omelette 
 蚵仔煎 
 ô-á-chian 
 ézǐjiān 
 Fujian 
 Chewy omelette made with eggs,  oysters , tapioca starch and  Garland chrysanthemum  leaves. It has a soft, sticky texture, and is eaten with a sweet and mildly spicy sauce, topped with cilantro. This dish is very common in night markets as it is the most popular snack in Taiwan. [31] 
 
 
 
 Oyster vermicelli 
 蚵仔麵線 
 ô-á mī-sòaⁿ 
 ézǐ miànxiàn 
 Local 
 A thickened soup containing small oysters and steamed  misua  (Chinese vermicelli). [1] 
 
 
 
 Bubble tea 
 珍珠奶茶 
 
 zhēnzhū nǎichá 
 Local 
 The original milk tea uses black tea and milk as well as sugar. The pearls or boba are  tapioca pearls  that are chewy. It is a very popular drink and was invented in Taichung [32] 
 
 
 
 Pig's blood cake 
 豬血糕  / 豬血粿 
 ti-huih-ko / ti-hoeh-kóe 
 zhūxiěgāo/ zhūxiěguǒ 
 Fujian 
 A  Pig's blood cake  made from pork blood and rice. It is usually cut into a rectangular piece and served on a stick, dipped in soy sauce, with the option of adding hot sauce, then topped with powdered peanut and cilantro. 
 
 
 
 Lo bah png  (Minced pork rice) 
 滷肉飯/魯肉飯 
 ló͘-bah-pn̄g 
 lǔròufàn 
 Fujian 
 Minced, cubed, or ground fatty pork, stewed in soy sauce and spices, then served on rice. 
 
 
 
 Khong bah png  (Braised pork rice) 
 炕肉飯/爌肉飯 
 khòng-bah-pn̄g 
 kàngròufàn 
 Fujian 
 Pork chunks, stewed in soy sauce and spices, then served on rice. [1] 
 
 
 
 Small sausage in large sausage 
 大腸包小腸 
 tōa-tn̂g pau sió-tn̂g 
 dàcháng bāo xiǎocháng 
 Local 
 A grilled  Taiwanese pork sausage  wrapped in a grilled, salty, sticky rice sausage. Usually wrapped with garlic and basil. Customer can also choose the flavor they want, such as black pepper, garlic, chili, butter and chocolate. A Taiwanese snack, common in night markets. 
 
 
 
 Sanbeiji 
 三杯雞 
 sam-poe-koe 
 sānbēijī 
 Jiangxi 
 A chicken dish which literally translates as "three cups chicken", named because the sauce is made of a cup of rice wine, a cup of sesame oil, and a cup of soy sauce. Alternatively, the sauce can also be made of a cup each of rice wine, sugar and soy sauce. [1] 
 
 
 
 Dried radish omelet 
 菜脯蛋 
 chhài-pó͘-nn̄g 
 càifǔdàn 
 Local 
 Finely cut Taiwanese-style preserved white radish cooked into an omelet 
 
 
 
 olen 
 黑輪 
 o-lien' 
 Hēi lún 
 Japan 
 This is used fish cake, a fish sauce made with fish soup, than cooked in a pot with different ingredients, similar to  Oden . 
 
 
 
 Cucumber pork 
 瓜子肉 
 koe-á bah 
 guāzǐròu 
 Guangdong 
 Steamed, minced pork with Taiwanese-style pickled cucumber. 
 
 
 
 Spicy hotpot 
 麻辣鍋 
 ba-luah e 
 málàguō 
 Sichuan 
 It is increasingly popular, especially in Taipei. The soup of this hotpot is very spicy, inclusive of Chinese herbs and other special materials. People can cook what they want with this soup. [1] 
 
 
 
 Eel noodles 
 鱔魚意麵 
 siān-hî ì-mī 
 shànyú yìmiàn 
 Local 
 Rice eel  with  Yi mein  in a starch-thickened sweet and sour soup. 
 
 
 
 Tamsui a-gei 
 淡水阿給 
 Tām-chúi a-geh 
 Dànshuǐ āgěi 
 Local 
 Steamed  aburaage  tofu stuffed with cooked  cellophane noodles  and covered with  surimi 
 
 
 
 Danbing 
 蛋餅 
 nn̄g-piánn 
 Dàn bǐng 
 Local 
 A breakfast dish made by kneading flour, potato starch, glutinous rice flour and water into a thin dough, and an omelet is baked on top. 
 
 
 
 Iron eggs 
 鐵蛋 
 thih-nn̄g 
 tiědàn 
 Local 
 Eggs stewed in  soy sauce , usually with their shells still on but cracked throughout, until they are flavorful and chewy in texture. 
 
 
 
 Chhau-a-koe 
 草仔粿 
 chháu-á-kóe / chháu-á-ké 
 cǎozaǐguǒ 
 Fujian 
 A type of  kuih  made with  glutinous rice  flour, sugar, and a ground cooked paste of  Jersey cudweed  or  Chinese mugwort . Often filled with  dried shrimp ,  shiitake  mushrooms, white  radish  (菜脯), and  deep-fried   shallots . 
 
 
 
 Moon shrimp cake 
 月亮蝦餅 
 ge̍h-liāng hê-piánn 
 yuèliàng xiābǐng 
 Thai/Southeast Asia 
 Commonly found in Taiwanese Thai restaurants. Shrimp, garlic, and pork fat are pounded then spread on a circular spring roll wrapper. Another wrapper is placed over top and the cake is pan-fried and served with sweet chili sauce. 
 
 
 
 
 Taiwanese Beef Noodle Soup 
 臺灣牛肉麵 
 dái-wán gu-bà mi
 
 táiwān niúròumiàn 
 Local 
 Red-braised version of  beef noodle soup . 
 
 
 
 Tube rice pudding 
 筒仔米糕 
 tâng-á-bí-ko
 
 Tǒng zǐ mǐ gāo 
 Local 
 Dish consisting of a stir-fried glutinous rice mixture that is seasoned and steamed in a bamboo tube. 
 
 
 
 There is a type of outdoor  barbecue  called  khòng-iô  [ zh ] . To barbecue in this manner, one first builds a hollow pyramid up with dirt clods. Next, charcoal or wood is burnt inside until the temperature inside the pyramid is very high (the dirt clods should be glowing red). The ingredients to be cooked, such as  taro ,  yam , or  chicken , are placed in cans, and the cans are placed inside the pyramid. Finally, the pyramid is toppled over the food until cooked.
 Many non-dessert dishes are usually considered snacks, not entrees; that is, they have a similar status to  Cantonese   dim sum  or  Spanish   tapas . Such dishes are usually only slightly salted, with many vegetables accompanying the main meat or seafood item.
 
 
 Taiwanese dishes 
 
 
 
 Popiah  with vegetables and powdered peanuts as filling
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Oyster omelette  from  Chien-Cheng Circle ,  Datong District (Taipei) .
 
 
 
 
 
 
 A bowl of  oyster vermicelli 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ba-wan  served with sweet and savory sauce
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pork ball  and  rice vermicelli  in soup
 
 
 
 
 
 
 A-gei  served with sauce
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Many flavors of Taiwanese  sausages  are sold by night market vendors
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pork and  shiitake   geng  over rice from an eatery in  Taichung 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 A Fenchihu  Bento box 
 
 
 
 
 Desserts [ edit ] 
 Main article:  List of Taiwanese desserts and snacks 
   A plate of  tshuah-ping  with strawberries and condensed milk 
 Aiyu jelly  – a gelatinous dessert made from the seeds of a  creeping fig ,  Ficus pumila var. awkeotsang . Served on ice. [1] [10] 
 O'ahping  [ zh ]  ( 芋仔冰 ;  ō͘-á-peng ) – an ice cream made of  taro  root paste. 
 Tshuah-ping  (also known as  Baobing ) – a Taiwanese  shaved ice  dessert very common in China, Taiwan, Malaysia, and Vietnam. [1] 
 Xue-bing  (雪花冰) - also called "xue hua bing," translated to "snow ice," "snowflake ice," or "shaved snow."   This is different from baobing/tshuah-ping in that the base mixture for the ice is creamy (milk is generally added, but it can be dairy or plant based), the ice itself often has a flavor dissolved in (milk, taro, chocolate, coffee, etc.), the texture of the shaved snow is very fine, and it melts near-instantaneously, upon contact.  The ice for this is typically cylindrical, and the shaved snow comes out of the machine in ruffled ribbons.  Some additional common toppings include but are not limited to:   sweetened condensed milk ,  mangoes , sweetened red beans, sweetened  mung beans ,  boba  pearls, or  taro . 
 Bubble tea , aka boba milk tea; also known as pearl milk tea - chewy  tapioca balls  added to  milk tea . [10] 
 Traditional  cakes  are not always of the same composition depending on the flavor. There is the  moon cake  which has a thick filling usually made from  lotus  seed paste or sweetened red bean paste and surrounded by a relatively thin (2–3 mm) crust and may contain yolks from salted duck eggs. It is traditionally eaten during the festival for lunar worship and moon watching. Mooncakes are offered between friends or on family gatherings while celebrating the festival. The  Mid-Autumn Festival  is one of the four most important  Chinese festivals . 
 There are other cakes that can mix salty ingredients with sweet ones to create a balance while enjoying these delicacies with  tea . The crust could be shiny from applying a layer of egg yolk before putting in the oven, or not in that case it is often whiter and the crust has more layers. 
 Grass jelly  ( Chinese :  仙草 ;  Pe̍h-ōe-jī :  sian-chháu ) – ( Mesona  procumbens ) Served hot or cold. 
 Moachi ( 麻糍 ;  môa-chî ), a soft rice cake like Japanese  daifuku   mochi . Flavors of the fillings can vary, ranging from all kinds of beans to nuts. [10] 
 Pineapple cake  - a square short crust pie filled with pineapple filling. One of Taiwan's best known dessert pastries and souvenir of choice. [1] 
 Chhau-a-koe  – Cakes made with a dough from glutinous rice flour and combine with a ground cooked paste of  Gnaphalium affine  or  Mugwort  to give it a unique flavor and green color. The dough is commonly filled with ground meat or sweet bean pastes. 
 Douhua (豆花)  - Soft tofu served with syrup and toppings such as  peanuts ,  adzuki beans ,  tapioca , and  mung beans . Served hot or cold. 
 Chocolate  - Taiwan's cocoa production is centered in Pingtung in Southern Taiwan. As of 2020 approximately 200-300 acres was under cultivation in Pingtung supporting around 30 chocolate making companies. [33] [34]  Taiwan is one of the few mature chocolate making countries to also be a cocoa producer. [33] 
 Night market dishes [ edit ] 
 Taiwan's best-known snacks are present in the  night markets , where street vendors sell a variety of different foods, from finger foods, drinks, sweets, to sit-down dishes. In these markets, one can also find fried and steamed meat-filled buns,  oyster-filled omelets , refreshing fruit ices, and much more. Aside from snacks, appetizers, entrees, and desserts, night markets also have vendors selling clothes, accessories, and offer all kinds of entertainment and products. [35] 
 In 2014  The Guardian  called Taiwan's night markets the "best street food markets in the world". [35] 
 
 
 
 Common English term 
 Han Characters 
 Taiwanese Hokkien (Tâi-lô) 
 Mandarin Pinyin 
 Influence 
 Description 
 Photo
 
 
 Takoyaki 
 
 章魚燒
 
 
 
 
 
 Japanese
 
 A ball-shaped snack that is filled with diced octopus and fried in a flour-based batter, and it can be eaten with condiments such as wasabi. They are commonly found at night markets. [36] 
 
 
 
 Wheel cake 
 車輪餅 
 chhia-lûn-piáⁿ 
 chēlúnbǐng 
 Japanese 
 Pancake  batter is poured into hot-metallic molds and gets quickly cooked into small cakes of various shapes.  Countless variations exist. Sometimes the cakes have fillings ranging from cream, red bean paste, to peanut butter. Similar to  Imagawayaki  or  Taiyaki 
 
 
 
 Stinky tofu 
 臭豆腐 
 chhàu-tāu-hū 
 chòudòufǔ 
 Chinese 
 Stinky tofu is popular in Taiwan. It is called as "Stinky tofu"  because of its strong unpleasant odour. [10]  Back in the  Qing dynasty , Stinky tofu was already a dish in the royal family's meal. Besides, it was also one of the favorite foods of the  Empress Dowager Cixi . Stinky tofu can generally be classified into two main kinds, which are soft stinky tofu (臭豆腐乳) and dried stinky tofu (臭豆腐乾). 
 
 
 
 Taiwanese meatball 
 肉圓 
 bah-oân 
 ròuyuán 
 Local 
 A sticky gelatinous  tapioca  dough filled with pork, bamboo shoots,  shiitake mushrooms , and served with a savory sweet and spicy sauce. 
 
 
 
 Maize 
 玉米 
 
 yùmǐ 
 American 
 Vendors may specialize in one type of corn or they could offer varieties between savory/salty and sweet corn. The corn is either steamed, grilled, boiled, etc. 
 
 
 
 Taiwanese sausages 
 香腸 
 ian-chhiâng (煙腸) 
 xiāngcháng 
 Chinese 
 Fatty pork sausages with a mild sweet taste. There are several different kinds.  Kaoliang wine  is sometimes used in the sausage recipe. In night markets they are often served on a stick with many different condiments. Sometimes, they are wrapped in  glutinous rice . In the very early 1980s, when resources were still relatively scarce, the standard serving is one sausage link on a toothpick garnished with a clove of  garlic . 
 
 
 
 Green onion pancake 
 蔥油餅 
 
 cōngyóubǐng 
 Chinese 
 Spring onion  flour pancake with many thin layers, made with scallions (chopped green onions). Cheese and egg are popular additional fillings. [10]  A snack originating in the Chinese mainland. 
 
 
 
 Tanghulu 
 糖葫蘆 
 
 tánghúlú 
 Chinese 
 Red candy coated bite-sized fruit served on a stick. Sometimes the fruit is stuffed with preserved plums, and then candied. Cherry tomatoes and strawberries are also used. 
 
 
 
 Grilled  squid 
 烤花枝 
 
 kǎo huāzhī 
 Japanese 
 Grilled squid often marinated and basted while grilled. 
 
 
 
 Shaved ice 
 礤冰/剉冰/刨冰 
 chhoah-peng 
 cuòbīng/bàobīng 
 Local 
 Finely shaven ice with a variety of toppings (peanuts, fruit, azuki beans, sweetened corn, and so on). Sometimes served drizzled with condensed milk. [10] 
 
 
 
 Tempura 
 甜不辣 
 
 tiánbùlà 
 Japanese 
 Deep-fried surimi and fish cakes simmered in broth and served with a sweet sauce. It is similar to  Satsuma-age , which in some regions in Japan is called  Tempura . Otherwise, it is not related to Japanese  Tempura , similar to Japanese  Oden . [10] 
 
 
 
 Taiwanese spring roll 
 潤餅 
 jūn-piáⁿ / lūn-piáⁿ 
 rùnbǐng 
 Fujian 
 The Taiwanese spring roll is a semi-crispy super-thin flour crepe filled with a variety of filling, such as powdered sugar, peanut powder, egg, vegetables, pork and even seafood. Taiwanese spring rolls are made from the same dough as Western crêpes. 
 
 
 
 Shawarma 
 沙威馬 
 
 shāwēimǎ 
 West Asian 
 A sandwich usually made from spiced, grilled chicken and served on a leavened, white flour bun with  julienned   cabbage , a slice of  tomato , sliced  onions ,  ketchup  and  mayonnaise . Brought over from  Turkey  decades ago, the seasoning is quite different from the seasoning used in making  shawarma  in Turkey. 
 
 
 
 Popcorn chicken 
 鹹酥雞/鹽酥雞 
 kiâm-so͘-ke / kiâm-so͘-koe 
 xiánsūjī / yánsūjī 
 American 
 Popcorn chicken made from spiced, deep-fried chicken topped with salt and pepper and seasoned with fragrantly cooked basil. It is a delicious decadence loved by all for its juicy and tender texture. [10] 
 
 
 
 Fried chicken  fillet 
 炸雞排 
 
 zhá jīpái 
 American 
 Fried chicken fillet is one of the most popular snacks in Taiwan. [10]  Fried chicken fillets first appeared in Taiwan over 20 years ago but have changed over the years as vendors have concocted new flavors and preparation methods. Unlike the fried chicken served in most fast-food restaurants, this treat is made of chicken breast that has been pounded flat, marinated, battered and deep-fried. After cooking, a generous sprinkling of ground pepper is applied. It is crispy on the outside, tender and juicy on the inside. 
 
 
 
 Rousong  or Pork Floss 
 肉鬆 
 
 Ròusōng 
 Chinese 
 
 
 
 
 Various drinks are also often sold, ranging from bubble tea stands to various juice and tea stands. [10] 
 Crêpes  - Adapted from the original  French  version, a thin cooked pancake, it has a much crispier texture, rather like a cracker. They were popular in the early 2000s. 
 Fruit or bean smoothies - milk or ice is blended on the spot with fresh papaya, mango, watermelon,  azuki bean , or  mung bean . 
 Fried glutinous rice balls - slightly sweet. 
 Food of the Taiwanese Aborigines [ edit ] 
 This section  needs additional citations for  verification .  Please help  improve this article  by  adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.   ( November 2022 )  ( Learn how and when to remove this template message ) 
 Taiwan's food and food culture is very much diversified and largely influenced by the exodus of Han people. However, one part of the Taiwanese food culture that remains integral is that of the Taiwanese indigenous peoples. Though the indigenous population only make up less than 2% of Taiwan's overall population, it is notable that their foods eaten and ways of preparation are distinguishable from the more typical Chinese-influenced cuisine.
 The aborigines' diet very much depends on nature. With profuse vegetation and wild animals, the aborigines were natural hunter-gatherers. Essentially, much of what Aborigines ate depended on their environment – that is, whether they lived in coastal or mountainous areas. Tribes like Amis, Atayal, Saisiyat and Bunun hunt what they can, and gather what they cultivate. On the other hand, tribes like the Yamis and the Thao have fish as a predominant source of food. Most foods consisted of millet, taro, sweet potato, wild greens and game like boar and rat. This is in contrast to the main foods eaten by the Han, which consisted of rice and chicken.
 Game meats for those living in the mountainous areas include deer, and flying squirrel intestines, a delicacy as regarded by the Bunun people. Another is 'stinky' meat – that is, 'maggoty game' that has begun to rot, which is then barbecued, fried, seasoned with garlic and ginger then served with spicy sauce.
 The Amis, apart from meat, had much greens to eat, largely due to the belief that anything a cow ate, was also edible by humans.  The Bununs, who are primarily hunters of wild animals, would dine on stone-grilled pork, boar, deer, and hog roast. The Yami tribe, located off Taitung coast, fed on many types of fish, including the prized 'flying fish' (or Alibangbang). A speciality includes rice, mixed with river fish and wild vegetables, served in large bamboo trunks.
 Apart from being a staple-food, millet was always produced as wine. Not just for drinking, millet wine played an important role in being used as offerings during festivals, births and weddings. Millet wines are all made in the homes of the Aborigines. Sticky rice is put into a wooden steamer after being soaked in water. Once cooled, the rice is put into a pot of water, then pulled out and combined with rice yeast. After four or five days of being placed in a large jar, the rice is placed in a sieve or rice bag, whilst the alcoholic liquid drips out and is stored away.
 Also important to the Indigenous Taiwanese people's cuisine are the sweet potato and taro, favored for their perennial nature and low maintenance. The cultivation of root vegetables rather than typical seedling plants was notably prominent, with archaeological evidence suggesting as early as fourth millennium BC, from the Dapenkeng site, in Guanyin Mountain, New Taipei City.
 Given the versatility of both vegetables, they were usually boiled or steamed, and eaten by itself or as ingredients in soups and stews. Without the need for advanced agricultural technology, taro and sweet potatoes were a prime preference for farming. Canadian missionary George MacKay said of 19th century Taiwan: 'the bulb of the sweet potato is planted in March. In about six weeks the vines are cut into pieces eight inches long, which are planted in drills, and from these vine-cuttings the bulbs grow and are ripe about the end of June. A second crop is planted in a similar way in July and is ripe in November.' (Ibid). The influence of sweet potatoes and taro has been vast. They are still widely present in modern-day Taiwan, be it on the streets, night markets, or in successful food chains like 'Meet Fresh' (or 鮮芋仙).
 Due to the absence of contemporary culinary utensils such as the refrigerator, gas stovetops and ovens, the Indigenous resorted to other means to prepare their food. Upon bringing back hunted game meat, the Aborigines would preserve the meat with either millet wine or salt. Another cooking technique involved the heating up of stones by fire, which are then placed inside a vessel with other certain meats and seafood, which are cooked from the heat of the stones. Foods were mostly prepared by steaming, boiling or roasting, in order to infuse flavors together, yet preserve the original flavors. This again is contrasted with the Han, who adopted skills like stir-frying and stewing. Meat was also put on a bamboo spit and cooked over the fire.
 A cookbook published in 2000 by the CIP and  National Kaohsiung University of Hospitality and Tourism , listed some foods of the main Taiwanese Aboriginal tribes, showing the Aborigines' adherence and passion for natural foods. 
 
 Amis Nation: Alivongvong (meat and  sticky rice   dumpling  packed in leaves) (阿里鳳鳳); Stir-fried wild vegetables 
 Atayal Nation: Grilled meat on stone (石板烤肉); Langying (steamed sticky rice cake) (朗應) 
 Bunun Nation: Bunun  millet  cake (布農粿); Millet rice (小米飯) 
 Paiwan Nation: Millet Qinafu (millet and pork meat-ball) (小米奇那富); Jinbole (Sorghum and pork dumpling packed in a banana leaf) (金伯樂) 
 Puyuma Nation: Yinafei mountain cake (以那馡山地粿); Fried wild rat with basil (九層野鼠) 
 Rukai Nation: Qinabu (taro and meat dumpling) (奇那步); Grilled boar 
 Saisiyat Nation: Grilled  boar  with papaya (木瓜拌山豬肉); Assorted wild flowers (野花拼盤); Cassava and spareribs soup (樹薯排骨湯) 
 Tsou Nation: Bamboo cooked rice (竹筒飯); Banana cake (香蕉糕) 
 Yami Nation: Boiled  taro  and crab (芋泥加蟹肉); Grilled fish Steamed dried fish (蒸魚乾) 
 Modern aboriginal cuisine [ edit ] 
 Though Taiwan is home to many cuisines, there are still restaurants which keep the spirit of Aborigine cuisine alive. Whilst chefs in such restaurants may need to tweak traditional recipes to suit contemporary tastebuds, emphasis of natural foods is still extant. The annual Indigenous Peoples Healthy Cuisine and Innovative Beverage Competition, partly sponsored by the Council of Indigenous Peoples and the Tourism Bureau provides prize money to contestants who creatively use traditional indigenous ingredients in healthy ways. Other similar competitions are held by local governments (such as Kaohsiung City). In Tainan, indigenous people may sell their food at the Cha Ha Mu Aboriginal Park. Such trends are all to promote the wonderful taste of Aboriginal Taiwanese cuisine.
 Silaw is an Amis dish of  pickled  pork. [37] 
 The importance of wild greens to aboriginal cuisine is being increasingly appreciated. Wild greens refers to both wild plants found in the forest and to those same plants cultivated in domestic gardens. [38] 
 
 Beverages [ edit ] 
 The Taiwanese drink less alcohol per capita than neighboring South Koreans and Japanese. This is believed to be because approximately half of Taiwan’s population does not possess the necessary gene to successfully metabolize alcohol. During the Japanese colonial period the production of  alcoholic beverages  was industrialized and in 1922 production of alcohol was monopolized by the colonial authorities. Modern Taiwanese drinking culture and beverage production is still influenced by the Japanese colonial period. [39] 
 
 Beer [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Beer in Taiwan 
 Beer is a popular beverage in Taiwan. Taiwan both imports and produces a wide variety of beers from mass market lagers to niche craft ales. Some of the well-developed brands include Long Chuan (龍泉), Le Blé d'Or (金色三麥), Jolly Brewery+Restaurant (卓莉手工醸啤酒泰食餐廳), North Taiwan Brewing (北台灣麥酒) and Taihu Brewing (臺虎精釀). [40] 
 
 Coffee [ edit ] 
 The first coffee plants on Taiwan were imported by the British to Tainan in 1884 with the first significant small scale cultivation taking place in New Taipei City's  Sanxia District . Tainan remains the heart of Taiwanese coffee culture. Production reached a peak in 1941 following the introduction of  arabica coffee  plants by the Japanese colonial authorities. [41]  Domestic production is small but of high quality, imported beans account for the vast majority of coffee sold in Taiwan. In 2016 domestic production was 900 tons while 30,000 tons was imported. [42] 
 By 2020 there were more than 15,000 coffee shops in Taiwan. [43]  In 2020 average coffee consumption surpassed average tea consumption for the first time. [44] 
 
 Kaoliang liquor [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Kaoliang liquor 
   Kinmen 58% Kaoliang 
 Kinmen Kaoliang Liquor  is one of the most popular brands of  kaoliang liquor  in Taiwan. As its name indicates, it is produced on the island of Kinmen. The mainstays of the range are the standard 58 percent and 38 percent alcohol bottlings. Kinmen's kaoliang production traces its roots back to the Chinese Civil War when Chinese nationalist general  Hu Lien  encouraged Kinmenese farmers to grow sorghum to produce hard liquor as importing alcohol from Taiwan caused financial strain. Kaoliang liquor has become an integral part of Kinmen's economy and plays a significant role in the culture of Kinmen. [45] 
 Yusan Kaoliang Chiew ( Chinese :  玉山高粱酒 ;  pinyin :  Yùshān Gāoliáng Jiǔ ) is produced by the  Taiwan Tobacco and Liquor Corporation . It is named after the highest mountain in Taiwan,  Yushan . One of the most notable products in the range is an "X.O." kaoliang aged for five years in tanks before bottling. [46] 
 Matsu Tunnel 88 Kaoliang Liquor ( Chinese :  馬祖八八坑道高粱酒 ;  pinyin :  Bā Bā Kēngdào Gāoliáng Jiǔ ) is produced by the  Matsu Distillery  in  Nangan Township ,  Lienchiang County . The name is derived from the name of an abandoned military tunnel called  Tunnel 88  which the distillery took over as storage space for their kaoliang and aged rice wine. All of the distillery's aged kaoliangs are stored in the tunnel for at least five years. [47] 
 
 Rum [ edit ] 
 Commercial rum production was introduced into Taiwan along with commercial sugar production during the Japanese colonial period. [48]  Rum production continued under the ROC however it was neglected by  Taiwan Tobacco and Liquor Corporation  which held the national liquor monopoly. The industry diversified after democratization and the de-monopolization of the Taiwanese alcoholic beverage industry. [49] 
 
 Tea [ edit ] 
 Main articles:  Taiwanese tea  and  Taiwanese tea culture 
 Taiwanese tea is considered among the best in the world and the country has a unique tea culture. [50] 
 
 Whisky [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Taiwanese whisky 
 Taiwan has a young but thriving whisky industry buoyed by a massive domestic market for whisky, especially single malt scotch. Taiwan is the only whisky market which drinks more single malt whisky than blended whisky. [51] 
 
 Wine [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Taiwanese wine 
 Independent  winemaking  was illegal in Taiwan for a long time due to the monopoly granted to the  Taiwan Tobacco and Liquor Corporation . [52]  Independent winemakers became legal in 2002 and in 2014 a Taiwanese wine won its first gold medal at an international competition. [53]  In 2019 a red wine from Taichung was awarded a gold medal at the 25th Vinalies Internationales in France. [54]  Two of the most acclaimed wineries are Domaine Shu Sheng and Weightstone Vineyard Estate & Winery. [55]  Although it was once largely lost Taiwan's indigenous winemaking culture is staging a comeback. [56] 
 
 Sake [ edit ] 
 Sake  consumption started during the Japanese colonial period. The first sake was made in Taiwan in 1914, the largest contemporary domestic brand is Yuchun produced by the Taiwan Tobacco and Liquor Corporation. A number of smaller producers also exist with an emphasis placed on unique products made with local rice. Taiwan also imports large amounts of sake from Japan. It's proximity and the volume of the trade allows merchants in Taiwan to stock fresh and limited production sake which is not widely available elsewhere outside Japan. [57] 
 
 Fine dining [ edit ] 
 Further information:  List of Michelin starred restaurants in Taipei 
 Fine dining in Taiwan is often of a mixed identity. For example, wedding banquets in Taiwan typically feature Japanese  sashimi  as the first course with traditional Taiwanese and Chinese dishes following. [58] 
 The  Michelin Guide  began reviewing restaurants in Taipei in 2018 and Taichung in 2020. The 2020 Michelin awarded stars to 30 restaurants in Taiwan, four in Taichung and 26 in Taipei. With three stars the cantonese restaurant Le Palais is the country's highest rated restaurant. The 2020 list also bestowed the  Bib Gourmand  on 54 restaurants in Taipei [59]  and 21 in Taichung. [60]  There are significant differences between the fine dining scenes in Taipei and Taichung. In Taichung an emphasis is placed on ceremony with large tables and private rooms common, a premium is also placed on parking with restaurants having more than 100 parking spaces. This is due in part to Taichung's strong small and medium enterprises as well as a multitude of informal recreational and fraternal organizations. In Taipei fine dining restaurants and tables are generally smaller with most customers being couples or small groups, in general service is less formal than in Taichung. In Taipei there is more international influence in the fine dining scene while Taichung retains a strong affinity with traditional dishes. [61] 
 
 Foreign cuisine in Taiwan [ edit ] 
 Fusion [ edit ] 
 Fusion cuisine  is very popular in Taiwan. Many Taiwanese dishes are a result of cultural fusion, such as the Taiwanese version of  pastel de nata  which are a legacy of Portuguese colonialism in neighboring Macao. [62] 
 
 Italian [ edit ] 
 Italian cuisine  has been popular in Taiwan for a long time, but the country had few authentic Italian restaurants and even fewer Italian chefs until the late 1990s and early 2000s. Due to the  financial crisis of 2007–08 , a large number of Italians emigrated from Italy to healthier economies. This led to a rapid increase in both the number of Italian restaurants and the number of Italian expats in Taiwan. While most restaurants follow the traditional Italian course style, the meal proportions are influenced by  Italian-American cuisine . Taiwanese diners have become increasingly passionate and discerning about Italian cuisine. [63]  Michael de Prenda was one of the innovators of Italian cuisine in Taiwan, starting multiple restaurants, a market, and a farm. [64] 
 
 Pizza [ edit ] 
 Pizza is one of the most popular foods in Taiwan. The first pizza restaurant opened in the 1970s and the industry grew rapidly in the 2000s driven by a increasing demand for quality Italian and American style pizza from an affluent younger generation which had spent time abroad and brought back a taste for it. [65] 
 Chain pizza restaurants like  Pizza Hut  and  Domino's Pizza  are known for running promotional pizzas with outrageous toppings like spicy hotpot, cilantro and century egg with pig’s blood, beef and kiwi, glutinous rice, ramen, and stinky tofu in an attempt to get national and international publicity. Pizza Hut entered the Taiwanese market in 1986 and Domino's followed in the late 1980s. In 2022 each company had more than 150 stores in Taiwan. [65] 
 
 Indian [ edit ] 
 Indian food became popular in Taiwan in the 2000s. The number of Indian restaurants has grown along with the growth of the Indian and larger South Asian community in Taiwan however most customers in Indian restaurants are local with Indian food also being found in university cafeterias and other institutional settings. [66] 
 
 Russian [ edit ] 
 Along with the fleeing KMT came  White Russian  refugees who had sought shelter from the Russian Revolution in China. George Elsner founded the first Russian restaurant, The Café Astoria, in Taiwan in 1949. The Café Astoria was a center of Russian expat life in Taiwan during its early years.  Chiang Ching-kuo  and his Russian wife,  Faina Vakhreva , often brought their children with them to eat there. Elsner died  stateless  in Taiwan. [67] 
 
 Nordic [ edit ] 
 Nordic haute cuisine  is popular in Taiwan's major cities, with restaurants offering both authentic Nordic cuisine and Nordic cuisine adapted to local ingredients and tastes. [68] [69] 
 
 Hong Kong [ edit ] 
 The increase in immigration from  Hong Kong  following the  pro-democracy protests  brought an increased focus on  Hong Kong cuisine , along with a fusion between Hong Kong and Taiwan cuisines. Taiwan is considered a safe haven for  Hongkongers , with many opening shops and restaurants to serve food they were unable to find in Taiwan, or which they did not feel was up to Hong Kong standards. [70] 
 
 Japanese [ edit ] 
 Taiwan, in particularly Taipei, is regarded as having some of the best Japanese food outside of Japan. This is due to the legacy of Japanese colonialism as well as ongoing cultural and commercial exchange. [71] 
 
 Taiwanese cuisine abroad [ edit ] 
   A pork  keⁿ , a thick soup with  tofu  and  surimi -coated pork 
 Taiwanese cuisine has a global presence. [72]  Taiwanese chefs have been extremely successful abroad cooking both Taiwanese and international cuisine. Well known chefs include  André Chiang . [73] 
 
 United States [ edit ] 
 Taiwanese immigrant restaurateurs were largely responsible for the shift of  American Chinese food  from Cantonese-focused cuisine to diverse cuisine featuring dishes from many regions in China. The immigration of Taiwanese chefs to the United States began in the 1950s. At the time, cooks in Taiwan were trained in traditional Chinese regional cooking as this fit the chosen identity of the KMT. Taiwanese restaurateurs changed the food landscape of many American cities, including  New York City , and pioneered innovations such as picture menus and food delivery. Many of the immigrants to the United States during this period had been born in mainland China and fled to Taiwan with the retreating KMT, particularly former residents of the Dachen Islands who had been evacuated in 1955. [74] 
 Traditionally, Taiwanese food has been hard to differentiate from Chinese and Japanese food abroad, since many Taiwanese chefs cooked simplified or westernized versions of traditional Taiwanese, Japanese, or Chinese dishes. In 2018, there was a rapid growth in the number of authentic Taiwanese restaurants in New York City [75] [76]  and across the country, which coincided with an increased interest in regional Chinese food and in Taiwan itself. [77]  Some object to the  politically fraught  inclusion of Taiwanese cuisine under the banner of regional Chinese food and point out that it is inaccurate. [78] 
 Taiwanese American cuisine is emerging as a full cuisine in its own right. Myers + Chang in Boston was one of the first restaurants to explicitly describe their food as such. In 2018, James Beard Award-winning chef  Stephanie Izard  opened a Taiwanese snack/dessert shop in  Chicago . [79]  Taiwanese cuisine has a significant presence in the  San Francisco Bay Area . [78] 
 
 Culinary education [ edit ] 
 Historically, culinary education was informal with apprentices learning from a master for many years before they practice the craft on their own. The first college level course in cooking was implemented in 1986 at Danshui Technical College. [72] 
 
 Culinary schools [ edit ] 
 Danshui Technical College [72] 
 National Kaohsiung University of Hospitality and Tourism [72] 
 See also [ edit ] 
 
 Taiwan portal Food portal 
 Agriculture in Taiwan 
 Maritime industries of Taiwan 
 Q texture 
 List of restaurants in Taiwan 
 References [ edit ] 
 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   e   f   g   h   i   j   k   l   Nguyen-Okwu, Leslie (6 March 2019).  "16 Dishes That Define Taiwanese Food" .  eater.com . Eater.  Archived  from the original on 13 April 2020 . Retrieved  27 April  2020 . 
 
 ^  a   b   Rao, Tejal (21 August 2022).  "In a tense political moment, Taiwanese cuisine tells its own story" .  japantimes.co.jp . Japan Times . Retrieved  21 August  2022 . 
 
 ^   Culinary nationalism in Asia . Michelle Tien King. London, UK. 2019.  ISBN   978-1-350-07869-7 .  OCLC   1100471127 . {{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: others ( link ) 
 
 ^   OUNG, ANGELICA.  "Green Dining Gains Recognition in Taiwan" .  topics.amcham.com.tw/ . Taiwan Topics . Retrieved  5 February  2023 . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   Goossaert, Vincent; David A. Palmer (2011).  The Religious Question in Modern China . University of Chicago Press. pp. 281–283.  ISBN   9780226304168 . 
 
 ^  a   b   Su, Lynn.  "A Rice Renaissance" .  www.taiwan-panorama.com . Taiwan Panorama . Retrieved  16 December  2020 . 
 
 ^   Lin, Sean (30 October 2014).  "History behind Taiwanese cuisine revealed" .  Taipei Times .  Archived  from the original on 3 June 2020 . Retrieved  3 June  2020 . 
 
 ^   Chang, Meg (31 July 2009).  "Groupers help boost nation's aquaculture industry" .  taiwantoday.tw . Taiwan Today.  Archived  from the original on 7 June 2020 . Retrieved  7 June  2020 . 
 
 ^   "Eating and drinking in Taiwan" .  Rough Guides . Retrieved  9 February  2021 . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   e   f   g   h   i   j   k   l   m   n   Hiufu Wong, Maggie (24 July 2015).  "40 of the best Taiwanese foods and drinks" .  www.cnn.com . CNN . Retrieved  29 September  2020 . 
 
 ^   "Taiwan Country Profile" .  www.foodexport.org . Retrieved  21 July  2021 . 
 
 ^   "What is Parsley?" .  HowStuffWorks . 21 November 2007 . Retrieved  14 March  2022 . 
 
 ^   Tchea, Michelle (27 October 2021).  "Taiwanese basil is more than a garnish — it's the main event" .  www.sbs.com.au . SBS . Retrieved  27 October  2021 . 
 
 ^   Wei, Clarissa (29 May 2021).  "Black Vinegar Doesn't Just Season a Dish–It Transforms It" .  www.bonappetit.com . Retrieved  30 May  2021 . 
 
 ^   Lin, Ming-teh (2006).  "Popular Food Culture in Taiwan" .  Government Information Office . Archived from  the original  on 20 June 2012 . Retrieved  15 December  2010 . 
 
 ^   Koutsakis, George.  "Chef Summit Held In Taiwan: Asia's Biggest Culinary Event Of 2020" .  Forbes . Retrieved  5 January  2021 . 
 
 ^   Jen, Victoria.  "Taiwan local street banquet chefs hit hard by dampened Chinese New Year festivities amid COVID-19" .  www.channelnewsasia.com . Channel News Asia . Retrieved  17 February  2021 . 
 
 ^   Somekh, Simone (22 February 2018).  "Hungry for Kosher Food in Taiwan? Look for the Swastikas" .  tabletmag.com . Tablet.  Archived  from the original on 4 July 2020 . Retrieved  4 July  2020 . 
 
 ^   Tseng, Esther.  "Taiwan's Vegetarian Awakening" .  www.taiwan-panorama.com . Taiwan Panorama . Retrieved  29 January  2021 . 
 
 ^   Xie, Tina.  "Meeting New Demand for Vegetarian Foods" .  www.taiwan-panorama.com . Taiwan Panorama . Retrieved  29 January  2021 . 
 
 ^   Amster-Burton, Matthew (9 May 2017).  "The saucy comforts of Taiwanese turkey rice" .  thetakeout.com . The Takeout . Retrieved  29 September  2020 . 
 
 ^   Craddock, Kat (18 March 2019).  "Taiwan's Coffin Bread Perfects the Art of the Bread Bowl" .  www.saveur.com . Saveur . Retrieved  28 January  2020 . 
 
 ^   "2019 Daxi Dried Tofu Festival Opening Ceremony" .  travel.tycg.gov.tw . Taoyuan Government. 16 March 2019 . Retrieved  29 January  2021 . 
 
 ^   "Hsinchu Meatballs" .  edu.ocac.gov.tw . OCAC . Retrieved  29 January  2021 . 
 
 ^   Wong, Maggie Hiufu (15 June 2020).  "From chow mein to udon: A beginner's guide to Asia's best noodles" .  www.cnn.com . CNN . Retrieved  29 January  2021 . 
 
 ^   Liao, George (17 October 2019).  " 'Buy one and get one free' at Pastry Festival in central Taiwan" .  www.taiwannews.com.tw . Taiwan News . Retrieved  29 January  2021 . 
 
 ^   Everington, Keoni (3 December 2020).  "Historic pastry shop burns down in central Taiwan" .  www.taiwannews.com.tw . Taiwan News . Retrieved  29 January  2021 . 
 
 ^   Wei, Clarissa.  "Gallery: 25 Things You Must Eat in Tainan, the Culinary Center of Taiwan" .  www.seriouseats.com . Serious Eats . Retrieved  29 January  2021 . 
 
 ^   "A-Gei" .  tour.ntpc.gov.tw . New Taipei City . Retrieved  29 September  2020 . 
 
 ^   Bird, Thomas (9 November 2017).  "Taiwan's northern tip: weird nature, wonderful street food" .  www.scmp.com . South China Morning Post . Retrieved  29 January  2021 . 
 
 ^   "Oyster omelet the nation's favorite" .  Taipei Times .  CNA . 2 June 2007. p. 2.  Archived  from the original on 17 May 2008 . Retrieved  2 June  2007 . 
 
 ^   Martin, Laura C. (2007).  Tea: The drink that changed the world . Rutland: Tuttle Publishing. p. 219.  ISBN   9780804837248 . 
 
 ^  a   b   Cheung, Han (15 September 2020).  "Tree to bar to gold" .  www.taipeitimes.com . Taipei Times.  Archived  from the original on 17 September 2020 . Retrieved  25 September  2020 . 
 
 ^   Su, Lynn.  "A Sweet Vision: Taiwanese Chocolate's Road to the World" .  www.taiwan-panorama.com . Taiwan Panorama.  Archived  from the original on 26 September 2020 . Retrieved  10 December  2019 . 
 
 ^  a   b   Gillan, Audrey (17 May 2014).  "Taiwan, home to the best street food markets in the world" .  The Guardian .  Archived  from the original on 16 May 2020 . Retrieved  27 April  2020 . 
 
 ^   Joe, Melinda (24 February 2018).  "In Taiwan, top chefs are building on a long history of culinary exchange with Japan" .  Japan Times .  ISSN   0447-5763 .  Archived  from the original on 4 August 2018 . Retrieved  5 September  2018 . 
 
 ^   Cheung, Han (21 October 2022).  "Eating local in indigenous Taitung" .  Taipeitimes.com/ . Taipei Times . Retrieved  18 November  2022 . 
 
 ^   Cheung, Han (30 April 2022).  "Taiwan's 'godmother of wild greens' " .  taipeitimes.com . Taipei Times . Retrieved  5 May  2022 . 
 
 ^   Crook, Steven (23 April 2021).  "Highways & Byways: Taiwan's boozy past and present" .  www.taipeitimes.com . Taipei Times . Retrieved  6 May  2021 . 
 
 ^   Chou, Cybil Huichen (11 May 2019).  "How Taiwanese craft beers are finding fans in Asia and the West" .  South China Morning Post .  Archived  from the original on 18 September 2019 . Retrieved  28 July  2020 . 
 
 ^   Staff Writer (17 February 2021).  "FEATURE: Growers along Tainan's 'Coffee Road' want to put local brew on national map" .  www.taipeitimes.com . Taipei Times . Retrieved  17 February  2021 . 
 
 ^   "Coffee culture booms in Taiwan" .  www.efe.com . Agencia EFE . Retrieved  30 November  2020 . 
 
 ^   News Desk.  "Coffee culture on the rise in Taiwan" .  The Jakarta Post .  Archived  from the original on 29 July 2020 . Retrieved  28 July  2020 . 
 
 ^   Yuan-ting, Yang; Chung, Jake (31 August 2021).  "Coffee consumption exceeds that of tea for the first time" .  taipeitimes.com . Taipei Times . Retrieved  31 August  2021 . 
 
 ^   China (Taiwan), Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Republic of (18 March 2011).  "Kaoliang serves Kinmen a tasty future" .  Taiwan Today . Retrieved  12 June  2020 . 
 
 ^   "嘉義酒廠目前主力產品" . 
 
 ^   "八八坑道高粱酒官方網站" . 
 
 ^   du Toit, Nick (29 July 2011).  "Yo-ho-ho and a bottle of Koxinga Gold rum" .  taiwantoday.tw . Taiwan Today . Retrieved  8 June  2021 . 
 
 ^   Koutsakis, George (6 June 2021).  "Will Japanese whisky be eclipsed by Taiwan? The island's gin and rum also show promise – with one distillery promising spirits 'good enough for God' " .  www.scmp.com . South China Morning Post . Retrieved  8 June  2021 . 
 
 ^   Crook, Steven (9 July 2020).  "Exploring the World of Taiwanese Tea" .  topics.amcham.com.tw .  Archived  from the original on 15 July 2020 . Retrieved  28 July  2020 . 
 
 ^   Koutsakis, George (6 October 2019).  "Can Taiwan's premium gin producers take on the world – and Taiwanese drinkers who prefer foreign liquor?" .  South China Morning Post .  Archived  from the original on 23 November 2019 . Retrieved  28 July  2020 . 
 
 ^   Whithead, Richard.  "Tropical terroir made to produce award-winning wines" .  www.beveragedaily.com . Beverage Daily.  Archived  from the original on 9 May 2020 . Retrieved  5 May  2020 . 
 
 ^   Cheung, Han (21 March 2020).  "Vina Formosa comes of age" .  www.taipeitimes.com . Taipei Times.  Archived  from the original on 23 March 2020 . Retrieved  23 March  2020 . 
 
 ^   Hui-ning, Hu (10 March 2019).  "Taichung red wine wins gold medal in France" .  www.taipeitimes.com . Taipei Times.  Archived  from the original on 2 September 2019 . Retrieved  30 April  2020 . 
 
 ^   Huichen Chou, Cybil (14 September 2019).  "Why Hong Kong connoisseurs – and Michelin-star chefs – are taking note of Taiwan's wines" .  www.scmp.com . SCMP.  Archived  from the original on 7 July 2020 . Retrieved  30 April  2020 . 
 
 ^   Wang, Ann.  "Taiwan's award-winning winemaker aims to revive fading tradition" .  www.thejakartapost.com . Reuters.  Archived  from the original on 10 August 2020 . Retrieved  8 August  2020 . 
 
 ^   CHOU, CYBIL.  "Taiwan sake boom starts to challenge Japanese traditions" .  nikkei.com . Nikkei Asia . Retrieved  14 March  2022 . 
 
 ^   Haggerty, Nicholas (25 September 2020).  "Beyond the Michelin Guide: What Is Real Taiwanese Gourmet?" .  thenewslens.com . The News Lens.  Archived  from the original on 26 September 2020 . Retrieved  26 September  2020 . 
 
 ^   Sontag, Elazar (25 August 2020).  "Michelin Announces 2020 Stars for Taiwan" .  www.eater.com . Eater.  Archived  from the original on 26 September 2020 . Retrieved  25 September  2020 . 
 
 ^   Hsin-Yin, Lee.  "Michelin Guide releases Bib Gourmand list for Taipei, Taichung" .  focustaiwan.tw . Focus Taiwan.  Archived  from the original on 26 September 2020 . Retrieved  25 September  2020 . 
 
 ^   Wu, Sunny (15 January 2021).  "Michelin Guide Taiwan – Taipei vs. Taichung" .  topics.amcham.com.tw . Retrieved  15 January  2021 . 
 
 ^   Chen, Lina (19 March 2017).  "Origins of Taiwanese Fusion Cuisine: It's Not That Simple" .  thenewslens.com . The News Lens.  Archived  from the original on 3 June 2020 . Retrieved  3 June  2020 . 
 
 ^   Fulco, Matthew (12 January 2018).  "Discovering a Little Italy in Taipei" .  topics.amcham.com.tw . Taiwan Business Topics.  Archived  from the original on 18 June 2020 . Retrieved  1 May  2020 . 
 
 ^   Chou, Min.  "An Italian Entrepreneur Realizing 'His Meaning of Life' in Taiwan" .  english.cw.com.tw . Commonwealth.  Archived  from the original on 26 September 2020 . Retrieved  1 May  2020 . 
 
 ^  a   b   Quartly, Jules (17 January 2022).  "A Golden Era for Pizza in Taiwan" .  amcham.com.tw . Taiwan Topics . Retrieved  5 May  2022 . 
 
 ^   Banka, Neha (18 December 2021).  "In Taipei, Indian food makes for good business" .  indianexpress.com . Indian Express . Retrieved  19 December  2021 . 
 
 ^   Strong, Matthew (20 June 2020).  "Taiwan's Café Astoria inherits spirit of Russia" .  Taiwan News .  Archived  from the original on 22 June 2020 . Retrieved  20 June  2020 . 
 
 ^   Alamin, Jasmine.  "How this young Singaporean chef is making culinary waves in Taiwan" . Channel NewsAsia.  Archived  from the original on 31 December 2019 . Retrieved  27 April  2020 . 
 
 ^   Sgarbi, Giulia.  "Asia's Highest Climber Mume brings Taiwanese produce into the global spotlight" .  theworlds50best.com . The World’s 50 Best.  Archived  from the original on 26 September 2020 . Retrieved  27 April  2020 . 
 
 ^   GLAUERT, RIK.  "Hong Kong protesters revolutionize Taiwan restaurant scene" .  asia.nikkei.com . Nikkei.  Archived  from the original on 3 June 2020 . Retrieved  3 June  2020 . 
 
 ^   Fulco, Matthew (21 January 2021).  "Experiencing Taipei's Authentic Japanese Cuisine" .  topics.amcham.com.tw . Taiwan Topics . Retrieved  24 January  2021 . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   "Taiwanese cuisine reflects nation's historical odyssey" .  taiwantoday.tw . Taiwan Today. 4 March 2011 . Retrieved  27 April  2020 . 
 
 ^   Koutsakis, George.  "What Makes A Great Chef? Andre Chiang on Cuisine, Growth, And Taiwan's Culinary Beauty" .  Forbes .  Archived  from the original on 22 March 2019 . Retrieved  27 April  2020 . 
 
 ^   Pio Kuo, Chunghao.  "Taiwaneze immigrand spark a golden age fore Chinese food" .  nyfoodstory.com . NY Food Story.  Archived  from the original on 21 September 2020 . Retrieved  29 April  2020 . 
 
 ^   Wu, Stephenie.  "Taiwanese food is finally having a moment in New York City's crowded restaurant scene" .  mic.com . Mic.  Archived  from the original on 26 September 2020 . Retrieved  27 April  2020 . 
 
 ^   Gross, Matt (25 July 2018).  "New York City's Taiwanese-Food Boom (It's About Time)" .  tastecooking.com . Taste.  Archived  from the original on 3 June 2020 . Retrieved  3 June  2020 . 
 
 ^   Moskin, Julia (11 June 2019).  "A New Generation of Chefs Reframes Taiwanese Cuisine in America" .  The New York Times .  Archived  from the original on 1 June 2020 . Retrieved  3 June  2020 . 
 
 ^  a   b   Tsai, Luke.  "The Bay Area's Taiwanese Food Scene Comes Into Its Own" .  www.kqed.org . kqed . Retrieved  22 May  2021 . 
 
 ^   Erway, Cathy.  "How Today's Taiwanese-American Chefs Rewrote the Rules and Made a New Cuisine" .  foodandwine.com . Food and Wine.  Archived  from the original on 3 June 2020 . Retrieved  3 June  2020 . 
 
 
 Further reading [ edit ] 
 Crook, Steven; Hung, Katy Hui-wen (2018),  A Culinary History of Taipei: Beyond Pork and Ponlai , Rowman & Littlefield,  ISBN   978-1538101377 
 External links [ edit ] 
  Media related to  Cuisine of Taiwan  at Wikimedia Commons 
 Minaglia, Jaysun.  "Jaysun Eats Taipei" .  Taipei Restaurant Guide . 
 Erway, Cathy.  "The Food of Taiwan" .  Facebook . 
 Wong, Maggie Hiufu (29 January 2014).  "Best Taiwanese Food: 45 Taiwanese foods we can't live without" .  CNN Travel . 
 "Taiwanese Restaurants" .  10keythings . 8 September 2016. 
 v t e Taiwan   articles History 
 Timeline of Taiwanese history 
 Prehistory 
 archaeological sites 
 Kingdom of Middag 
 Dutch Formosa 
 Spanish Formosa 
 Kingdom of Tungning 
 Taiwan under Qing rule 
 Republic of Formosa 
 Taiwan under Japanese rule 
 Republic of China 
 Retreat to Taiwan 
 Guanbi policy 
 White Terror 
 Martial law 
 Mandarin policy 
 Geography Overviews 
 Beaches 
 Cities 
 Climate 
 Deforestation 
 Earthquakes 
 Endemic species  /  Protected species 
 Hot springs 
 Islands 
 Lakes 
 Mountains 
 National parks 
 Rivers 
 Scenic areas 
 Superlatives 
 Volcanoes 
 Government Politics Economy Government and  politics 
 Cabinet 
 Censorship 
 Civil defense 
 Constitution 
 Additional Articles 
 Elections 
 Human rights 
 LGBT rights 
 Intelligence 
 Law 
 Law enforcement 
 Military 
 Parliament 
 President 
 Political parties 
 Propaganda 
 Regions of Taiwan 
 Administrative divisions 
 Special municipalities 
 Counties 
 Cities 
 List of administrative divisions 
 Metropolitan areas 
 Political issues 
 Conscription 
 Cross-Strait relations 
 Chinese unification 
 Chinese nationalism 
 Chinese Taipei 
 Dang Guo 
 De-Sinicization 
 Foreign relations 
 North–South divide 
 One Country on Each Side 
 Political status of Taiwan 
 Special non-state-to-state relations 
 Two Chinas 
 Taiwanese nationalism 
 Taiwan independence movement 
 Economy 
 Agriculture 
 Aquaculture 
 Floriculture 
 Automotive industry 
 Banking 
 List of banks 
 Central bank 
 Companies 
 Defense industry 
 Dollar  (currency) 
 Economic history 
 Energy 
 Forestry 
 Maritime industries 
 Mining 
 Semiconductor industry 
 State-owned enterprises 
 Stock exchange 
 Taiwan Miracle 
 Taxation 
 Telecommunications 
 Textile 
 Tourism 
 Transportation 
 National Symbols People Society Culture National symbols 
 Anthem 
 Emblem 
 Flag 
 Flower 
 Seals 
 People Demographics 
 Taiwanese people 
 Taiwanese indigenous peoples 
 Ethnic groups 
 Hans 
 Hoklos 
 Hakkas 
 Mainland Chinese 
 Languages 
 Formosan languages 
 Amis 
 Atayal 
 Bunun 
 Kanakanavu 
 Kavalan 
 Paiwan 
 Puyuma 
 Rukai 
 Saaroa 
 Saisiyat 
 Sakizaya 
 Seediq 
 Thao 
 Tsou 
 Yami 
 Sinitic 
 Mandarin 
 Taiwanese Hokkien 
 Hakka 
 Matsu dialect 
 Sign Language 
 Braille 
 Society 
 Architecture 
 Crime 
 Sex trafficking 
 Education 
 Healthcare 
 Inventions and discoveries 
 Prostitution 
 Public holidays 
 Squatting 
 Superlatives 
 Taiwan studies 
 Women 
 Culture 
 Animation 
 Art 
 Cinema 
 Cuisine 
 Cultural history 
 Drama 
 Gambling 
 Glove puppetry 
 Literature 
 Media 
 Music 
 Opera 
 Night markets 
 Philosophy 
 Photography 
 Religion 
 Smoking 
 Sports 
 T-Beauty 
 Taiwanese wave 
 Tea 
 Tourist attractions 
 
   Category 
   Portal 
   Outline 
 
 v t e   Taiwanese cuisine Dishes and meals 
 Beef noodle soup 
 Bento  ( Taiwan Railway Bento ) 
 Congee 
 Coffin bread 
 Eel noodles 
 Geng 
 Karasumi 
 Khong bah png 
 Lo bah png 
 Misua 
 Mongolian barbecue 
 Oyster vermicelli 
 Pork ball 
 Rice vermicelli 
 Sanbeiji 
 Ta-a mi 
 Turkey rice 
 Tube rice pudding 
 Wu geng chang wang 
 Xiaochi 
 A-gei 
 Ba-wan 
 Chinese sausage 
 Curry beef turnover 
 Danbing 
 Fish ball 
 Gua bao 
 Hujiao bing 
 Iron egg 
 Milkfish congee 
 Moon shrimp cakes 
 Oyster omelette 
 Pig's blood cake 
 Popiah 
 Scallion pancake 
 Shuangbaotai 
 Small sausage in large sausage 
 Spring roll 
 Stinky tofu 
 Taiwanese fried chicken 
 Tea egg 
 Tempura 
 Xiaolongbao 
 Zongzi 
 Snacks and desserts 
 Aiyu jelly 
 Bakkwa 
 Chhau-a-koe 
 Coconut bar 
 Douhua 
 Dried shredded squid 
 Grass jelly 
 Mochi 
 Peanut soup 
 Pineapple cake 
 Suncake 
 Taro ball 
 Tshuah-ping 
 Youtiao 
 Beverages 
 Beer 
 Ginger tea 
 Grape wine 
 Kaoliang liquor 
 Mr. Brown Coffee 
 Soy milk 
 Whisky 
 Taiwanese tea 
 Bubble tea 
 Tung-ting tea 
 High mountain tea 
 Pouchong 
 Winter melon punch 
 Ingredients 
 Black bean paste 
 Milkfish 
 Rousong 
 Shacha sauce 
 Chefs 
 André Chiang 
 Ching He Huang 
 Erchen Chang 
 Fu Pei-mei 
 Miscellaneous 
 Agriculture 
 Aquaculture 
 List of Michelin starred restaurants in Taipei 
 List of restaurants in Taiwan 
 List of Taiwanese desserts and snacks 
 Night markets 
 List 
 Tea culture 
 Q texture 
   Category     Commons     Portal     WikiProject     bookshelf 
 v t e Asian cuisine Sovereign states 
 Afghanistan 
 Armenia 
 Azerbaijan 
 Bahrain 
 Bangladesh 
 Bhutan 
 Brunei 
 Burma (Myanmar) 
 Cambodia 
 China 
 Cyprus 
 East Timor (Timor-Leste) 
 Egypt 
 Georgia 
 India 
 Indonesia 
 Iran 
 Iraq 
 Israel 
 Japan 
 Jordan 
 Kazakhstan 
 North Korea 
 South Korea 
 Kuwait 
 Kyrgyzstan 
 Laos 
 Lebanon 
 Malaysia 
 Maldives 
 Mongolia 
 Nepal 
 Oman 
 Pakistan 
 Philippines 
 Qatar 
 Russia 
 Saudi Arabia 
 Singapore 
 Sri Lanka 
 Syria 
 Tajikistan 
 Thailand 
 Turkey 
 Turkmenistan 
 United Arab Emirates 
 Uzbekistan 
 Vietnam 
 Yemen 
 States with limited recognition 
 Abkhazia 
 Artsakh 
 Northern Cyprus 
 Palestine 
 South Ossetia 
 Taiwan 
 Dependencies and other territories 
 British Indian Ocean Territory 
 Christmas Island 
 Cocos (Keeling) Islands 
 Hong Kong 
 Macau 
 
 v t e Cuisines Continental 
 African 
 North 
 West 
 list 
 Americas 
 Caribbean 
 North 
 South 
 list 
 Asian 
 Caucasian 
 Central 
 Indian subcontinent 
 Levantine 
 list 
 European 
 Balkan 
 Central 
 Eastern 
 list 
 Oceanic 
 Intercontinental
 Global 
 Latin American 
 Mediterranean 
 Middle Eastern 
 National  and regional 
 Afghan 
 Albanian 
 Algerian 
 American 
 Californian 
 Floribbean 
 Hawaiian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Lowcountry (South Carolina) 
 New England 
 New Mexico 
 Pacific Northwest 
 Pennsylvania Dutch 
 Puerto Rican 
 Southern US 
 Southwest US 
 Texas 
 Angolan 
 Argentine 
 Armenian 
 Australian 
 Austrian 
 Azerbaijani 
 Bahraini 
 Bangladeshi 
 Barbadian 
 Belarusian 
 Belgian 
 Belizean 
 Beninese 
 Bhutanese 
 Bolivian 
 Bosnian-Herzegovinian 
 Botswana 
 Brazilian 
 British 
 Channel Islands 
 English 
 Gibraltarian 
 Northern Irish 
 Saint Helena 
 Scottish 
 Welsh 
 Bruneian 
 Bulgarian 
 Burkinabé 
 Burmese 
 Burundian 
 Cambodian 
 Cameroonian 
 Canadian 
 Acadian 
 Québécois 
 Central African Republic 
 Chadian 
 Chilean 
 Chinese 
 Cantonese 
 Hong Kong 
 Macanese 
 Tibetan 
 Xinjiang 
 Colombian 
 Congolese 
 Corsican 
 Croatian 
 Cuban 
 Cypriot 
 Czech 
 Danish 
 Faroese 
 Greenlandic 
 Djiboutian 
 Dominican 
 Dominican Republic 
 Dutch 
 East Timorese 
 Ecuadorian 
 Egyptian 
 Emirati 
 Equatorial Guinean 
 Eritrean 
 Estonian 
 Ethiopian 
 Fijian 
 Filipino 
 Finnish 
 French 
 Occitan 
 French Guianan 
 Gabonese 
 Gambian 
 Georgian 
 German 
 Ghanaian 
 Greek 
 Cretan 
 Epirotic 
 Greek Macedonian 
 Heptanesean 
 Guatemalan 
 Guinea-Bissauan 
 Guinean 
 Haitian 
 Honduran 
 Hungarian 
 Icelandic 
 Indian 
 Arunachalese 
 Assamese 
 Bengali 
 Bihari 
 Goan 
 Gujarati 
 Himachal Pradesh 
 Kashmiri 
 Jharkhandi 
 Karnataka 
 Kerala 
 Maharashtrian 
 Manipuri 
 Meghalayan 
 Mizo 
 Naga 
 Odia 
 Punjabi 
 Rajasthani 
 Sikkimese 
 Sindhi 
 Tamil 
 Telangana 
 Telugu 
 Indonesian 
 Acehnese 
 Balinese 
 Banjar 
 Batak 
 Betawi 
 Indo 
 Javanese 
 Madurese 
 Makassar 
 Minahasan 
 Minangkabau 
 Palembangese 
 Sundanese 
 Iranian 
 Iraqi 
 Irish 
 Israeli 
 Italian 
 Abruzzese 
 Ligurian 
 Lombard 
 Lucanian 
 Neapolitan 
 Roman 
 Sardinian 
 Sicilian 
 Venetian 
 Ivorian 
 Jamaican 
 Japanese 
 Okinawan 
 Jordanian 
 Kazakh 
 Kenyan 
 Korean 
 North Korean 
 South Korean 
 Kosovan 
 Kuwaiti 
 Kyrgyz 
 Lao 
 Latvian 
 Lebanese 
 Lesotho 
 Liberian 
 Libyan 
 Liechtensteiner 
 Lithuanian 
 Luxembourg 
 Macedonian 
 Malagasy 
 Malawian 
 Malaysian 
 Sabahan 
 Sarawakian 
 Maldivian 
 Malian 
 Maltese 
 Mauritanian 
 Mauritian 
 Mexican 
 Moldovan 
 Monégasque 
 Mongolian 
 Montenegrin 
 Moroccan 
 Mozambican 
 Namibian 
 Nauruan 
 Nepalese 
 New Zealand 
 Nicaraguan 
 Niger 
 Nigerian 
 Niuean 
 Norwegian 
 Omani 
 Pakistani 
 Palestinian 
 Panamanian 
 Peruvian 
 Polish 
 Portuguese 
 Qatari 
 Romanian  (incl.  Transylvanian Saxon ) 
 Russian 
 Bashkir 
 Chechen 
 Circassian 
 Komi 
 Mordovian 
 Sakha 
 Tatar 
 Udmurt 
 Yamal 
 Rwandan 
 Saint Lucian 
 Salvadoran 
 Sammarinese 
 São Tomé and Príncipe 
 Saudi Arabian 
 Senegalese 
 Serbian 
 Seychellois 
 Sierra Leonean 
 Singaporean 
 Slovak 
 Slovenian 
 Somali 
 South African 
 Spanish 
 Andalusian 
 Asturian 
 Balearic 
 Basque 
 Canarian 
 Cantabrian 
 Catalan 
 Extremaduran 
 Galician 
 Manchegan 
 Valencian 
 Sri Lankan 
 Sudanese 
 Swazi 
 Swedish 
 Swiss 
 Syrian 
 Taiwanese 
 Tajik 
 Tanzanian 
 Zanzibari 
 Thai 
 Togolese 
 Tunisian 
 Turkish 
 Turkmen 
 Trinidadian and Tobagonian 
 Ugandan 
 Ukrainian 
 Uruguayan 
 Uzbek 
 Venezuelan 
 Vietnamese 
 Western Saharan 
 Yemeni 
 Zambian 
 Zimbabwean 
 Ethnic 
 Ainu 
 Arab 
 Indonesian 
 Aromanian 
 Assyrian 
 Balochi 
 Berber 
 Cajun 
 Chinese 
 American 
 Canadian 
 Chifa 
 Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Crimean Tatar 
 Greek American 
 Hazaragi 
 Indian 
 Anglo-Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Indigenous American 
 Inuit 
 Italian American 
 Kurdish 
 Livonian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Malay 
 Ossetian 
 Parsi 
 Pashtun 
 Peranakan 
 Romani 
 Sámi 
 Soul food 
 Sylheti 
 Transylvanian Saxon 
 Yup'ik 
 Religious 
 Buddhist 
 Christian 
 Goan Catholic 
 Mangalorean Catholic 
 Mennonite 
 Hindu 
 Islamic 
 Chinese 
 Ital 
 Jain 
 Jewish 
 American 
 Ashkenazi 
 Bukharan 
 Ethiopian 
 Mizrahi 
 Sephardic 
 Syrian 
 Ritual slaughter 
 Sikh 
 Historical 
 Ancient Egyptian 
 Ancient Greek 
 Ancient Israelite 
 Ancient Roman 
 Antebellum America 
 Aztec 
 Byzantine 
 Early modern European 
 Historical Chinese 
 Historical Indian subcontinent 
 Historical North Indian and Pakistani 
 History of agriculture 
 History of alcoholic drinks 
 History of bread 
 History of seafood 
 History of vegetarianism 
 Historical Argentine 
 Historical Japanese 
 Inca 
 Mayan 
 Muisca 
 Mughal 
 Medieval 
 Ottoman 
 Peasant 
 Soviet 
 Thirteen Colonies 
 Styles 
 Classique 
 Fast food 
 Fusion 
 New American 
 Eurasian 
 Haute 
 Molecular gastronomy 
 Note by Note 
 Nouvelle 
 Lists 
 List of cuisines 
 List of historical cuisines 
 Lists of prepared foods 
 Related 
 Cookbook 
 Cooking 
 Culinary arts 
 Drink 
 Food 
 history 
 Diet 
 Meal preparation 
 
   Food portal 
   Drink portal 
   Category 
   Commons 
   Cookbook 
   WikiProject 
   Outline 
 
 Authority control : National libraries  
 Israel 
 United States 
 
  
NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw2379
Cached time: 20230311141636
Cache expiry: 1814400
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc, no‐toc‐conversion]
CPU time usage: 1.479 seconds
Real time usage: 1.776 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 24159/1000000
Post‐expand include size: 361700/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 21812/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 15/100
Expensive parser function count: 31/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 292675/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.784/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 19541981/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/400
 
 
Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1402.839      1 -total
 33.25%  466.460      1 Template:Reflist
 27.61%  387.351     77 Template:Cite_web
 18.36%  257.606      8 Template:Navbox
 12.38%  173.672      1 Template:Asian_topic
 10.87%  152.525      1 Template:Taiwan_related_articles
 10.61%  148.824      1 Template:Country_topics
  9.18%  128.742     32 Template:Lang
  7.90%  110.838     52 Template:Iso2country
  5.20%   72.975      2 Template:More_citations_needed
 
  Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:idhash:30528-0!canonical and timestamp 20230311141634 and revision id 1140932099. Rendering was triggered because: page-view
  
 esi <esi:include src="/esitest-fa8a495983347898/content" />  
 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Taiwanese_cuisine&oldid=1140932099 " 
 Category :  Taiwanese cuisine Hidden categories:  CS1 maint: others Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from January 2010 All articles needing additional references Use dmy dates from September 2020 Articles containing traditional Chinese-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2022 Articles with unsourced statements from September 2020 Articles containing Chinese-language text Articles with unsourced statements from December 2020 Articles with unsourced statements from January 2021 Articles needing additional references from November 2022 Commons category link from Wikidata Region topic template using suffix Articles with J9U identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  This page was last edited on 22 February 2023, at 14:06  (UTC) . 
 Text is available under the  Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0 ;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the  Terms of Use  and  Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the  Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. 
 
 
 Privacy policy 
 About Wikipedia 
 Disclaimers 
 Contact Wikipedia 
 Mobile view 
 Developers 
 Statistics 
 Cookie statement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
