
 
 
 Jump to content 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle sidebar 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Create account Log in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Personal tools 
 
 
 
 
   Create account   Log in 
 
 
 
 
		Pages for logged out editors  learn more 
 
 
 Contributions Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Navigation 
 
 
 Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate 
 
 
 
 
 Contribute 
 
 
 Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file 
 
 
 
 
 Tools 
 
 
 What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item 
 
 
 
 
 Print/export 
 
 
 Download as PDF Printable version 
 
 
 
 
 In other projects 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons 
 
 
 
 
 Languages 
 
 On this Wikipedia the language links are at the top of the page across from the article title.  Go to top . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CentralNotice  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Contents 
 move to sidebar 
 hide 
 
 
 
 
 (Top) 
 
 
 
 
 
 1 Regional variations 
 
 
				Toggle Regional variations subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 1.1 Coastal Andhra 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.1.1 Uttarandhra 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.2 Rayalaseema 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.3 Telangana 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.3.1 Staple Telangana foods 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.3.2 Vegetarian cuisine of Telangana 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.3.3 Non-vegetarian Telangana cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.3.4 Other Telangana dishes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 Breakfast 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 Lunch and dinner 
 
 
				Toggle Lunch and dinner subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 3.1 Vegetarian dishes 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.1.1 Meal presentation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.1.2 Courses and servings 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.1.3 Koora/kura/curry (main courses) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.1.4 Pappu (dal) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.1.5 Pulusu 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.1.6 Pickles 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.2 Non-vegetarian dishes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4 Snacks 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5 Sweets and savories 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6 Rural cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 7 See also 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8 References 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 9 External links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
						Toggle the table of contents
					 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle the table of contents 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Telugu cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 8 languages 
 
 
 
 العربية বাংলা ગુજરાતી हिन्दी Jawa ಕನ್ನಡ മലയാളം తెలుగు 
 Edit links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Article Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 English 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 More 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
 
 
 Cuisine of South India native to the Telugu people from the state of Andhra Pradesh, India 
 This article  needs additional citations for  verification .  Please help  improve this article  by  adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources:   "Telugu cuisine"  –  news   ·   newspapers   ·   books   ·   scholar   ·   JSTOR   ( September 2019 )  ( Learn how and when to remove this template message ) 
 
 
 Part of a series on the Culture of Andhra Pradesh 
History 
 History of Andhra Pradesh 
 Economy of Andhra Pradesh 
 Culture of Andhra Pradesh 
 Politics of Andhra Pradesh 
 
People and culture 
 Telugu people 
 Telugu language 
 Telugu cuisine 
 Music of Andhra Pradesh 
 Shadow puppets of Andhra Pradesh 
 Telugu literature 
 Tourism in Andhra Pradesh 
 Telugu cinema 
 v t e 
 Part of a series on the Telangana Culture 
 History •  History of Telangana 
 •  Economy of Telangana 
•  Telangana Movement 
 
•  Politics of Telangana 
 
 People •  Telugu people 
 
 Festivals and Traditions •  Batukamma 
•  Bonalu 
 
 Languages •  Telugu   
•  Urdu   
 
 Cuisine •  Telugu cuisine   
 •  Telangana cuisine   
 
•  Hyderabadi cuisine   
 
 Arts and Crafts •  Music of Telangana •  Shadow Puppets of Telangana 
 
 Literature Telugu Literature 
 
 Tourism Tourism in Telangana 
 
 Cinema Telugu cinema 
 v t e 
 This article is part of the series on Indian cuisine 
 Regional cuisines 
 North India 
 Awadhi 
 Bhojpuri 
 Haryana 
 Kashmiri 
 Kumauni 
 Mughlai 
 Punjabi 
 Rajasthani 
 Uttar Pradeshi 
 South India 
 Chettinad 
 Hyderabadi 
 Karnataka 
 Kerala 
 KonguNadu 
 Mangalorean 
 Mangalorean Catholic 
 Saraswat 
 Tamil 
 Telangana 
 Telugu 
 Udupi 
 East India 
 Bengali 
 Bihari 
 Jharkhand 
 Odia 
 Maithil 
 West India 
 Goan 
 Gujarati 
 Malvani & Konkani 
 Marathi 
 Parsi 
 Sindhi 
 Northeast India 
 Arunachalese 
 Assamese 
 Meghalayan 
 Manipuri 
 Mizoram 
 Naga 
 Sikkimese 
 Tripuri 
 Other 
 Anglo-Indian 
 Fast food 
 Indian Chinese 
 Indian Indonesian 
 Indian Singaporean 
 Jain (Satvika) 
 Malaysian Indian 
 Nepali 
 
 Ingredients, types of food 
 Main dishes 
 Soups and stews 
 Desserts 
 Bread 
 Drinks 
 Snack foods 
 Spices 
 Condiments 
 
 Preparation, cooking 
 Handi 
 Karahi 
 Tava 
 Tandoor 
 Uruli 
 Other 
 
 See also 
 History 
 Etiquette 
 Indian chefs 
 Cookbook: Cuisine of India 
 
 Related cuisines 
 Nepalese cuisine 
 Sri Lankan cuisine 
 Bangladeshi cuisine 
 Pakistani cuisine 
 Bhutanese cuisine 
 Tibetan cuisine 
 Afghani cuisine 
 
   India portal 
   Food portal v t e 
 Telugu cuisine  is a cuisine of  South India  native to the  Telugu people  from the states of  Andhra ,  Telangana , and  Yanam . Generally known for its tangy, hot, and spicy taste, the cuisine is as diverse as the people and regions in which it is consumed.
 
   Andhra Bhojanam Thali 
 
 Regional variations [ edit ] 
 This section  needs additional citations for  verification .  Please help  improve this article  by  adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources:   "Telugu cuisine"  –  news   ·   newspapers   ·   books   ·   scholar   ·   JSTOR   ( September 2019 )  ( Learn how and when to remove this template message ) 
 The regions of  Coastal Andhra ,  Rayalaseema , and Telangana all produce distinctive variations of Telugu cuisine. In the semi-arid Telangana region,  millet -based bread known as  rotte  is the predominant staple food, whereas  rice  is the staple in the irrigated regions of Andhra and Rayalaseema.  Ragi  is also popular in Rayalaseema. The curries, snacks, and sweets produced in these areas vary in both name and method of preparation from region to region.
 Andhra Pradesh is the leading producer of  red chili  and rice in India, and Telangana is the leading producer of millet. The concentration of red chili production in Andhra Pradesh has led to the liberal use of spices in Telugu cuisine. Vegetarian dishes, as well as meat, and seafood in coastal areas, feature prominently.  Tomato pappu ,  gongura , and  tamarind  are widely used for cooking curries. Spicy and hot varieties of  pickle  are also an important part of Telugu cuisine, including  avakaya . "Deltaic" cuisine from  Guntur  in Coastal Andhra is known as the spiciest variety of Telugu cuisine, primarily because of the use of red chilis traditionally grown in the region.
 The eating habits of Hindu royals and Brahmin, as well as Muslim  Nawabi  royal families have historically had a heavy influence on Telugu cuisine. Andhra Pradesh and Telangana's proximity to Western, Central, and Eastern India influenced the diversity of those border regions' cuisine as well, as the  Telugu -speaking population spread into neighboring states. Different communities have developed their own variations, and rural areas still follow centuries-old cooking methods and recipes.
 
 Coastal Andhra [ edit ] 
   A typical vegetarian meal in Andhra Pradesh 
   Vegetarian meal for a special occasion 
   A vegetarian Andhra meal served on important occasions 
 Coastal Andhra is dominated by the  Krishna  and  Godavari  river delta regions and is adjacent to the  Bay of Bengal . This proximity to water has led to rice, lentils, and seafood becoming dietary staples in the region. Andhra cuisine has its own variations, but dishes are predominantly rice-based. The  Nellore  region in the south has its own unique recipes, markedly different from those in  Uttarandhra .  Ulava charu  is a soup made from  horse gram , [1]  and  bommidala pulusu  is a seafood stew that is considered a specialty of Andhra Pradesh. Andhra cuisine is prevalent in restaurants all over Andhra Pradesh, as well as in cities like  Bangalore ,  Chennai , and  New Delhi . 
 
 Uttarandhra [ edit ] 
 The  Uttarandhra  region is composed of the northeastern districts of  Srikakulam ,  Vizianagaram , and  Visakhapatnam  in Coastal Andhra. While Visakhapatnam district has a cuisine closer in character to the rest of Andhra's districts, Vizianagaram and Srikakulam cuisine shares less in common with other Andhra regional cuisines. The food of the Uttarandhra region is often sweeter than in other regions of Andhra Pradesh. Lentils are often cooked in  jaggery , a dish referred to as  bellam pappu , and are usually served with butter and steamed rice.
 Vegetables are often cooked in a gravy of  menthi kura  ( fenugreek  seed paste),  avapettina kura  (mustard seed paste), or  nuvvugunda kura  ( sesame  paste).  Ullikaram  is another popular dish in which vegetables or corn seeds are flavored with  shallots  or  onion  paste.
 Poori  and  patoli  are popular breakfast or festival dishes.  Patoli  is composed of soaked split black  chickpeas  ( senagapappu  or  chana dal ) ground to a coarse paste and seasoned with  coriander  seeds, onions, and sometimes  cluster beans  ( goruchikkudu kaya ).  Upma  or  uppudu pindi  is coarsely broken rice steamed with vegetables and seeds. [2]  This dish is eaten on feast days, when people fast during the day and eat at night. Attu, also called  dosa , is a standard breakfast in Andhra Pradesh, which may also include coconut or tomato chutneys.  Idli  is also very common.  Karappoddi  is a popular curry powder that is served with idli, dosa and upma.
 Inguva charu  is a sweet-and-sour stew made with tamarind and  hing . It can be eaten with rice or  uppupindi .  Bellam pulusu  is another flavorful, thick, sweet stew made out of rice flour, jaggery, corn cobs, and whole shallots.
 The pickles used in Uttarandhra differ from those of other regions of Andhra Pradesh. Avakaya is a mango pickle which is part of a standard Andhra meal. Pieces of mango are coated with mustard powder, red pepper powder, and salt, then sun-dried, and finally soaked in sesame oil to give the pickle  extended shelf life . The result of this process is a darker hue and a sweeter taste than other pickles. This method helps preserve Uttarandhra pickles better amidst the high moisture from the Bay of Bengal coast.
 
 Rayalaseema [ edit ] 
 Rayalaseema, in the south of Andhra Pradesh, is well-known for the spiciness of its cuisine due to liberal use of chili powder in almost every dish.  Seema karam  is a dish unique to this region. Some of the main courses include rice,  jonna , ( jowar ),  ragi roti  with  neyyi , and  raagi sangati , usually served with  spinach  or  pulusu .  Uggani  is a dish unique to Rayalaseema, especially  Ananthapur ,  Kurnool , and  Kadapa  districts, as well as in  Karnataka , where it is called  oggane . It is made with boiled paddycorn and is generally yellowish in color due to heavy use of  turmeric  powder. It is usually served with  mirapakaya bajji  (chili "bajji").  Uggani bajji  is served primarily as a breakfast dish, but can be eaten as a snack too. It is spicy and a signature dish of Rayalaseema and Eastern Karnataka. [3] 
 Sweeter dishes of Rayalaseema include  attirasaalu  or  attirasa  (rice-based  vada  with jaggery),  pakam undalu  (a mixture of steamed rice flour, ground nuts, and jaggery),  borugu undalu  (a sweet made of jowar and jaggery), and  rava ladd .  Masala borugulu ,  nargis mandakki , and  ponganaalu  (wet rice flour fried in oil, with carrot, onion, and chilis) are other savory specialties from the region.
 
 Telangana [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Telangana cuisine 
 This section  needs additional citations for  verification .  Please help  improve this article  by  adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources:   "Telugu cuisine"  –  news   ·   newspapers   ·   books   ·   scholar   ·   JSTOR   ( September 2019 )  ( Learn how and when to remove this template message ) 
 Telangana state is located on the  Deccan Plateau , and its environment lends itself to a cuisine based on millet and roti. Jowar and  pearl millet , or  bajra , are also prominent features in Telangana cuisine. Due to the state's proximity to  Maharashtra ,  Chhattisgarh , and northwest Karnataka, it shares some similarities with other Deccan Plateau cuisines.
 Recent years have seen a resurgence of Telangana cuisine in  Hyderabad , with many restaurants now serving  thali   for lunch. [4] 
 
 Staple Telangana foods [ edit ] 
 Telanganan cuisine frequently makes use of roti made from millet, such as  jonna rotte  ( sorghum ) and  sajja rotte  ( pennisetum ), or  sarva pindi  and  uppudi pindi  (broken rice). In Telangana a gravy or curry is called  koora  or  pulusu  (a sour version) and uses a tamarind base. A deep-fried reduction of the same is called  vepudu .  Kodi pulusu  and  mamsam vepudu  are popular meat dishes.  Vankaya ( brinjal ) koora ,  baingan bhartha ,  aloogadda ( potato ) koora ,  bendakaya ( okra ) pulusu  are common vegetable dishes. [5]   Palakoora pappu  is a spinach dish cooked with lentils and eaten with steamed rice and roti.  Peanuts  are added in some special cases, and in  Karimnagar District ,  cashew  nuts are sometimes used.
 Popular Telangana  koora  dishes include  boti , derived from  mutton , and  thunti  koora  made from red sorrel leaves.  Potlakaya pulusu , or  snake gourd  stew is another daily staple for many Telanganans.  Sakinalu  and  garelu  are popular fries/fritters made of rice flour which are eaten during festivals like  Dussehra  and  Sankranti . [6]  Sugar  madugulu  is a sweet made with milk and butter with sugar coating, and  pharda pheni  is a sugar-coated crispy wafer. 
 
 Vegetarian cuisine of Telangana [ edit ] 
   Pesara  ( moong-dal )  pulusu 
   Various types of  lentils  ( pappulu ) and millet for sale at a market 
 Tamarind, red chilis ( koraivikaram ) and  asafetida  are prominently used in Telangana vegetarian cuisine.  Roselle  is a major staple used extensively in curries and pickles.
 [7] 
 
 Sarva pindi , a spicy  pancake , is a common breakfast, made from rice flour,  chana dal , ginger, garlic, sesame seeds, curry leaves, and green chilis. [8] 
 Puntikura chana dal : A vegetarian alternative to 'gongura ghosht', consisting of  chana dal  cooked in spices and tempered with mustard and curry leaves. 
 Bachali kura : A tangy spinach curry cooked with tamarind paste. 
 Pachi pulusu : A spicy, raw  rasam  made with tamarind, chili, and onions. Prepared mainly in summer. 
 Rail palaram : a traditional food made from rice flour. Steamed rice flour balls are stir-fried with soaked  chana dal , curry leaves, green chilis, onion, and grated fresh coconut. 
 Non-vegetarian Telangana cuisine [ edit ] 
 Ooru kodi pulusu , a chicken curry 
 Golichina Mamsam , a spicy fried mutton dish 
 Ankapur chicken , a spicy chicken curry 
 Boti  curry, curried lamb gizzards 
 Kaalla kura (paya) , goat leg curry 
 Mutton curry 
 Other Telangana dishes [ edit ] 
 Jonna gatka 
 Makka gatka 
 Ambali , a vegetarian summer drink/porridge common in Karnataka. [9] 
 Makka rotti 
 Kudumulu 
 Passham , a sweet with two varieties: one with jaggery and milk, and the other with  talukalu  prepared from dough. 
 Odapa 
 Pyalalu 
 Sabhudhana upma  
 Antuvuls , also called  bajji  ( pulusu  with vegetables) 
 Kadambam 
 Makka gudaalu 
 Bebarla gudaalu 
 Sala pachi pulusu 
 Challa charu , a dish prepared by tempering buttermilk 
 Atukulu 
 Makkajona garelu 
 Ponganallu 
 Sajja kudumulu  with onion chutney 
 Sadhulu , varieties of rice, mainly cooked for the  Sadhula Bathukama  festival. Typically prepared in the following flavors: sesame ( nuvulu ), groundnuts ( palilu ), Bengal gram ( putnalu ), coconut  ( kobari ), tamarind ( chintapandu pulusu ), lemon ( nimakaya ), mango ( mamidikaya ), yogurt ( perugu ) 
 Guddalu , prepared with different beans, corn,  chana , and sprouts, along with spices and onions. 
 Garje , a sweet filled with lentils and either sugar or jaggery. 
 Rotu tokkulu , prepared by semi-frying vegetables, grinding them, and then adding  thadka . 
 Kallegura  ( a.k.a.   kallegalapula kura ), a mixed vegetable curry, generally prepared during the Sankranti festival 
 Breakfast [ edit ] 
 This section  does not  cite  any  sources .  Please help  improve this section  by  adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and  removed .   ( September 2019 )  ( Learn how and when to remove this template message ) 
 A typical Andhra breakfast consists of a few of the items listed below. Usually it consists of  idli ,  garelu  a.k.a.  vada  (deep-fried lentil dough),  minapattu , also known as  dosa , (a rice- and lentil-based pancake or  crepe ).  Tea ,  coffee  with  milk , or simply milk often accompany these dishes. The most common dishes consumed for breakfast are:
 
 ' Idli ',  Urad dal  and rice steamed dumplings, often eaten with freshly-made chutney or with neyyi added and sprinkled with  karrap podi  (chili dal powder) or chutney and  sambar . 
   Pesarattu  served with  ginger   pachadi 
 Andhra  dosa , a rice- and urad dal-based crepe eaten with chutney and  sambar .
 Minapattu, a rice- and lentil-based crepe, served with chutney and  sambar 
 Pesarattu , a  green gram -based crepe. It is usually served with ginger chutney. Sometimes  pesarattu  is filled with  upma ,  in which case it is known as  upma pesarattu . 
 Dibba attu , a deep-fried dosa made with  idli  batter 
 Atukula dosa , a dosa made from  atukulu , a.k.a.  poha . 
 Rava (Suji) dosa , a dosa made with  sooji  dough with chili, coriander leaves, onion, and pepper. 
   Wheat  uppindi  ( upma ) served with  curds 
 Andhra  upma 
 Godhuma uppindi , upma made from broken wheat flour 
 Pesarpindi uppindi , a dry porridge made of green gram flour. Commonly served with yoghurt or mango-jaggery pickle. 
 Pulusu uppindi , a dry porridge made with rice flour, peanuts, and tamarind extract. Commonly served with yoghurt or mango-jaggery pickle. 
 Beeyam rava pesasara pappu , literally translated as "made with broken rice and hulled green gram". Commonly served with yoghurt or mango-jaggery pickle. 
 Varipindi uppindi , a dry porridge made with rice flour and hulled green gram. Commonly served with yoghurt or mango-jaggery pickle. 
 Uppudu pindi  or  uppindi  a.k.a. upma, a porridge made from broken  sooji  flour, ghee, and vegetables. Commonly served with buttermilk or a spicy-savoury powder made from pulses. 
 Saggubiyyam (sago) upma , an upma made from  sago  ( saboodana ). 
 Semiya upma , an upma made with vermicelli. 
   Punugulu 
 Vada 
 Garelu , a deep-fried lentil-based doughnut, or sometimes a deep-fried  dal  mixture. 
 Punukulu  or  Punugulu , a.k.a.  Bonda , a deep-fried dish made from idli/dosa batter. 
 Gunta  punugulu, made from rice and dal batter 
 Saggubiyyam punugulu , vada made from sago ( saboodana ). 
 Mung dal punugulu , or bonda, a deep-fried dish made from idli/dosa batter. 
 Thapala chekkalu , a deep-fried rice and dal-based flat vada with onions, curry leaves, and chili. 
 Atukulu/poha 
 Atukulu , also known as  poha  in the northern states; moist rice flakes sautéed in oil. 
 Atukula dosa , dosa made from  atukulu  a.k.a.  poha . 
 Atukula upma , upma made from  atukulu , replacing  atukulu  with  sooji . 
 Bread and roti 
 Nokulu annam , made of  jowar  and jaggery. 
 Chapati , baked flattened wheat dough, served with dal or chutney. 
 Puri , wheat dough deep-fried in cooking oil. Served with potato  bajji  or chutney. Technically a north Indian dish, but widely available in all Telugu restaurants. 
 Lunch and dinner [ edit ] 
 This section  needs additional citations for  verification .  Please help  improve this article  by  adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources:   "Telugu cuisine"  –  news   ·   newspapers   ·   books   ·   scholar   ·   JSTOR   ( September 2019 )  ( Learn how and when to remove this template message ) 
 Great effort is put into preparing lunch and dinner in many Telugu households. In most urban households, the food is served on stainless steel or porcelain plates, while in traditional and rural households, the food may be served on a banana leaf. The banana leaf is often used during festivals, special occasions, and for guests. Many middle-budget restaurants in smaller towns also use banana leaves for serving food. At times, a  vistaraaku  (a larger plate made of several leaves sewn together) is used. Sun-dried banana leaves have also traditionally been used to package food for personal use on long journeys. 
 A complete vegetarian Andhra meal typically consists of rice served with ghee,  pulihora , chapati or  puri ,  pappu  (lentils),  sambar ,  chaaru  ( rasam ), fried and wet curries,  appadam  ( papadum ),  odiyalu , chutney,  pachadi ,  avakaya , yoghurt and a sweet for dessert. In general, food from the  Vijayawada -Guntur region contains more  chili  and spices than food from the rest of Andhra Pradesh. Rice is considered the main dish and everything else is considered a side.
 
 Vegetarian dishes [ edit ] 
   Okra plain curry  made in Vijayawada, Andhra Pradesh 
   Dried capsicum for chili dishes 
 Meal presentation [ edit ] 
 Pappu (dal/lentils) and kooralu (curries) are placed to the right of the diner, while spiced pickles, pachadi (chutney/ raita ), a saucy condiment with  dahi  (yogurt) , vegetables,  pappulu podi  (dal and dry red chili-based powdered condiment), and  neyyi  (ghee) are placed to the left. On some occasions, special items such as  pulihora  (tamarind or lemon rice) and  garelu  (vada) are placed at the top right. A large scoop of  annam  (plain white rice) is placed in the middle. Small amounts of  neyyi  are added on the rice.  Avakaya  (mango pickle) and gongura (roselle leaf pickle) are often served with the meal.
 
 Courses and servings [ edit ] 
   Dibba rotti  or  minapa rotti  is a classic Andhra dish eaten for breakfast, brunch, or evening snack with a chutney or pickle 
 Rice is the main dish, eaten by mixing with the side dishes using the right hand, and the primary source of carbohydrates. Spiced pickles,  pachadi ,  podi , and  papadum  ( appadam ) are typical side dishes.
 A meal traditionally starts with  modhati muddha  (first bite), an appetizer of spiced pickle followed by a  pappu (dal) dish, which can be made with vegetables added or eaten plain with a pickle. This constitutes the main source of protein for vegetarians. This is followed by a couple of  koora  varieties, which provide vitamins and minerals. A  pappu  or  rasam  (Telugu:  charu ), usually  kadi , is the third course. The fourth course of the meal is either a  perugu  (curd or yoghurt) or  majjiga  (buttermilk) accompanied by a spicy pickle or other condiments.
 After the meal,  paan  or  somph  ( areca nut / betel  on pan leaf) is traditionally offered. On festival days or other auspicious occasions, a sweet, usually  paravannam , is served with the meal, which is usually eaten first.
 
 Koora/kura/curry (main courses) [ edit ] 
 This section  does not  cite  any  sources .  Please help  improve this section  by  adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and  removed .   ( September 2019 )  ( Learn how and when to remove this template message ) 
   Pulihora 
   Brinjal with onion curry 
   Gobi Manchuria fry 
   Banana with onion curry 
   Pulihora, a sour tamarind-based fried rice dish from Andhra Pradesh 
 Koora  — a generic word for a protein-based dish. Koora dishes are named for the ingredients used and the method of preparation. These methods include:
 
 Vepudu  (fry): crispy fried vegetables, typically including okra ( bendakaya ),  ivy gourd  ( dondakaya ), potato ( bangaladumpa ),  colocasia , and several additional local vegetables. 
 Pappu koora  (lentil-based dish): boiled vegetables stir-fried with a small amount of half-cooked lentils (dal). 
 Podi  (powdered dal-based condiment or seasoning): mixed with rice and a spoonful of ghee or sesame oil. 
 Gujju  (gravy): a tomato or coriander seed base into which is added a chicken drumstick, brinjal ( gutthi vankaya ), okra, etc. 
 Pulusu  (sour paste or gravy)
 Pulusu koora/Aava petti koora  (stew): boiled vegetables cooked in tamarind sauce and mustard paste. Some varieties include  potlakaya ,  anapakaya ,  bendakaya ,  gummadikaya . 
 Kaaram petti koora/Koora podi koora  (literally, "dish with curry powder added"): sautéed vegetables cooked with curry powder or paste, served as a solid mass. The vegetables can be stuffed with curry powder or paste and are usually cooked whole. 
 Pappucharu  (thick dal broth) or  charu 
 Charu   a.k.a.   rasam  (clear soup) 
 Ooragaya  (pickle):  avakaya ,  gongura ,  nimmakaya , etc. 
 Pachadi  (pasty/saucy condiment or chutney):  kobbari  ( coconut ), tomato,  gongura ,  dosakaya ,  gummadikaya , and  allam  ( ginger ). 
 Other gravy-based curries are usually made with vegetables cooked in  tomato sauce  and onion with coriander and  cumin  powder. 
 Pappu (dal) [ edit ] 
   Ridge gourd with moong-dal pappu 
 Pappu (dal/lentils) dishes include  toor daal  ( kandi pappu ) and  moong daal  ( pesara pappu ), which are usually cooked with a vegetable or other green. No masala is added to the dal. In some areas, garlic and onion are included in the seasoning, while in others  asafetida  (hing/inguva) is used.  Kandi pappu  is often cooked with leafy vegetables such as  palakura  (spinach),  gongura ,  malabar spinach , and other fruits and vegetables such as tomato,  mango , or  aanapakaya .  Sometimes the cooked version of the dal is replaced with a roasted and ground version, like  kandi pachadi  (roasted  toor daal  ground with red chilis), or  pesara pachadi  (soaked  moong daal  ground with red or green chilis).
 A very popular combination in Andhra is  mudda pappu  (plain  toor dal  cooked with salt) and  avakaya .
 
 Pulusu [ edit ] 
   Moong-daal pulusu 
 Pulusu  (meaning sour) is a curry-like stew that is typically sour and cooked with tamarind paste. Other common bases include tomatoes or mangoes. The mixture can be flavored with mustard, chilis, curry leaves, jaggery, onions, or fenugreek. Fish, chicken, and eggs are typical meat additions.  Pachi pulusu  is an unheated version of pulusu, typically made of mangoes or tamarind, and eaten during the warmer months.
 
 Majjiga pulusu : sour buttermilk boiled with  channa dal  and coconut paste 
 Menthi challa / menthi majjiga : sour buttermilk seasoned with ginger or green chili paste and  menthi  (fenugreek) seeds, then fried in oil 
 Mukkalu pulusu :  pulusu  made with  aanapakaya 
 Chammagadda pulusu :  pulusu  made with colocasia 
 Kanda pulusu :  pulusu  made with  yam 
 Perugu  (curd): the last dish of the meal, normally eaten along with  pachadi  or pickles 
 Pickles [ edit ] 
 Pachadi  and  ooragaya  are two broad categories of pickle that are eaten with rice.  Pachadi  is the Telugu version of chutney, typically made of vegetables/greens/lentils and roasted green or red chilis, using tamarind and sometimes curds as a base. It is prepared fresh and must be consumed within two days due to having a short shelf life.  Ooragaya  is prepared in massive amounts each season. Preparation includes using large amounts of chili powder, as well as  menthi  (fenugreek) powder, mustard powder, and groundnut (peanut) oil or sesame or mustard oil. It is either consumed on its own, mixed with rice, or as a side dish with  pappu / koora .
 
 Non-vegetarian dishes [ edit ] 
 This section  needs additional citations for  verification .  Please help  improve this article  by  adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources:   "Telugu cuisine"  –  news   ·   newspapers   ·   books   ·   scholar   ·   JSTOR   ( September 2019 )  ( Learn how and when to remove this template message ) 
   Andhra chepala pulusu  (tamarind fish curry) 
 While a sizeable portion of the Telugu-speaking population are vegetarian, the majority also consume non-vegetarian dishes. The state of Andhra Pradesh produces abundant seafood and has an established poultry industry. Lamb meat has also been consumed for centuries in the region. Andhra restaurant chains and hotels are very popular in other states due to the extensive variety of meat featured on their menus.
 Hyderabadi biryani  and  palaav , or "Andhra biryani", are popular dishes within the region.  Royyala palav , made with shrimp, is considered a delicacy in coastal Andhra Pradesh. Mutton biryani and mixed biryani (chicken, mutton, and shrimp) are other popular biryani dishes, generally available in restaurants. There are many local variations as well, such as  kaaja biryani ,  kunda biryani  (pot biryani),  avakaya biryani ,  ulavacharu biryani , [10]  and  panasa biryani .
 Kodi  (chicken)  koora  and mutton  koora  are two popular meat dishes, often made with a range of spices and condiments. The base usually consists of onions, tomato, coriander, tamarind, and coconut. These are mixed with steamed rice on the plate during the meal.  Pepper  is also used on fried meat dishes. Popular dishes commonly served in Andhra-style restaurants include the spicy Andhra chili chicken, [11]  chicken roast, and mutton pepper fry. For seafood dishes, a tamarind base is generally used. Shrimp and prawns are widely available for use in cuisine, due to the state's extensive shrimp farming industry.
 Other common meat dishes include:
 
 Talakaya koora : a hearty meat curry with bold flavours, made with lamb's head, coriander, and spices. 
 Chepala pulusu : a fish curry seasoned with freshly ground spices and tamarind juice. 
 Endu chepala vankaya : a flavourful dry fish curry cooked with brinjal. [12] 
 Royyala koora : prawns cooked in a tangy paste of tamarind and onion. 
 Gongura mamsam : spicy curry made with tender lamb pieces cooked in a curry of gongura (roselle leaves) and freshly-ground green chili paste. 
 Kodi gudllu pulusu : egg curry sprinkled with chopped onions, green chilis, and coriander. 
 These curries are usually served with steamed rice,  bagara khana  (basmati rice cooked with aromatic seasoning),  sajja roti  (millet flatbread), or  jonna roti  (jowar flatbread).
 Non-vegetarian snacks include  kodi pakodi  (chicken pakora),  chicken 65 ,  peetha pakodi  (crab pakodi),  chepa vepudu  (fish fry),  royyala vepudu  (shrimp fry), and  chicken lollipop .
 Bhimavaram  town in  West Godavari district  is famous for its unique non-vegetarian pickles, such as chicken, shrimp, and fish pickles.
 The area near  Rajamundry  and  Araku  is famous for bongu (bamboo) chicken curry.
 
 Snacks [ edit ] 
   Uggani bajji, a favorite snack in Rayalaseema 
   Ravva dosa served at a hotel in Guntur Some common Telugu snacks include:
 Upma  (ఉప్మా) 
 Boondi  (బూంది) 
 Kaarappoosa  (కారప్పూస) 
 Ponganalu  (పొంగనాలు) 
 Bajji  and   bondaalu  or  punukulu  (బజ్జి, బోండాలు or పునుకులు), stuffed with spices, dipped in chickpea batter and fried; served with a spicy dip ( allam pachadi ). Other varieties include  mirapakaya bajji  (chili),  vamu bajji ,  vankaya bajji  (brinjal),  aratikaya bajji  (plantain),  urla gadda bajji  (potato), and vegetable  bonda .   Samosa vendor on the streets of Hyderabad 
 Pakodi  (పకోడీ) 
 Ulli kaadalu pakodi 
 Sanna pakodi 
 Vankaya pakodi 
 Other varieties include  royallu pakodi ,  kodi pakodi , and  ullipakodi  (fritters made with sliced onion and spices fried in chickpea batter) 
 Gaare  (గారె), spiced deep-fried dough 
 Varieties include: perugu gaare / aavadalu  (ఆవడలు),  gaare  marinated in a yogurt sauce,  bellam garelu ,  rava garelu ,  ulli garelu ,  pulla garelu 
 Murukullu  or jantikalu  (జంతికలు) 
 Varieties include  pesarapappu jantikalu ,  challa murukulu ,  chegodilu (చేగోడీలు),  sakinalu  or  chakkidalu  (చక్కిడాలు),  chakli ,  chekkalu  or  chuppulu  (చెక్కలు or చుప్పులు), maida chips, molocasia chips,  plain papadam , and  aam papad 
 Maramaraalu or puffed rice: Usually mixed with tomatoes, onions, coriander, lime juice, and chili powder. 
 Bean/pea snacks, such as  senagala talimpu  and  guggillu  (గుగ్గిళ్ళు) 
 Mixed snacks, such as  boondi  mixed with chopped onions and lemon juice 
 Sweets and savories [ edit ] 
 This section  needs additional citations for  verification .  Please help  improve this article  by  adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources:   "Telugu cuisine"  –  news   ·   newspapers   ·   books   ·   scholar   ·   JSTOR   ( September 2019 )  ( Learn how and when to remove this template message ) 
   Appachulu 
   Bobbatlu , a snack made from wheat or  sooji , filled with jaggery and lentils 
   Chakodi 
   Boondi mithai  or  karakajjam 
 Sweets and savories are typically made on festive and auspicious occasions, and are served to visiting relatives. Some of the savories below are also prepared as an evening snack.
 
 Pootharekulu , a sweet dish consisting of sweet powder with  cardamom  flavor stuffed into very thin pancake skins made of rice flour.  Pootharekulu  was created in  Atreyapuram , a village in Andhra Pradesh. 
 Kaaja , a deep-fried pastry filled with fruit or soaked in syrup. Variations such as  madatha kaaja  and  kakinada kaaja  are eaten across the region. [13] [14] 
 Sakinalu , one of the most popular savories, is often cooked during the Makara Sankranti festival season. It is a deep-fried snack made of rice flour and sesame seeds, flavored with  ajwain  (carom seeds or  vaamu  in Telugu). 
 Kajjikayalu : fried dumpling stuffed with  suji , dry coconut powder, and sugar. It is usually prepared during  Deepavali . 
 Sunnundallu ,  laddu  made with roasted  urad dal  ( minapappu ) and jaggery  (bellam) / sugar. A generous amount of ghee is usually added to enhance the flavour. 
 Ariselu , a sweet fried snack made of rice flour 
 Boondi laddu 
 Poornam boorelu   a.k.a.   Poornalu , made by cooking  chana dal  until soft, cooling, then adding jaggery and cardamom powder. The mix is then rolled into balls, which are subsequently batter-fried. The batter that is used is made from  urad dal . This sweet dish is usually served during a festival lunch. 
 Rava laddu 
 Bhakshalu  or  bobbatlu  or  polelu , sweet flatbread made of senega pappu (chickpea flour) 
 Tapeswaram kaja 
 Pulagam   a.k.a.   pongali , a sweet dish made on a festival morning as an offering for a deity. Soaked rice is cooked in milk at a ratio of 1:2.5; when the rice is cooked, well-broken jaggery is added. The dish is completed by adding a splash of ghee and fried dry fruit. 
 Payasam , a sweet pudding sometimes served in temples [15] 
 Gavvalu  or "sweet shells" (Telugu: గవ్వలు, gavvalu), deep-fried and sugared balls of flour 
 Chakodi , a crunchy ball of rice flour and chili, served hot. [16] 
 Chakkera pongali  (sugar pongal) 
 Laskora undalu  (coconut laddu) or  raskora undalu  (coconut laddu) 
 Boondi , a fried snack made of chickpea flour [17] 
 Palathalikalu , an Indian sweet made during  Ganesh Chaturthi 
 Ravva kesari 
 Pappuchekka 
 Jeedilu 
 Malai khaja , a traditional sweet from Nellore 
 Kobbari lavuju , grated coconut flesh in molten jaggery or sugar syrup 
 Vennappalu 
 Rural cuisine [ edit ] 
 This section  does not  cite  any  sources .  Please help  improve this section  by  adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and  removed .   ( December 2022 )  ( Learn how and when to remove this template message ) 
 In rural Andhra Pradesh, agriculture is the predominant occupation. Some centuries-old cooking practices can still be observed, particularly the use of mud pots, but this practice is being replaced by the use of steel utensils in recent decades. Traditional recipes have largely been influenced by what was grown and available locally earlier in history. In the drier districts,  jowar  (sorghum),  bajra  (millet) and  ragi  are still in use, while eating rice is seen as a symbol of prosperity. In the Delta and coastal districts, rice plays a major role in the cuisine.
 
 See also [ edit ] 
 Telugu language 
 Telugu people 
 Telugu script 
 Telugu diaspora 
 Indian cuisine 
 References [ edit ] 
 
 
 ^   "Humble dishes win hearts, grab spotlight" .  The Hindu . 29 March 2018 . Retrieved  1 September  2019 . 
 
 ^   [Andhra Uppu Pindi | Uppudu Pindi | Rice Rava And Moong Dal Upma  https://aahaaramonline.com/andhra-uppu-pindi-uppudu-pindi-recipe/ ] 
 
 ^   Uggani bajji, a popular dish of Kurnool, steals the show ,  The Hindu , February 24, 2018 
 
 ^   "In Hyderabad, chicken crosses the road from Andhra to Telangana" .  indianexpress.com . The New Indian Express. 29 January 2014 . Retrieved  22 February  2014 . 
 
 ^   . The New Indian Express. 29 January 2014  https://web.archive.org/web/20130918082622/http://travel.outlookindia.com/article.aspx?281198 . Archived from  the original  on 18 September 2013 . Retrieved  22 February  2014 .   {{ cite news }} :  Missing or empty  |title=  ( help ) 
 
 ^   "In Hyderabad, chicken crosses the road from Andhra to Telangana" .  indianexpress.com . The New Indian Express. 29 January 2014 . Retrieved  22 February  2014 . 
 
 ^   "The Telangana Table" .  LESLEY A. ESTEVES . Outlook Traveller. 1 June 2012. Archived from  the original  on 25 February 2014 . Retrieved  22 February  2014 . 
 
 ^   . The New Indian Express. 29 January 2014  https://web.archive.org/web/20130918082622/http://travel.outlookindia.com/article.aspx?281198 . Archived from  the original  on 18 September 2013 . Retrieved  22 February  2014 .   {{ cite news }} :  Missing or empty  |title=  ( help ) 
 
 ^   Ragi Malt Or Ambali: This Weight-Loss-Friendly South-Indian Drink Is A Delicious Summer CoolerAmbali or ragi malt is a vegetarian summer drink or porridge that is prepared in Karnataka. , NDTV, July 05, 2019 
 
 ^   [What is Ulavacharu Biryani that's loved by Dulquer Salmaan and how to make it at home  https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/life-style/food-news/what-is-ulavacharu-biryani-thats-loved-by-dulquer-salmaan-and-how-to-make-it-at-home/photostory/93642925.cms ]] 
 
 ^   [Andhra Chilli Chicken: A Fiery Chicken Recipe From South India That Spells Indulgence | https://food.ndtv.com/food-drinks/andhra-chilli-chicken-a-fiery-chicken-recipe-from-south-india-that-spells-indulgence-2549621 ] 
 
 ^   [Dried fish is a much-loved alternative to fresh fish across the country  https://www.thehindu.com/life-and-style/food/dried-fish-with-its-versatility-is-popular-across-the-country/article32437505.ece ] 
 
 ^   Elizabeth Fernandez, Sugar and spice and all things nice,  ISBN   978-1409287223 
 
 ^   Chitrita Banerji, Eating India: An Odyssey into the Food and Culture of the Land of Spices,  ISBN   978-1596910188 
 
 ^   "A truly international dessert" .  Hindustan Times . 3 October 2009. 
 
 ^   "Trailing the Andhra food route" .  ND TV . Retrieved  2 August  2017 . 
 
 ^   Tiwari, Brijesh; Singh, Narpinder (2015).  Pulse Chemistry and Technology . Royal Society of Chemistry. p. 271.  ISBN   9781782625674 . 
 
 
 External links [ edit ] 
 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons has media related to  Telugu cuisine . 
 
 v t e   State  of  Andhra Pradesh Capital :  Amaravati Topics 
 Cinema 
 Cuisine 
 Culture 
 Demographics 
 Economy 
 Education 
 Elections 
 Geography 
 Government 
 Council of Ministers 
 Highest point 
 History 
 Language 
 Politics 
 Sports 
 People 
 Transport 
 Tourism 
 State Day 
 Regions 
 Coastal Andhra 
 Rayalaseema 
 Uttarandhra 
 Districts 
 Alluri Sitarama Raju 
 Anakapalli 
 Anantapur 
 Annamayya 
 Bapatla 
 Chittoor 
 East Godavari 
 Eluru 
 Guntur 
 Kadapa 
 Kakinada 
 Konaseema 
 Krishna 
 Kurnool 
 Nandyal 
 Nellore 
 NTR 
 Palnadu 
 Parvathipuram Manyam 
 Prakasam 
 Srikakulam 
 Sri Satyasai 
 Tirupati 
 Visakhapatnam 
 Vizianagaram 
 West Godavari 
 Million-plus cities 
 Visakhapatnam 
 Vijayawada 
 Cities (population over 1 lakh) 
 Adoni 
 Anantapur 
 Bhimavaram 
 Chilakaluripet 
 Chittoor 
 Dharmavaram 
 Kadiri 
 Eluru 
 Gudivada 
 Guntakal 
 Guntur 
 Hindupur 
 Kadapa 
 Kakinada 
 Kurnool 
 Machilipatnam 
 Madanapalle 
 Nandyal 
 Narasaraopet 
 Nellore 
 Nuzvid 
 Ongole 
 Palakollu 
 Proddatur 
 Rajahmundry 
 Srikakulam 
 Tadepalligudem 
 Tadipatri 
 Tenali 
 Tirupati 
 Vijayawada 
 Visakhapatnam 
 Vizianagaram 
 Tourism 
 Dams 
 Forts 
 Lakes 
 National Parks 
 Hindu Temples 
 Churches 
 Wildlife Sanctuaries 
 Waterfalls 
 History 
 Satavahana dynasty 
 Andhra Ikshvaku 
 Ananda Gotrika 
 Salankayana dynasty 
 Vishnukundina dynasty 
 Pallava dynasty 
 Eastern Chalukyas 
 Western Chalukya Empire 
 Rashtrakuta dynasty 
 Kakatiya dynasty 
 Velanati Chodas 
 Eastern Ganga dynasty 
 Gajapati Empire 
 Vijayanagara Empire 
 Related lists 
 List of cities in Andhra Pradesh by population 
 List of urban agglomerations in Andhra Pradesh 
 List of revenue divisions in Andhra Pradesh 
 List of urban local bodies in Andhra Pradesh 
 List of mandals of Andhra Pradesh 
 
 Portal:India 
 
 v t e Cuisines Continental 
 African 
 North 
 West 
 list 
 Americas 
 Caribbean 
 North 
 South 
 list 
 Asian 
 Caucasian 
 Central 
 Indian subcontinent 
 Levantine 
 list 
 European 
 Balkan 
 Central 
 Eastern 
 list 
 Oceanic 
 Intercontinental
 Global 
 Latin American 
 Mediterranean 
 Middle Eastern 
 National  and regional 
 Afghan 
 Albanian 
 Algerian 
 American 
 Californian 
 Floribbean 
 Hawaiian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Lowcountry (South Carolina) 
 New England 
 New Mexico 
 Pacific Northwest 
 Pennsylvania Dutch 
 Puerto Rican 
 Southern US 
 Southwest US 
 Texas 
 Angolan 
 Argentine 
 Armenian 
 Australian 
 Austrian 
 Azerbaijani 
 Bahraini 
 Bangladeshi 
 Barbadian 
 Belarusian 
 Belgian 
 Belizean 
 Beninese 
 Bhutanese 
 Bolivian 
 Bosnian-Herzegovinian 
 Botswana 
 Brazilian 
 British 
 Channel Islands 
 English 
 Gibraltarian 
 Northern Irish 
 Saint Helena 
 Scottish 
 Welsh 
 Bruneian 
 Bulgarian 
 Burkinabé 
 Burmese 
 Burundian 
 Cambodian 
 Cameroonian 
 Canadian 
 Acadian 
 Québécois 
 Central African Republic 
 Chadian 
 Chilean 
 Chinese 
 Cantonese 
 Hong Kong 
 Macanese 
 Tibetan 
 Xinjiang 
 Colombian 
 Congolese 
 Corsican 
 Croatian 
 Cuban 
 Cypriot 
 Czech 
 Danish 
 Faroese 
 Greenlandic 
 Djiboutian 
 Dominican 
 Dominican Republic 
 Dutch 
 East Timorese 
 Ecuadorian 
 Egyptian 
 Emirati 
 Equatorial Guinean 
 Eritrean 
 Estonian 
 Ethiopian 
 Fijian 
 Filipino 
 Finnish 
 French 
 Occitan 
 French Guianan 
 Gabonese 
 Gambian 
 Georgian 
 German 
 Ghanaian 
 Greek 
 Cretan 
 Epirotic 
 Greek Macedonian 
 Heptanesean 
 Guatemalan 
 Guinea-Bissauan 
 Guinean 
 Haitian 
 Honduran 
 Hungarian 
 Icelandic 
 Indian 
 Arunachalese 
 Assamese 
 Bengali 
 Bihari 
 Goan 
 Gujarati 
 Himachal Pradesh 
 Kashmiri 
 Jharkhandi 
 Karnataka 
 Kerala 
 Maharashtrian 
 Manipuri 
 Meghalayan 
 Mizo 
 Naga 
 Odia 
 Punjabi 
 Rajasthani 
 Sikkimese 
 Sindhi 
 Tamil 
 Telangana 
 Telugu 
 Indonesian 
 Acehnese 
 Balinese 
 Banjar 
 Batak 
 Betawi 
 Indo 
 Javanese 
 Madurese 
 Makassar 
 Minahasan 
 Minangkabau 
 Palembangese 
 Sundanese 
 Iranian 
 Iraqi 
 Irish 
 Israeli 
 Italian 
 Abruzzese 
 Ligurian 
 Lombard 
 Lucanian 
 Neapolitan 
 Roman 
 Sardinian 
 Sicilian 
 Venetian 
 Ivorian 
 Jamaican 
 Japanese 
 Okinawan 
 Jordanian 
 Kazakh 
 Kenyan 
 Korean 
 North Korean 
 South Korean 
 Kosovan 
 Kuwaiti 
 Kyrgyz 
 Lao 
 Latvian 
 Lebanese 
 Lesotho 
 Liberian 
 Libyan 
 Liechtensteiner 
 Lithuanian 
 Luxembourg 
 Macedonian 
 Malagasy 
 Malawian 
 Malaysian 
 Sabahan 
 Sarawakian 
 Maldivian 
 Malian 
 Maltese 
 Mauritanian 
 Mauritian 
 Mexican 
 Moldovan 
 Monégasque 
 Mongolian 
 Montenegrin 
 Moroccan 
 Mozambican 
 Namibian 
 Nauruan 
 Nepalese 
 New Zealand 
 Nicaraguan 
 Niger 
 Nigerian 
 Niuean 
 Norwegian 
 Omani 
 Pakistani 
 Palestinian 
 Panamanian 
 Peruvian 
 Polish 
 Portuguese 
 Qatari 
 Romanian  (incl.  Transylvanian Saxon ) 
 Russian 
 Bashkir 
 Chechen 
 Circassian 
 Komi 
 Mordovian 
 Sakha 
 Tatar 
 Udmurt 
 Yamal 
 Rwandan 
 Saint Lucian 
 Salvadoran 
 Sammarinese 
 São Tomé and Príncipe 
 Saudi Arabian 
 Senegalese 
 Serbian 
 Seychellois 
 Sierra Leonean 
 Singaporean 
 Slovak 
 Slovenian 
 Somali 
 South African 
 Spanish 
 Andalusian 
 Asturian 
 Balearic 
 Basque 
 Canarian 
 Cantabrian 
 Catalan 
 Extremaduran 
 Galician 
 Manchegan 
 Valencian 
 Sri Lankan 
 Sudanese 
 Swazi 
 Swedish 
 Swiss 
 Syrian 
 Taiwanese 
 Tajik 
 Tanzanian 
 Zanzibari 
 Thai 
 Togolese 
 Tunisian 
 Turkish 
 Turkmen 
 Trinidadian and Tobagonian 
 Ugandan 
 Ukrainian 
 Uruguayan 
 Uzbek 
 Venezuelan 
 Vietnamese 
 Western Saharan 
 Yemeni 
 Zambian 
 Zimbabwean 
 Ethnic 
 Ainu 
 Arab 
 Indonesian 
 Aromanian 
 Assyrian 
 Balochi 
 Berber 
 Cajun 
 Chinese 
 American 
 Canadian 
 Chifa 
 Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Crimean Tatar 
 Greek American 
 Hazaragi 
 Indian 
 Anglo-Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Indigenous American 
 Inuit 
 Italian American 
 Kurdish 
 Livonian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Malay 
 Ossetian 
 Parsi 
 Pashtun 
 Peranakan 
 Romani 
 Sámi 
 Soul food 
 Sylheti 
 Transylvanian Saxon 
 Yup'ik 
 Religious 
 Buddhist 
 Christian 
 Goan Catholic 
 Mangalorean Catholic 
 Mennonite 
 Hindu 
 Islamic 
 Chinese 
 Ital 
 Jain 
 Jewish 
 American 
 Ashkenazi 
 Bukharan 
 Ethiopian 
 Mizrahi 
 Sephardic 
 Syrian 
 Ritual slaughter 
 Sikh 
 Historical 
 Ancient Egyptian 
 Ancient Greek 
 Ancient Israelite 
 Ancient Roman 
 Antebellum America 
 Aztec 
 Byzantine 
 Early modern European 
 Historical Chinese 
 Historical Indian subcontinent 
 Historical North Indian and Pakistani 
 History of agriculture 
 History of alcoholic drinks 
 History of bread 
 History of seafood 
 History of vegetarianism 
 Historical Argentine 
 Historical Japanese 
 Inca 
 Mayan 
 Muisca 
 Mughal 
 Medieval 
 Ottoman 
 Peasant 
 Soviet 
 Thirteen Colonies 
 Styles 
 Classique 
 Fast food 
 Fusion 
 New American 
 Eurasian 
 Haute 
 Molecular gastronomy 
 Note by Note 
 Nouvelle 
 Lists 
 List of cuisines 
 List of historical cuisines 
 Lists of prepared foods 
 Related 
 Cookbook 
 Cooking 
 Culinary arts 
 Drink 
 Food 
 history 
 Diet 
 Meal preparation 
 
   Food portal 
   Drink portal 
   Category 
   Commons 
   Cookbook 
   WikiProject 
   Outline 
 
  
NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw2371
Cached time: 20230311165715
Cache expiry: 1814400
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc, no‐toc‐conversion]
CPU time usage: 0.630 seconds
Real time usage: 0.822 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3081/1000000
Post‐expand include size: 211597/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2411/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 16/100
Expensive parser function count: 8/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 90147/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.301/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 8266240/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/400
 
 
Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  537.572      1 -total
 27.50%  147.808      1 Template:Reflist
 18.38%   98.818      8 Template:Cite_news
 17.83%   95.829      3 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 17.12%   92.008      6 Template:More_citations_needed
 16.23%   87.229      9 Template:Ambox
 13.77%   74.009      1 Template:Culture_of_Andhra_Pradesh
  9.52%   51.151      1 Template:Short_description
  9.48%   50.935      3 Template:Navbox
  5.66%   30.410      1 Template:Andhra_Pradesh
 
  Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:idhash:33687227-0!canonical and timestamp 20230311165714 and revision id 1140772781. Rendering was triggered because: page-view
  
 esi <esi:include src="/esitest-fa8a495983347898/content" />  
 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Telugu_cuisine&oldid=1140772781 " 
 Categories :  Andhra cuisine Telangana cuisine South Indian cuisine Indian cuisine by culture Indian cuisine by state or union territory Hidden categories:  CS1 errors: missing title CS1 errors: bare URL Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from September 2019 All articles needing additional references Use dmy dates from June 2019 Use Indian English from June 2019 All Wikipedia articles written in Indian English Articles needing additional references from December 2022 Commons category link is on Wikidata 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  This page was last edited on 21 February 2023, at 18:34  (UTC) . 
 Text is available under the  Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0 ;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the  Terms of Use  and  Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the  Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. 
 
 
 Privacy policy 
 About Wikipedia 
 Disclaimers 
 Contact Wikipedia 
 Mobile view 
 Developers 
 Statistics 
 Cookie statement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
