
 
 
 Jump to content 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle sidebar 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Create account Log in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Personal tools 
 
 
 
 
   Create account   Log in 
 
 
 
 
		Pages for logged out editors  learn more 
 
 
 Contributions Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Navigation 
 
 
 Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate 
 
 
 
 
 Contribute 
 
 
 Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file 
 
 
 
 
 Tools 
 
 
 What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item 
 
 
 
 
 Print/export 
 
 
 Download as PDF Printable version 
 
 
 
 
 In other projects 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons 
 
 
 
 
 Languages 
 
 On this Wikipedia the language links are at the top of the page across from the article title.  Go to top . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CentralNotice  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Contents 
 move to sidebar 
 hide 
 
 
 
 
 (Top) 
 
 
 
 
 
 1 Food culture 
 
 
				Toggle Food culture subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 1.1 Cookware 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.2 Dinnerware 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 Tea 
 
 
				Toggle Tea subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 2.1 Monastic kitchens 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 Etiquette 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4 Dishes 
 
 
				Toggle Dishes subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 4.1 Breads and fried dough foods 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.2 Soups 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.3 Sweet foods 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.4 Desserts 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.5 Holiday dishes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5 Cheeses, yogurt and butter 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6 Beverages 
 
 
				Toggle Beverages subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 6.1 Alcoholic beverages 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 7 Ingredients 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8 References 
 
 
				Toggle References subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 8.1 Citations 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8.2 Sources 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 9 External links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
						Toggle the table of contents
					 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle the table of contents 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tibetan cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 25 languages 
 
 
 
 বাংলা བོད་ཡིག Català Čeština Deutsch Español Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Jawa ქართული Lietuvių Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Русский Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 
 Edit links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Article Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 English 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 More 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
 
 
 Culinary traditions of Tibet 
 
 
   A simple Tibetan breakfast 
   A Tibetan woman making  momos  at a gathering in the U.S. 
   Shipment of  barley  grain, a food staple. It is roasted and ground into powder to make a flour 
   Tibetan bowls and spoons,  Field Museum 
   Examples of  Tibetan cheese  at the Zhongdian Market 
 Tibetan cuisine  includes the culinary traditions and practices and its peoples. The cuisine reflects the Tibetan landscape of mountains and plateaus and includes influences from neighbors (including India and Nepal where many Tibetans abide). It is known for its use of noodles,  goat ,  yak ,  mutton ,  dumplings ,  cheese  (often from yak or goat milk), butter, yogurt (also from animals adapted to the Tibetan climate), and soups.  Vegetarianism  has been debated by religious practitioners since the 11th century but is not prevalent due to the difficulty of growing vegetables, and cultural traditions promoting consumption of meat. [1] 
 Crops must be able to grow at high altitudes, although a few areas are at low enough altitude to grow crops such as rice, oranges, bananas and lemons. [2]  The most important crop is  barley . Flour milled from roasted barley, called  tsampa , is the  staple food  of Tibet, as well as  Sha phaley  (meat and cabbage in bread). [3]   Balep  is Tibetan bread eaten for breakfast and lunch. Various other types of balep bread and fried pies are consumed.  Thukpa  is a dinner staple consisting of vegetables, meat, and noodles of various shapes in broth. Tibetan cuisine is traditionally served with bamboo  chopsticks , in contrast to other  Himalayan  cuisines, which are eaten by hand.   Mustard seeds  are cultivated and feature heavily in its cuisine.
 Outside of Tibet, Tibetan cuisine is consumed in the Indian states of  Ladakh ,  Sikkim , and  Arunachal Pradesh , northern regions of  Nepal  such as  Mustang  and by  Tibetan diaspora  communities.
 In larger Tibetan towns and cities, many restaurants now serve  Sichuan-style Han Chinese food . Western imports and fusion dishes, such as fried yak and chips, are also popular. Nevertheless, many small restaurants serving traditional Tibetan dishes persist in both cities and the countryside.
 
 
 Food culture [ edit ] 
 Cookware [ edit ] 
 Tibetans  use pots, pans, cans, steamer pots and boxes made from various materials. Tibetan women carry large wooden containers, which can hold up to 25 liters, to fetch water once a day. Returning to the house, they pour the water into built-in copper cans that hold more than 100 liters. Cooking pots made from iron or brass are used on the stove. Traditionally, pans were used rarely, but are becoming increasingly popular. Wooden boxes are used to store  tsampa , butter and cheese. Tibetans use elaborately woven baskets with matching lids to store dried fruits, rice and sugar. When travelling, they use the baskets to store dried meat and cheese. In Southern Tibet, mortars are indispensable for crushing chilis. [4] 
 
 Dinnerware [ edit ] 
 Tibetan dinnerware is traditionally made from wood, but sometimes lacquered clay is used. According to local tradition, this handicraft was passed down for generations. Those who could afford to do so purchased high-quality porcelain bowls from elsewhere. In more modern times, other types of porcelain from China or elsewhere are used. Similarly, chopsticks were made by the family or imported from the forested regions in the south. The nobility used ivory chopsticks with silver ornaments.  Spoons are indispensable for most dishes. Poor people and children wore them around their necks to allow constant and easy access. Knives are sometimes used to eat fruits. Tibetans also use small soup bowls, while the rich used bowls of gold and silver. [5] 
 
 Tea [ edit ] 
 Teacups are sometimes carried in the abdominal fold of the  Chuba , a traditional costume. Wooden teacups made from dzabija wood are considered especially fine. They have a smooth surface, an impressive grain pattern and are made with a balanced form, which relates to the composition of the raw wood. They are comfortable to hold. The cups are costly and most cannot afford them. Lavish teacups often have a layer of silver inside, which is intended to make them easier to clean. The nobility and high lamas used stands and tops that were intricately ornamented with mythological motifs. The tops are used to preserve the scent of the tea. The most precious cups shipped from other provinces are made from white  jade . They have no handles. The best teacups are made from metal or silver, which are used only for guests and on festival days. The silversmiths from  Derge  are known for their exquisite tea sets. Teapots are typically made from wood or clay, while the better ones are made from lavishly ornamented metals such as copper or brass. [6] 
 The  Dongmo  is a tea-mixing cylinder used for making Tibetan  butter tea . It usually has a volume of around 4 litres and is made from wood ornamented with brass. A whisk is placed in a hole on the top of the Dongmo and, with 15-20 vertical movements, the butter tea emulsifies. [7] 
 
 Monastic kitchens [ edit ] 
 Tibetan monks are self-sufficient. [8]  They cook for themselves and raise money by praying for farmers and nomads or by performing rituals for the well-being of families. In monastery kitchens, large pots are used to make soups. During breaks in religious studies, the monks are served tea and soup. Novice monks walk through the rows and pour tea from richly decorated teapots. [7] 
 
 Etiquette [ edit ] 
 Friendliness, hospitality, generosity and selflessness, derived from the principles of  Tibetan Buddhism , are the basis of local etiquette. Behaviour which is egocentric or egoistic is regarded as inappropriate, and helping/supporting others is idealized. Combined with their belief in  Karma  - that everything that happens in life has a source in actions committed in the past - they easily process a loss, sickness or great misfortune as they believe this relieves them from the effects of past actions.
 Guests witness this attitude. Upon arriving, a guest receives a  Khata  - a white silk scarf - that symbolizes joy for the visit and reverence for the guest. After entering, a guest's comfort and well-being is cared for in every way, including cooking. The guest may be offered tea, but instead of accepting immediately, the guest is culturally expected to politely decline - the guest too has to be exemplary. Without hesitating, the host (customarily the woman of the house) immediately serves the tea. The host pours and hands over the cup with both hands as a sign of respect. In the common protocol, the guest only takes a small sip before putting the cup down. The host will fill up the cup and ask the guest to drink again. This is repeated two more times before the guest empties the cup slowly. If the guest leaves the cup filled without drinking, this is regarded as a signal of contentment. Without asking, the cup will be taken away and the guest will often be offered  Chang  (barley beer). At the table, expectations are that individuals sit cross-legged, and it is considered impolite to stretch one's legs. In addition, one should never pass over body parts of another. [ citation needed ]  Pastries may be served with tea. Offered a meal, the guest may politely refuse at first. Upon subsequent offering, the host may find out what the guest wants.
 The goal of every host is to create a relaxed atmosphere and to give joy and pleasure. [9] 
 
 Dishes [ edit ] 
 Main article:  List of Tibetan dishes 
   Tibetan snack  Sha Phaley  in  Nepal 
   Tibetan kitchen items including a small  butter churn  with shoulder strap, suitable for  nomadic  life, cooking pot, bowls, and spoons 
 Other Tibetan foods include:
 
 Sha Phaley  - bread stuffed with seasoned beef and cabbage, which is then fashioned into semi-circular or circular shapes and which, according to regional variations, is either deep fried or pan fried like  pot stickers . 
 Balep korkun  - a central Tibetan  flatbread  cooked on a skillet rather than in an oven. 
 Tingmo (food)  - a type of steamed bun, a heavier version of the Han Chinese  baozi . 
 Thenthuk  - a type of cold-weather  soup  made with noodles and various vegetables. 
 Shab Ta  - Stir-fried meat tossed with celery, carrots and fresh green chili. 
 Gyurma  (Juema) - a  blood sausage  with yak or sheep's blood and roasted barley flour or rice as filler 
 Sokham Bexe  - fried dough, with butter and minced meat. It is said to be a favourite of the  Dalai Lama  and the  Panchen Lama . 
 Dtowa Katsa  - stewed  tripe , with  curry ,  fennel ,  monosodium glutamate  and  salt . [10] 
 Lunggoi Katsa  -  stewed  sheep's head, with  curry ,  fennel ,  monosodium glutamate  and salt. [10] 
 Tu (cake)  - a cheese cake pastry made with  yak butter ,  brown sugar  and water. [10] 
 Masan  - a pastry, made with  tsampa , dry cubic or curd cheese,  yak butter ,  brown sugar  and water. [10] 
 Xogoi Momo  - a type of  momo  using  mashed potato  with dough, shaped into balls, with a  minced meat  filling, served with  bread crumbs . [10] 
 Samkham Papleg  - fried dough with  yak butter  or  rapeseed oil . [11] 
 Gyabrag ,  Chetang Goiche . 
 Cheser Mog ,  Zhoima Mogu . 
 Yurla 
 Zhoixo 
 Chexo 
 Gyatog 
 Gyaho 
 Xabbatog 
 Gong'a Momo 
 Xab Momo 
 Xab Pagri 
 Gundain 
 Qoiri [12] 
 Léphing  - a spicy  mung bean  noodle dish sold by street vendors ( street food ). 
 Lo Khatsa 
 
 Breads and fried dough foods [ edit ] 
 Papza Mogu  -  dough  balls with  melted   butter ,  brown sugar , and dry  curd cheese . They have a sweet and sour taste and are red in color. [11] 
 Soups [ edit ] 
 De-Thuk  - a type of gruel that includes yak or sheep stock along with rice, different types of Tibetan cheeses. Similar to Cantonese rice congee 
 Tsam-thuk  - a type of gruel that uses yak or sheep stock and roasted barley flour as well as a variety of Tibetan cheeses. 
 Thukpa bhatuk  - a common Tibetan noodle soup made with little  bhasta  noodles. 
 Sweet foods [ edit ] 
 Day-see  - a Tibetan sweet dish with rice cooked in unsalted butter and mixed with raisins, droma (gourd shaped root found), dates and nuts. This dish is usually served only on Losar (Tibetan New Year). 
 Khapsey  - Tibetan cookies or biscuits that are deep fried and made during celebrations such as the Tibetan New Year or weddings. Khapseys are fashioned into many different intricate shapes and textures. Some are sprinkled with powdered sugar while other shapes such as the donkey ear-shaped khapseys are used for decoration. [13] 
 Desserts [ edit ] 
 Thue [14] 
 Holiday dishes [ edit ] 
 Guthuk  - is traditionally eaten before  Losar 
 Khapse  - pastries for Losar called  nyapsha [15] 
 Changkol (food) [16] 
 Cheeses, yogurt and butter [ edit ] 
   A type of  Tibetan cheese 
 Tibetan cheeses ,  yogurt  and  butter  are staples. Varieties include soft  cheese curds  resembling  cottage cheese  made from  buttermilk  called  chura loenpa  (or ser). [17]  Hard cheese is called  chura kampo . Extra hard cheese, made from solidified  yogurt , is called  chhurpi , and is also found in  Sikkim  and  Nepal . [18]  Another type of cheese called  shosha  or  churul , with a flavor said to resemble  Limburger  is also eaten. It is made from  cream  and the  skin of milk . [17] 
 
 Beverages [ edit ] 
Most Tibetans drink many cups of yak  butter tea  daily [ citation needed ] . Jasmine  tea  is also sometimes available. Brick tea  is made by methods only distantly related to those employed in China or Sri Lanka (Ceylon). When the water boils, a great handful of the stuff is crumbled into it and allowed to stew for between five and ten minutes, until the whole infusion is so opaque that it looks almost black. At this stage a pinch of salt is added; the Tibetans always put salt, never sugar, in their tea. I have been told that they sometimes add a little  soda , in order to give the beverage a pinkish tinge, but I never saw this done in  Sikang . They very seldom, on the other hand, drink tea without butter in it. If you are at home, you empty the saucepan into a big wooden churn, straining the tea through a colander made of reed or horsehair. Then you drop a large lump of butter into it, and, after being vigorously stirred, this brew is transferred to a huge copper teapot and put on a brazier to keep it hot. When you are traveling, you do not normally take a churn with you, so everyone fills his wooden bowl with tea, scoops a piece of butter out of a basket, puts it in the bowl, stirs the mixture gently with his finger, and, finally, drinks the tea. [19] 
 Butter tea is the national beverage. It is ideal in the extreme climatic and geographical conditions of the Tibetan plateau due to its high butter content. [ citation needed ] 
 Although butter tea is the most popular tea, black tea is also fairly popular.
 Jasmine  grows in Eastern Tibet. Most likely, Tibetans took absorbed jasmine tea from the Han Chinese cultural sphere.
 Spice tea is very popular among exiles who live in India and Nepal. It is almost unknown in Tibet. Most likely, it was adopted from Indian culture.
 Dara is the Tibetan word for  buttermilk . It refers to the yogurt drink. It is also used for Indian  Lassi .
 
 Alcoholic beverages [ edit ] 
 Traditionally, Tibetan Buddhism prohibited the consumption of alcoholic beverages. Beer mostly from barley, but rice, wheat, maize, oats and millet are also used in brewing. Chang is consumed through a thin bamboo straw.
 Alcoholic beverages include:
 
 Beer 
 Chang , a beer usually made from barley 
 Pinjopo , a rice wine 
 Ara , distilled or fermented grain alcohol 
 Ingredients [ edit ] 
 Barley has been a  staple food  since the fifth century AD. [20]  It is made into a flour product called  tsampa  which is still a staple. [21]  The flour is roasted and mixed with butter and  butter tea  to form a stiff dough that is eaten in small balls.
 
 References [ edit ] 
 Citations [ edit ] 
 
 
 ^   Geoffrey, Barstow (2013).  "Food of Sinful Demons: A History of Vegetarianism in Tibet" .  UVA Library | Virgo . Retrieved  25 April  2018 . 
 
 ^   "Administrative Division" .  Tibet Facts & Figures 2007 .  China Internet Information Center . 24 April 2008 . Retrieved  1 November  2010 . 
 
 ^   Tibetan Marches .  André Migot . Translated from the French by  Peter Fleming , p. 103. (1955). E. P. Dutton & Co. Inc. New York. 
 
 ^   Mendrong, Tsering (2006).  Tibetisch kochen - Gerichte und ihre Geschichte . Die Werkstatt GmbH. p. 16.  ISBN   978-3-89533-520-4 . 
 
 ^   Tamang, Jyoti Prakash (2009).  Himalayan Fermented Foods: Microbiology, Nutrition, and Ethnic Values .  CRC Press . p.  9 .  ISBN   9781420093247 . 
 
 ^   Mendrong, Tsering (2006).  Tibetisch kochen - Gerichte und ihre Geschichte . Die Werkstatt GmbH. p. 19.  ISBN   978-3-89533-520-4 . 
 
 ^  a   b   Mendrong, Tsering (2006).  Tibetisch kochen - Gerichte und ihre Geschichte . Die Werkstatt GmbH. p. 20.  ISBN   978-3-89533-520-4 . 
 
 ^   Dreyfus, Georges B. J. (2003).  The Sound of Two Hands Clapping: The Education of a Tibetan Buddhist Monk . University of California Press. p. 57.  ISBN   978-0520232600 . 
 
 ^   Mendrong, Tsering (2006).  Tibetisch kochen - Gerichte und ihre Geschichte . Die Werkstatt GmbH. p. 22.  ISBN   978-3-89533-520-4 . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   e   Li, Tao; Jiang, Hongying (2003).  Tibetan customs . 五洲传播出版社. p. 35.  ISBN   978-7-5085-0254-0 . 
 
 ^  a   b   Li, Tao; Jiang, Hongying (2003).  Tibetan customs . 五洲传播出版社. p. 36.  ISBN   978-7-5085-0254-0 . 
 
 ^   Li, Tao; Jiang, Hongying (2003).  Tibetan customs . 五洲传播出版社. pp. 34–40.  ISBN   978-7-5085-0254-0 . 
 
 ^   Norbu, Jamyang.  "Dipping a Donkey-Ear in Butter Tea" .  Shadow Tibet . Retrieved  3 March  2011 . 
 
 ^   "Thue: An Original Tibetan Treat" . 
 
 ^   "Khapse Recipe: How to Make Tibetan Losar Pastries" . 23 December 2012 . Retrieved  4 October  2016 . 
 
 ^   "Changkol Recipe: To Start Losar Morning off Right" . 
 
 ^  a   b   Food in Tibetan Life
 By Rinjing Dorfe, pp. 93, 96 
 
 ^   Allen, Bryan; Allen, Silvia.  "Mozzarella of the East (Cheese-making and Bai culture)"   (PDF) . SIL International . Retrieved  4 February  2010 . 
 
 ^   Tibetan Marches . André Migot. Translated from the French by Peter Fleming, pp. 102-3. (1955). E. P. Dutton & Co. Inc. New York. 
 
 ^   Fernandez, Felipe Armesto (2001).  Civilizations: Culture, Ambition and the Transformation of Nature . p. 265.  ISBN   0-7432-1650-4 . 
 
 ^   Dreyer, June Teufel; Sautman, Barry (2006).  Contemporary Tibet : politics, development, and society in a disputed region . Armonk, New York: Sharpe. p. 262.  ISBN   0-7656-1354-9 . 
 
 
 Sources [ edit ] 
 
 "Brick Tea and Tsampa" in  Tibetan Marches , pp. 99–104. André Migot. Translated from the French by Peter Fleming, p. 101. (1955). E. P. Dutton & Co. Inc. New York. 
 Bruno J. Richtsfeld: Tee und Teekultur in Tibet. In: Markus Mergenthaler (Hg.): TeeWege. Historie/Kultur/Genuss. Dettelbach 2013, S. 28–77,  ISBN   9783897544376 
 Tsering Mendrong: Tibetisch kochen - Gerichte und ihre Geschichte. Die Werkstatt GmbH 2006,  ISBN   978-3-89533-520-4 
 
 External links [ edit ] 
  Media related to  Cuisine of Tibet  at Wikimedia Commons 
 v t e Tibet   articles History Overviews 
 Timeline 
 List of rulers 
 European exploration 
 Historical money 
 Chronology 
 Prehistory  (Neolithic) 
 Zhangzhung 
 Yarlung dynasty 
 Empire  (7th–9th century) 
 Timeline 
 List of emperors 
 Lönchen 
 Relations with Tang  (618–907) 
 Era of Fragmentation  (9th–11th century) 
 Guge kingdom 
 Tsongkha 
 Yuan dynasty rule  (1270–1350) 
 Bureau of Buddhist and Tibetan Affairs 
 Phagmodrupa dynasty 
 Relations with Ming  (1368–1644) 
 Rinpungpa dynasty 
 Tsangpa dynasty 
 Ganden Phodrang 
 Kashag 
 Khoshut Khanate 
 Qing dynasty rule  (1720–1912) 
 Lifan Yuan 
 List of Qing ambans 
 Post-Qing to 1950 
 Tibetan Army 
 People's Republic of China (PRC) rule 
 PRC annexation 
 political leaders 
 Wars and conflicts 
 Tibetan attack on Songzhou 
 Battle of Dafei River 
 Mongol invasions of Tibet 
 Tibet–Ladakh–Mughal War 
 Battle of Dartsedo 
 Battle of the Salween River 
 Chinese expedition to Tibet (1720) 
 Jinchuan campaigns 
 Lhasa riot of 1750 
 Sino-Nepalese War 
 Dogra–Tibetan War 
 Third Nepal–Tibet War 
 Sikkim expedition 
 British expedition to Tibet 
 Batang uprising 
 Chinese expedition to Tibet (1910) 
 Xinhai Lhasa turmoil 
 Sino-Tibetan War 
 Qinghai–Tibet War 
 1938–1939 German expedition to Tibet 
 1939 Japanese expedition to Tibet 
 Battle of Chamdo 
 Protests and uprisings since 1950 
 1959 Tibetan uprising 
 1987–1989 Tibetan unrest 
 2008 Tibetan unrest 
 Self-immolation protests by Tibetans in China 
 Special Frontier Force 
 Documents 
 Treaty of Tingmosgang (1684) 
 Treaty of Chushul (1842) 
 Treaty of Thapathali (1856) 
 Treaty of Lhasa (1904) 
 Convention Between Great Britain and China Respecting Tibet (1906) 
 Treaty of friendship and alliance with Mongolia (1913) 
 Simla Accord (1914) 
 Seventeen Point Agreement (1951) 
 Sino-Indian Trade Agreement over Tibetan Border (1954) 
 70,000 Character Petition (1962) 
 Memorandum on Genuine Autonomy  (2008) 
 Geography 
 Flora 
 Fauna 
 Environment 
 
 Mountains 
 Kailash 
 Lhotse  /  Changtse 
 Namcha Barwa 
 Tanggula 
 Rivers
 Yarlung Tsangpo 
 Grand Canyon 
 Rongbuk Glacier 
 Tibetan Plateau 
 Changtang 
 Nature Reserve 
 Valleys 
 Traditional regions 
 Amdo 
 Kham 
 Ü-Tsang 
 Ngari 
 Politics 
 Tibet Autonomous Region  (TAR) 
 Central Tibetan Administration 
 Parliament 
 Etymology of Tibet 
 Foreign relations 
 Human rights 
 LGBT 
 Patron and priest relationship 
 Golden Urn 
 Tibet Area 
 Independence movement 
 Serfdom controversy 
 Serfs' Emancipation Day 
 Sovereignty debate 
 CIA Tibetan program 
 India–Tibet relations 
 Government 
 Regional Government 
 TAR People's Government 
 TAR People's Congress 
 Economy 
 Postage and postal history 
 Qinghai-Tibet Highway 
 Qinghai–Tibet railway 
 Society 
 Education 
 Languages 
 Religion 
 Bon 
 Tibetan Buddhism 
 Sakya 
 Imperial Preceptor 
 Dpon-chen 
 Nyingma 
 Kagyu 
 Jonang 
 Gelug 
 Ganden Tripa 
 Dalai Lama 
 list 
 Lhamo La-tso 
 Panchen Lama 
 list 
 Islam 
 Sinicization 
 Social classes 
 Tibetan people 
 Changpa 
 Yolmo 
 Diaspora 
 Names 
 Culture 
 Art 
 rugs 
 thangka 
 tsakli 
 sand mandala 
 wall paintings 
 Calendar 
 Cuisine 
 Dzong architecture 
 Emblem 
 Festivals 
 Flag 
 Historical and cultural sites 
 Khata   (ceremonial scarf) 
 Literature 
 Annals 
 Chronicle 
 writers 
 Music 
 Tibetology 
 Traditional medicine 
 Outline Index 
 Category 
 v t e Cuisines Continental 
 African 
 North 
 West 
 list 
 Americas 
 Caribbean 
 North 
 South 
 list 
 Asian 
 Caucasian 
 Central 
 Indian subcontinent 
 Levantine 
 list 
 European 
 Balkan 
 Central 
 Eastern 
 list 
 Oceanic 
 Intercontinental
 Global 
 Latin American 
 Mediterranean 
 Middle Eastern 
 National  and regional 
 Afghan 
 Albanian 
 Algerian 
 American 
 Californian 
 Floribbean 
 Hawaiian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Lowcountry (South Carolina) 
 New England 
 New Mexico 
 Pacific Northwest 
 Pennsylvania Dutch 
 Puerto Rican 
 Southern US 
 Southwest US 
 Texas 
 Angolan 
 Argentine 
 Armenian 
 Australian 
 Austrian 
 Azerbaijani 
 Bahraini 
 Bangladeshi 
 Barbadian 
 Belarusian 
 Belgian 
 Belizean 
 Beninese 
 Bhutanese 
 Bolivian 
 Bosnian-Herzegovinian 
 Botswana 
 Brazilian 
 British 
 Channel Islands 
 English 
 Gibraltarian 
 Northern Irish 
 Saint Helena 
 Scottish 
 Welsh 
 Bruneian 
 Bulgarian 
 Burkinabé 
 Burmese 
 Burundian 
 Cambodian 
 Cameroonian 
 Canadian 
 Acadian 
 Québécois 
 Central African Republic 
 Chadian 
 Chilean 
 Chinese 
 Cantonese 
 Hong Kong 
 Macanese 
 Tibetan 
 Xinjiang 
 Colombian 
 Congolese 
 Corsican 
 Croatian 
 Cuban 
 Cypriot 
 Czech 
 Danish 
 Faroese 
 Greenlandic 
 Djiboutian 
 Dominican 
 Dominican Republic 
 Dutch 
 East Timorese 
 Ecuadorian 
 Egyptian 
 Emirati 
 Equatorial Guinean 
 Eritrean 
 Estonian 
 Ethiopian 
 Fijian 
 Filipino 
 Finnish 
 French 
 Occitan 
 French Guianan 
 Gabonese 
 Gambian 
 Georgian 
 German 
 Ghanaian 
 Greek 
 Cretan 
 Epirotic 
 Greek Macedonian 
 Heptanesean 
 Guatemalan 
 Guinea-Bissauan 
 Guinean 
 Haitian 
 Honduran 
 Hungarian 
 Icelandic 
 Indian 
 Arunachalese 
 Assamese 
 Bengali 
 Bihari 
 Goan 
 Gujarati 
 Himachal Pradesh 
 Kashmiri 
 Jharkhandi 
 Karnataka 
 Kerala 
 Maharashtrian 
 Manipuri 
 Meghalayan 
 Mizo 
 Naga 
 Odia 
 Punjabi 
 Rajasthani 
 Sikkimese 
 Sindhi 
 Tamil 
 Telangana 
 Telugu 
 Indonesian 
 Acehnese 
 Balinese 
 Banjar 
 Batak 
 Betawi 
 Indo 
 Javanese 
 Madurese 
 Makassar 
 Minahasan 
 Minangkabau 
 Palembangese 
 Sundanese 
 Iranian 
 Iraqi 
 Irish 
 Israeli 
 Italian 
 Abruzzese 
 Ligurian 
 Lombard 
 Lucanian 
 Neapolitan 
 Roman 
 Sardinian 
 Sicilian 
 Venetian 
 Ivorian 
 Jamaican 
 Japanese 
 Okinawan 
 Jordanian 
 Kazakh 
 Kenyan 
 Korean 
 North Korean 
 South Korean 
 Kosovan 
 Kuwaiti 
 Kyrgyz 
 Lao 
 Latvian 
 Lebanese 
 Lesotho 
 Liberian 
 Libyan 
 Liechtensteiner 
 Lithuanian 
 Luxembourg 
 Macedonian 
 Malagasy 
 Malawian 
 Malaysian 
 Sabahan 
 Sarawakian 
 Maldivian 
 Malian 
 Maltese 
 Mauritanian 
 Mauritian 
 Mexican 
 Moldovan 
 Monégasque 
 Mongolian 
 Montenegrin 
 Moroccan 
 Mozambican 
 Namibian 
 Nauruan 
 Nepalese 
 New Zealand 
 Nicaraguan 
 Niger 
 Nigerian 
 Niuean 
 Norwegian 
 Omani 
 Pakistani 
 Palestinian 
 Panamanian 
 Peruvian 
 Polish 
 Portuguese 
 Qatari 
 Romanian  (incl.  Transylvanian Saxon ) 
 Russian 
 Bashkir 
 Chechen 
 Circassian 
 Komi 
 Mordovian 
 Sakha 
 Tatar 
 Udmurt 
 Yamal 
 Rwandan 
 Saint Lucian 
 Salvadoran 
 Sammarinese 
 São Tomé and Príncipe 
 Saudi Arabian 
 Senegalese 
 Serbian 
 Seychellois 
 Sierra Leonean 
 Singaporean 
 Slovak 
 Slovenian 
 Somali 
 South African 
 Spanish 
 Andalusian 
 Asturian 
 Balearic 
 Basque 
 Canarian 
 Cantabrian 
 Catalan 
 Extremaduran 
 Galician 
 Manchegan 
 Valencian 
 Sri Lankan 
 Sudanese 
 Swazi 
 Swedish 
 Swiss 
 Syrian 
 Taiwanese 
 Tajik 
 Tanzanian 
 Zanzibari 
 Thai 
 Togolese 
 Tunisian 
 Turkish 
 Turkmen 
 Trinidadian and Tobagonian 
 Ugandan 
 Ukrainian 
 Uruguayan 
 Uzbek 
 Venezuelan 
 Vietnamese 
 Western Saharan 
 Yemeni 
 Zambian 
 Zimbabwean 
 Ethnic 
 Ainu 
 Arab 
 Indonesian 
 Aromanian 
 Assyrian 
 Balochi 
 Berber 
 Cajun 
 Chinese 
 American 
 Canadian 
 Chifa 
 Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Crimean Tatar 
 Greek American 
 Hazaragi 
 Indian 
 Anglo-Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Indigenous American 
 Inuit 
 Italian American 
 Kurdish 
 Livonian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Malay 
 Ossetian 
 Parsi 
 Pashtun 
 Peranakan 
 Romani 
 Sámi 
 Soul food 
 Sylheti 
 Transylvanian Saxon 
 Yup'ik 
 Religious 
 Buddhist 
 Christian 
 Goan Catholic 
 Mangalorean Catholic 
 Mennonite 
 Hindu 
 Islamic 
 Chinese 
 Ital 
 Jain 
 Jewish 
 American 
 Ashkenazi 
 Bukharan 
 Ethiopian 
 Mizrahi 
 Sephardic 
 Syrian 
 Ritual slaughter 
 Sikh 
 Historical 
 Ancient Egyptian 
 Ancient Greek 
 Ancient Israelite 
 Ancient Roman 
 Antebellum America 
 Aztec 
 Byzantine 
 Early modern European 
 Historical Chinese 
 Historical Indian subcontinent 
 Historical North Indian and Pakistani 
 History of agriculture 
 History of alcoholic drinks 
 History of bread 
 History of seafood 
 History of vegetarianism 
 Historical Argentine 
 Historical Japanese 
 Inca 
 Mayan 
 Muisca 
 Mughal 
 Medieval 
 Ottoman 
 Peasant 
 Soviet 
 Thirteen Colonies 
 Styles 
 Classique 
 Fast food 
 Fusion 
 New American 
 Eurasian 
 Haute 
 Molecular gastronomy 
 Note by Note 
 Nouvelle 
 Lists 
 List of cuisines 
 List of historical cuisines 
 Lists of prepared foods 
 Related 
 Cookbook 
 Cooking 
 Culinary arts 
 Drink 
 Food 
 history 
 Diet 
 Meal preparation 
 
   Food portal 
   Drink portal 
   Category 
   Commons 
   Cookbook 
   WikiProject 
   Outline 
 
 Authority control   National libraries 
 France 
 BnF data 
 Israel 
 United States 
 Other 
 IdRef 
 
  
NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw2271
Cached time: 20230310195001
Cache expiry: 1814400
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc, no‐toc‐conversion]
CPU time usage: 0.795 seconds
Real time usage: 1.017 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3330/1000000
Post‐expand include size: 162073/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 18815/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 28/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 77504/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.433/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 22142033/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/400
 
 
Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  789.781      1 -total
 23.28%  183.856      1 Template:Reflist
 22.20%  175.299      1 Template:Tibet_related_articles
 21.59%  170.547      1 Template:Country_topics
 13.41%  105.933      1 Template:Transl
 12.70%  100.303      7 Template:Cite_web
  7.63%   60.290      3 Template:Citation_needed
  7.01%   55.348      1 Template:Short_description
  6.48%   51.196     11 Template:Cite_book
  6.38%   50.358      3 Template:Fix
 
  Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:idhash:5154680-0!canonical and timestamp 20230310195000 and revision id 1139810812. Rendering was triggered because: page-view
  
 esi <esi:include src="/esitest-fa8a495983347898/content" />  
 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Tibetan_cuisine&oldid=1139810812 " 
 Categories :  Tibetan cuisine Cuisine by ethnicity Regional cuisines of China Hidden categories:  Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from June 2020 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2017 Articles with unsourced statements from January 2018 Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with BNF identifiers Articles with J9U identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers Articles with SUDOC identifiers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  This page was last edited on 17 February 2023, at 01:02  (UTC) . 
 Text is available under the  Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0 ;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the  Terms of Use  and  Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the  Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. 
 
 
 Privacy policy 
 About Wikipedia 
 Disclaimers 
 Contact Wikipedia 
 Mobile view 
 Developers 
 Statistics 
 Cookie statement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
