
 
 
 Jump to content 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle sidebar 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Create account Log in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Personal tools 
 
 
 
 
   Create account   Log in 
 
 
 
 
		Pages for logged out editors  learn more 
 
 
 Contributions Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Navigation 
 
 
 Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate 
 
 
 
 
 Contribute 
 
 
 Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file 
 
 
 
 
 Tools 
 
 
 What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item 
 
 
 
 
 Print/export 
 
 
 Download as PDF Printable version 
 
 
 
 
 In other projects 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons Wikibooks 
 
 
 
 
 Languages 
 
 On this Wikipedia the language links are at the top of the page across from the article title.  Go to top . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CentralNotice  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Contents 
 move to sidebar 
 hide 
 
 
 
 
 (Top) 
 
 
 
 
 
 1 Main meals 
 
 
				Toggle Main meals subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 1.1 Breakfast dishes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.2 Lunch and dinner 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.3 Condiments 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.4 Street foods 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.5 Festival foods 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.6 Sweets 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 Beverages 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 Fruits 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4 See also 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5 References 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
						Toggle the table of contents
					 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle the table of contents 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Trinidad and Tobago cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 6 languages 
 
 
 
 Čeština Deutsch Français 한국어 Italiano ქართული 
 Edit links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Article Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 English 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 More 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
 
 
 Culinary traditions of Trinidad and Tobago 
 This article  needs additional citations for  verification .  Please help  improve this article  by  adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources:   "Trinidad and Tobago cuisine"  –  news   ·   newspapers   ·   books   ·   scholar   ·   JSTOR   ( March 2013 )  ( Learn how and when to remove this template message ) 
 This article or section should  specify the language  of its non-English content, using {{ lang }}, {{ transliteration }} for transliterated languages, and {{ IPA }} for phonetic transcriptions, with an appropriate  ISO 639 code . Wikipedia's  multilingual support templates  may also be used.   See why .   ( November 2021 ) 
 Part of  a series  on the Culture of Trinidad and Tobago 
 History 
 People 
 Languages 
 Tobagonian Creole 
 Trinidadian Creole 
 Trinidadian English 
 Trinidadian Hindustani 
 Chinese 
 Arabic 
 Carib 
 Yoruba 
 Portuguese 
 Spanish 
 French Creole 
 
 Cuisine 
 Festivals 
 Carnival 
 Canboulay 
 Hosay 
 Diwali 
 Phagwah 
 Indian Arrival Day 
 Emancipation Day 
 Independence Day 
 Republic Day 
 
 Religion 
 Christianity 
 Hinduism 
 Islam 
 Spiritual Baptist 
 Rastafari movement 
 
 Art 
 Literature 
 Writers 
 
 Music 
 Media 
 Radio 
 Television 
 
 Sport 
 Symbols 
 Flag 
 Coat of arms 
 National anthem 
 
   Trinidad and Tobago portal v t e 
   Location of Trinidad and Tobago 
 Trinidad and Tobago has a unique history and its food is influenced by  Indian - South Asian ,  West African ,  Creole ,  European ,  American ,  Chinese ,  Amerindian , and  Latin American   culinary styles. Trinidad and Tobagonian food is dominated by a wide selection of seafood dishes, most notably, curried crab and dumplings. Trinidad and Tobago is also known for its prepared provisions, such as dasheen (taro root), sweet potato, eddoe, cassava, yam, soups and stews, also known as blue food across the country. Corresponding to the Blue Food Day event held annually in Trinidad and Tobago. [ citation needed ] 
 
 
 Main meals [ edit ] 
 Breakfast dishes [ edit ] 
 This section  needs additional citations for  verification .  Please help  improve this article  by  adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources:   "Trinidad and Tobago cuisine"  –  news   ·   newspapers   ·   books   ·   scholar   ·   JSTOR   ( October 2022 )  ( Learn how and when to remove this template message ) 
   Doubles 
 Popular breakfast foods include  doubles ;  roti  (usually  sada roti [1] ) served with a variety of curried, roasted or fried vegetable dishes;  fried bake  served with  saltfish , meat, or vegetable dishes; and coconut bake (coconut bread) served with a range of fillings.
 Doubles  is made with two  baras  (flat fried dough) and  curried   channa  ( chickpeas ) and is served with toppings, like  pepper sauce ,  kuchela , and  tamarind ,  mango ,  pommecythere ,  cucumber , and  bandhaniya   chutneys . It is one of the most popular breakfast foods eaten on the islands, however, it is eaten at any time throughout the day.
 A traditional Indo-Trinidadian and Tobagonian breakfast consists of  sada  roti , a type of unleavened bread made with flour, baking powder and water. The dough is rolled out and cooked on flat, cast-iron skillet, called a  tawa . The cooked dough is cut into quarters and served with a variety of fried vegetables,  tarkaris  or chokhas. [2]  Sometimes  fried bake  is eaten instead and is made using with flour, baking powder and yeast and is then fried in oil. Usually breakfast is vegetarian, however  salt fish  is sometimes added. Some breakfast dishes include  baigan chokha  (roasted and mashed  eggplant ),  damadol chokha [3]  (roasted and mashed  tomatoes ),  pepper chokha  (roasted and mashed peppers),  aloo chokha  (boiled, roasted, and mashed  potatoes ),  karaili chokha  (roasted and mashed  bittermelon ),  murtani  or  upar ghar  (combination of roasted and mashed eggplant, tomato, pepper, and okra), fried or  curried   bodi  ( long beans ), fried or curried aloo (potatoes), fried or curried  ochro/bhindhi  (okra), fried or curried  seim  ( hyacinth beans ), fried or curried  karaili  ( bittermelon ), pumpkin or  kohra   tarkari  (pumpkin simmered with spices and seasoning), fried or curried  saijan  ( drumstick ), fried or curried  lauki  ( bottle gourd ),  bhaji  (made with young  dasheen bush (taro)  leaves,  spinach  leaves,  saijan (drumstick)  leaves, or  chaurai (spiny amaranth)  leaves), and/or fried  plantains .
 Fried bake  (a fried  unleavened bread ) is usually served with fried shark, saltfish ( dried and salted cod ),  buljol  (saltfish with fresh  sweet peppers , tomatoes,  cucumbers  and sometimes  boiled eggs ),  sardines ,  herring  (smoked, salted, and dried fish),  bacon , fried plantain,  brown stew chicken , or  corned beef  with  onions  and tomatoes.
 Coconut bake (coconut bread) is usually served with fried accra (saltfish  fritters ), buljol,  black pudding , butter, cheese paste (a mixture of cheese, butter, mustard, grated onion, mayonnaise and green seasoning) or stewed meat, like chicken.
 Bake and shark  is a popular breakfast dish at local beaches, like  Maracas Beach  (Trinidad) and Store Bay (Tobago), especially on the weekend.
 Other breakfast foods include tannia cakes (fried  dasheen  cake), and boiled  cassava  with  butter .
 Common hot drinks consumed for breakfast include cocoa tea (hot chocolate) made from homemade cocoa balls, cornmeal porridge and farine (an amerindian treat).
 
 Lunch and dinner [ edit ] 
   Callaloo 
 A very popular and nationally well known dish with distinctly African roots is  callaloo , a  side dish  made of young  dasheen  or  taro  leaves,  okra  known locally as  ochro , crab or pigtails,  pumpkin ,  onions ,  coconut milk ,  pimento , and green seasoning like  chives ,  cilantro  and  culantro  (locally called  chadon beni  from the French name for  Cnicus  thistle "Chardon Bénit" or  bandhaniya  from the Hindi name for  closed cilantro  " ban dhaniya ").
 Callaloo  is often served with  cornmeal   coo coo , [4] [ better source needed ]  plantain, cassava,  sweet potatoes , dumplings, rice, and curried crab.
 This callaloo dish is not the same as Jamaican callaloo which is made with amaranth leaves, onions, garlic and tomatoes.
 Pelau  is a very popular rice-based dish in Trinidad and Tobago, as well as  stewed  chicken,  breadfruit  oil down,  macaroni pie ,  ox-tails ,  dhal  and rice, among many others.
 Trinidad and Tobago dishes are often  curried ,  stewed , or  barbecued . An array of fish and seafood can be bought at local merchants throughout Trinidad and Tobago, such as  flying fish ,  king fish ,  carite ,  prawns ,  sapatay , red fish,  shrimp ,  bonito ,  lobster ,  conch  and  crab ,  tilapia  and seasonal cascadura.
 One of the most popular Trinidadian dishes is curried duck served with either roti or rice. Local curried duck cooking competitions are often held with multiple variations being created. A simple dish to make, but difficult to master,  curried Muscovy  is regarded as a delicacy which can be served at all times.
 A popular Trini dish is  macaroni pie , a  macaroni   pasta  bake, with eggs and  cheese , and a variety of other potential ingredients that can change according to the recipe being used.
 Tobagonian food is dominated by a wide selection of seafood dishes, most notably, curried crab and  dumplings , and Tobago is also known for its sumptuously prepared provisions, such as dasheen ( taro root ),  sweet potato ,  eddoe ,  cassava ,  yam ,  soups  and  stews , also known as  blue food  across the country. "Fish broth" a soup made in the style of  Bouillabaisse  is quite popular as a main dish or as a side.
 Another local dish is the rare delicacy cascadu ( cascadura ), which is a small, freshwater fish. The fish is curried and served with lagoon rice and  cassava  and  yams . There is a local legend in Trinidad that s/he who eats cascadu will return to Trinidad to end their days. [5] 
 
 Condiments [ edit ] 
   Green seasoning in a supermarket 
 Trinidadians accompany their meals with various condiments; these can include pepper sauces, chutneys and pickles and are often homemade.
 Pepper sauces are made by using  scotch bonnet  or other hot peppers, either minced or chopped and other spices. It can sometimes include lime or lemon as well as other vegetables, and come in many variations and flavours. The murtanie (mother-in-law) is another popular condiment which is a coarsely chopped spicy medley of scotch bonnet peppers, carrots,  karaili  ( bitter melon ) and other spices.
 Chutneys  are popular as well and often include chaltar ( dillenia indica ),  mango ,  tamarind ,  cucumber ,  pommecythère ,  bandhaniya ,  dhaniya ,  tomato , and  coconut . They are most commonly eaten with  doubles ,  aloo pie ,  saheena , baiganee,  kachori , and  pholourie . There are a variety of popular pickles known locally as  Achar  which are commonly used.  Kuchela  a grated spicy version, usually made from mango but sometimes made from  pommecythère , the Mango version being most popular. Other version of Achars are made from mango,  pommecythère , tamarind,  amla ,  lemon ,  lime , and  chulta .
 Green seasoning is extremely popular, a cold sauce based on culantro or chadon beni, pureed with green onions, garlic, pimento, vinegar, and other herbs, which can be used as a table condiment or marinade.
 
 Street foods [ edit ] 
   Food stalls in  Debe 
 Popular freshly prepared  street foods  include:
 
 Indo-Trinidadian and Tobagonian  foods like  doubles , [6]   aloo pie , [7]   pholourie , saheena, baiganee,  bara , and  kachori  are popular street foods throughout the country. Another Indo-Trinidadian and Tobagonian street food that is popular is  wrap roti , which consists of  roti  (usually  paratha  or dhalpuri) that wraps curried vegetables, curried channa (chickpeas) and aloo (potatoes), curried chicken, curried shrimp, curried goat, curried duck, curried conchs, or any other spicy fillings.  Indian sweets  are also popular, especially around  Hindu holidays .  Debe  in South Trinidad is a popular destination for these foods. 
 Bake and shark  (most popular at  Maracas Beach  along the north coast of Trinidad) is a fried dish that is topped with fresh fruit like pineapple;  vegetables like cucumber and salad; and a variety of sauces and seasonings. 
 Souse is made from pig, cow or chicken feet or cucumbers and seasoned with onion, garlic, salt, pimento, scotch bonnet peppers, lemon and chadon beni. It is served warm (mostly) or slightly chilled (room temperature). It is also rumoured to be a cure to hangovers. 
 Other common street foods include  wontons ,  corn soup ,  geera (cumin) pork , geera chicken,  kebabs ,  gyros ,  pasteles , raw  oysters  (usually sold at stalls where there is a lighted kerosene torch or  flambeau , with a spicy sweet/hot sauce mainly with  cilantro  or  bandhaniya aka shadon beni aka culantro ),  fish pies ,  macaroni pies , cheese pies,  beef  pies (many Trinidadian neighbourhoods boast a local pie-man), and pows (Cantonese pao-tzu < baozi, steamed wrapped roll with savoury or sweet filling – steamed buns filled with meat, typically  char siu  pork).  Sausage rolls  are also eaten as midday snacks and are available at stands usually found along the nation's streets.
 
   Cooking Trinidadian Souse 
 When in season, roast and boiled corn on the cob can be found any time day or night.
 On festive occasions (Carnival, Borough Day and most public holidays), street foods also include wild meat such as deer,  iguana , manicou ( phalangeriformes ), tatou ( armadillo ), and  agouti , to name a few. These are prepared either as a creole or curry dish, and served with a wide choice of local pepper sauces.
 On hot days, locals enjoy  ice cream ,  snow cones  (served in various colours, flavours and shapes, often sweetened with  condensed milk ),  ice pops ,  kulfi , freezies, sucker bag,  coconut  slushies,  coconut water , and fresh  coconut   jelly .
 
 Festival foods [ edit ] 
   Diwali  meal consisting of curry channa and aloo, curried mango, bhaji,  karhi , rice, mother-in-law and  paratha  roti. 
 Special  Christmas  foods include appetisers like  pastelles  (called  hallaca  in  Venezuela  where they originated),  pholourie , saheena, baiganee,  kachori , and chicken or pork pies. Entrees include garlic ham ( carne vinha-d'alhos , a  Portuguese  dish), baked  ham , baked  turkey  or chicken,  macaroni pie ,  fish pie , garlic roasted potatoes, grilled or barbecued meat (chicken, shrimp, fish, or lamb),  corn ,  pigeon peas , Christmas (also called Spanish or festive) rice,  fried rice ,  chow mein ,  lo mein , Chinese roast chicken, pepper shrimp, different types of  curries  (chicken,  goat , duck, fish, shrimp, crab, baigan, channa and aloo),  roti , and  dal bhat (rice) . Desserts include  fruitcake ,  blackcake (rum cake) , sweet bread, cassava pone, coconut drops, sponge cake, chocolate cake,  Dundee cake , raisin/currants roll,  khurma , and  gulab jamun . Drinks include soda,  coconut water , juices (mango, orange, or cranberry),  ginger beer ,  ponche crema ,  egg nog ,  cocoa tea , and  sorrel .
 Traditional  Diwali  and other  Hindu festivals  and prayers foods include appetizers such as  pholourie , saheena, baiganee,  bara , and  kachori . Main dishes include  roti  (most commonly dalpuri and  paratha ) and   karhi  and rice served with condiments such as  achar or anchar ,  kuchela , mother-in-law (pickled vegetables),  pepper sauce , and dishes such as  curried  mango, bhaji ( dasheen bush  or any spinach), pumpkin or kohra tarkari (pumpkin), curry channa and aloo ( chickpeas  and  potatoes ), fried or curried  baigan  ( eggplant ), fried or curried  bodi  ( long beans ), fried or curried  seim  ( hyacinth beans ), curry  eddoes , curry chataigne or katahar ( breadnut ), and other  tarkaries  ( vegetarian   curries ). Desserts include  mohan bhog (parsad) ,  lapsi  and suhari,  burfi ,  khurma ,  gulab jamun ,  pera ,  rasgulla , batasa,  gujiya ,  gulgula , roat,  kheer (sweet rice) ,  laddu , and  jalebi . It is traditionally served on a  sohari  ( Calathea lutea ) leaf. [8] 
 Special  Eid ,  Hosay , and other Muslim festival foods include  curry goat , curry channa and aloo,  sawine ,  burfi ,  rasgulla , sirnee,  maleeda ,  halwa , and  baklawa . [ citation needed ] 
 
 Sweets [ edit ] 
 The popular local desserts are usually extremely sweet. Local snacks include cassava or coconut pone and stewed  guavas ,  sweetbread ,  paw paw  balls, tamarind balls, bene balls (sticks or cakes),  toolum ,  guava  cheese (guava paste), jub jub and  sugar cakes ,  nut cake ,  chilli bibi  and brown sugar fudge. Local chocolatiers and confectioners manufacture several different types of sweet treats.  Indian delicacies  like  kheer  (sweet rice or  meetha bhat ),  sawiyan , khurma,  gulab jamoon , roat,  laddu ,  jalebi ,  halwa ,  mohan bhog (parsad) , sirnee,  lapsi  and suhari,  rasgula ,  gulgula ,  rasmalai ,  pera ,  modak , doodhpitty,  gujiya , batasa, and  burfi  are also popular.
 
 Beverages [ edit ] 
   Tamarind drink 
   Coconut water vendor, Port of Spain. 1950s 
 There are many different popular beverages in Trinidad. These include, various sweet drinks [sodas] ( Chubby's ,  Busta ,  LLB (Lemon Lime and Bitters) ,  Solo ,  Peardrax ,  Coca-Cola ,  Fanta ,  Pepsi ,  Dr. Pepper , and  Sprite [9] ),  Malta ,  Smalta ,  Shandy ,  citrus juice ,  ginger beer ,  Guinness Beer ,  peanut punch , channa ( chickpea ) punch, beet punch,  sorrel ,  mauby ,  seamoss  punch,  barbadine  punch,  soursop  punch and paw paw punch.
 Carib  and Stag beers are very popular local lager beers. There is also Carib Light and Carib Shandys, which come in Sorrel, Ginger, and Lime flavours.
 Coconut water  can be found throughout the island. Rum was invented in the Caribbean, therefore Trinidad and Tobago boasts  rum  shops all over the island, serving local favourites such as  ponche-de-crème ,  puncheon rum , and home-made wines from local fruits.
Homemade  alcohol  is popular also.
 Bitters  (especially the one made by  House of Angostura ) is also popular.
 Pacro water is a seafood-based beverage made from boiling various  chiton  mollusks, such as  chiton tuberculatus [10]  but also has other culinary uses, such as in  broths  for soup. [11]  The beverage has a reputation as an aphrodisiac, as well as having other therapeutic properties. [12]  Pacro water can sometimes be found at festivals or public celebrations. [13] 
 
   Tobago Cuisine - Pacro Water and Sea Moss drinks 
 Fruits [ edit ] 
 Fruits available in Trinidad include mangoes (e.g. Axe, Bread, Bastapool, Button, Belly-bef, Calabash, Cedar, Cutlass, Doudouce, Egg, Graham,  Bombay ,  Ice Cream ,  Julie , Long, Pawpaw, Peter, Rose, Round, Spice, Starch, Tommy, Teen, Turpentine, Vert, Zabrico),  breadfruit , sorrel ( roselle ),  passion fruit , watermelons, sapodilla ( Manilkara zapota ), pommerac ( Syzygium malaccense ), guavas, pommecythère ( Spondias dulcis ), caimite ( star apple ),  abiu , five fingers ( carambola ), cherries, zaboca ( avocado ), pawpaw ( papaya ), chenette ( Melicoccus bijugatus ),  pineapples ,  oranges , Portugal ( tangerines  of various genetic breeding),  plum  (Governor, King and common variety), West Indian (Barbadian) cherry ( Acerola ),  bananas  (sikyé, silk, Gros Michel, Lacatan),  barbadine  (granadilla),  balatá ,  soursop , cashews, tamarind, Ceres ( Flacourtia indica ),  Pois Doux , Cocorite ( Attalea maripa ), Gru-Gru-beff ( Acrocomia aculeata ), Fat-Pork ( Chrysobalanus icaco ),  pears , and  coconuts  (several varieties). [14] 
 Many fruits available in Trinidad and Tobago are commonly used in a savory and usually spicy delicacy broadly referred to as " chow ". The main ingredients of chow are usually: the fruit of choice,  culantro  (bandhaniya), pepper (powdered, sauce or natural form), salt and sometimes garlic and vinegar. Traditionally, the most popular fruits for chow have been mangoes,  pommeracs ,  pommecythère ,  cucumbers ,  tomatoes ,  cherries ,  pineapples ,  green apples ,  pears , and  plums .
 The fruits are "seasoned" by the rest of the base ingredients and larger fruits (like mango and pineapple) are usually cut up into bite-sized pieces. [15] 
 
 See also [ edit ] 
 
 Food portal Trinidad and Tobago portal 
 Caribbean cuisine 
 Caribbean Chinese cuisine 
 References [ edit ] 
 
 
 ^   "Trinidad Sada Roti (Plain)" . 18 October 2018 . Retrieved  2019-06-26 . 
 
 ^   "Festival of the GIRMITIYAS Arrival Day | Indo American News" . Retrieved  2021-02-26 . 
 
 ^   "Traditional Tomato Choka Recipe" .  Zen Health . 2019-07-08 . Retrieved  2019-10-15 . 
 
 ^   "Cornmeal Coo-Coo II" .  Simply Trini Cooking . 2008-05-30 . Retrieved  2019-10-15 . 
 
 ^   Allsopp, S.R. Richard (1998). In  Dictionary of Caribbean English Usage, with a French and Spanish Supplement .  Oxford University Press .  p. 138.  ISBN   0-19-866152-5 . Google Book Search. Retrieved on November 23, 2007. 
 
 ^   Mohan, Neki (June 28, 2015).  "Street food of Trinidad, Tobago gains popularity in South Florida" .  WPLG . Retrieved  February 9,  2018 . 
 
 ^   "Food in true Trini style" .  Barbados Today . September 2, 2017 . Retrieved  February 9,  2018 . 
 
 ^   "Divali: Destination Trinidad and Tobago | Tours, Holidays, Vacations and Travel Guide" . 
 
 ^   Vanished UK drink is toast of Caribbean , an April 2007 article from the  BBC  website 
 
 ^   Winer, Lise (2010).  Dictionary of the English/Creole of Trinidad & Tobago : on historical principles . Montreal [Que.]: McGill-Queen's University Press. p. 659.  ISBN   9780773576070 . 
 
 ^   De-Light, Dominique (2010).  The Rough Guide to Trinidad & Tobago  (5th ed.). London: Rough Guides.  ISBN   9781405386746 . 
 
 ^   Allsopp, Jeannette (2003).  Dictionary of Caribbean English usage . [Kingston, Jamaica]: University of the West Indies Press. p. 423.  ISBN   9789766401450 . 
 
 ^   "Playing the right tune" .  Trinidad Express Newspapers . Retrieved  19 September  2020 . 
 
 ^   "Trade Winds Fruit Picture Index" .  Tradewindsfruit.com . Retrieved  2 August  2017 . 
 
 ^   "Mango Chow Recipes - Food Network Canada" .  Foodnetwork.ca . Retrieved  2 August  2017 . 
 
 
 v t e Trinidad and Tobago  articles History 
 Spanish missions 
 History of Tobago 
 Spanish West Indies 
 Dutch colonization 
 Curonian colonization 
 French invasion of Tobago (1781) 
 British invasion of Trinidad (1797) 
 Independence Act 
 Monarchy 
 Social unrest 
 Geography 
 Cities and towns 
 Dry forests 
 Moist forests 
 Mangroves 
 Islands 
 Natural history 
 Rivers 
 Wildlife 
 Politics 
 Administrative divisions 
 Attorney General 
 Chief Justice 
 Elections 
 Foreign relations 
 Head of State 
 Human rights 
 Military 
 Parliament 
 Politics 
 Political parties 
 President 
 Prime Minister 
 Trinidad and Tobago cabinet 
 Leader of the Opposition 
 Chief Secretary of Tobago 
 Economy 
 Dollar  (currency) 
 Telecommunications 
 Transportation 
 Society 
 Crime 
 Demographics 
 Education 
 Health 
 LGBT 
 Religion 
 Women 
 Culture 
 Cuisine 
 Flag 
 Literature 
 Media 
 Music 
 Public holidays 
 Outline 
 Category 
 Portal 
 v t e Cuisines Continental 
 African 
 North 
 West 
 list 
 Americas 
 Caribbean 
 North 
 South 
 list 
 Asian 
 Caucasian 
 Central 
 Indian subcontinent 
 Levantine 
 list 
 European 
 Balkan 
 Central 
 Eastern 
 list 
 Oceanic 
 Intercontinental
 Global 
 Latin American 
 Mediterranean 
 Middle Eastern 
 National  and regional 
 Afghan 
 Albanian 
 Algerian 
 American 
 Californian 
 Floribbean 
 Hawaiian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Lowcountry (South Carolina) 
 New England 
 New Mexico 
 Pacific Northwest 
 Pennsylvania Dutch 
 Puerto Rican 
 Southern US 
 Southwest US 
 Texas 
 Angolan 
 Argentine 
 Armenian 
 Australian 
 Austrian 
 Azerbaijani 
 Bahraini 
 Bangladeshi 
 Barbadian 
 Belarusian 
 Belgian 
 Belizean 
 Beninese 
 Bhutanese 
 Bolivian 
 Bosnian-Herzegovinian 
 Botswana 
 Brazilian 
 British 
 Channel Islands 
 English 
 Gibraltarian 
 Northern Irish 
 Saint Helena 
 Scottish 
 Welsh 
 Bruneian 
 Bulgarian 
 Burkinabé 
 Burmese 
 Burundian 
 Cambodian 
 Cameroonian 
 Canadian 
 Acadian 
 Québécois 
 Central African Republic 
 Chadian 
 Chilean 
 Chinese 
 Cantonese 
 Hong Kong 
 Macanese 
 Tibetan 
 Xinjiang 
 Colombian 
 Congolese 
 Corsican 
 Croatian 
 Cuban 
 Cypriot 
 Czech 
 Danish 
 Faroese 
 Greenlandic 
 Djiboutian 
 Dominican 
 Dominican Republic 
 Dutch 
 East Timorese 
 Ecuadorian 
 Egyptian 
 Emirati 
 Equatorial Guinean 
 Eritrean 
 Estonian 
 Ethiopian 
 Fijian 
 Filipino 
 Finnish 
 French 
 Occitan 
 French Guianan 
 Gabonese 
 Gambian 
 Georgian 
 German 
 Ghanaian 
 Greek 
 Cretan 
 Epirotic 
 Greek Macedonian 
 Heptanesean 
 Guatemalan 
 Guinea-Bissauan 
 Guinean 
 Haitian 
 Honduran 
 Hungarian 
 Icelandic 
 Indian 
 Arunachalese 
 Assamese 
 Bengali 
 Bihari 
 Goan 
 Gujarati 
 Himachal Pradesh 
 Kashmiri 
 Jharkhandi 
 Karnataka 
 Kerala 
 Maharashtrian 
 Manipuri 
 Meghalayan 
 Mizo 
 Naga 
 Odia 
 Punjabi 
 Rajasthani 
 Sikkimese 
 Sindhi 
 Tamil 
 Telangana 
 Telugu 
 Indonesian 
 Acehnese 
 Balinese 
 Banjar 
 Batak 
 Betawi 
 Indo 
 Javanese 
 Madurese 
 Makassar 
 Minahasan 
 Minangkabau 
 Palembangese 
 Sundanese 
 Iranian 
 Iraqi 
 Irish 
 Israeli 
 Italian 
 Abruzzese 
 Ligurian 
 Lombard 
 Lucanian 
 Neapolitan 
 Roman 
 Sardinian 
 Sicilian 
 Venetian 
 Ivorian 
 Jamaican 
 Japanese 
 Okinawan 
 Jordanian 
 Kazakh 
 Kenyan 
 Korean 
 North Korean 
 South Korean 
 Kosovan 
 Kuwaiti 
 Kyrgyz 
 Lao 
 Latvian 
 Lebanese 
 Lesotho 
 Liberian 
 Libyan 
 Liechtensteiner 
 Lithuanian 
 Luxembourg 
 Macedonian 
 Malagasy 
 Malawian 
 Malaysian 
 Sabahan 
 Sarawakian 
 Maldivian 
 Malian 
 Maltese 
 Mauritanian 
 Mauritian 
 Mexican 
 Moldovan 
 Monégasque 
 Mongolian 
 Montenegrin 
 Moroccan 
 Mozambican 
 Namibian 
 Nauruan 
 Nepalese 
 New Zealand 
 Nicaraguan 
 Niger 
 Nigerian 
 Niuean 
 Norwegian 
 Omani 
 Pakistani 
 Palestinian 
 Panamanian 
 Peruvian 
 Polish 
 Portuguese 
 Qatari 
 Romanian  (incl.  Transylvanian Saxon ) 
 Russian 
 Bashkir 
 Chechen 
 Circassian 
 Komi 
 Mordovian 
 Sakha 
 Tatar 
 Udmurt 
 Yamal 
 Rwandan 
 Saint Lucian 
 Salvadoran 
 Sammarinese 
 São Tomé and Príncipe 
 Saudi Arabian 
 Senegalese 
 Serbian 
 Seychellois 
 Sierra Leonean 
 Singaporean 
 Slovak 
 Slovenian 
 Somali 
 South African 
 Spanish 
 Andalusian 
 Asturian 
 Balearic 
 Basque 
 Canarian 
 Cantabrian 
 Catalan 
 Extremaduran 
 Galician 
 Manchegan 
 Valencian 
 Sri Lankan 
 Sudanese 
 Swazi 
 Swedish 
 Swiss 
 Syrian 
 Taiwanese 
 Tajik 
 Tanzanian 
 Zanzibari 
 Thai 
 Togolese 
 Tunisian 
 Turkish 
 Turkmen 
 Trinidadian and Tobagonian 
 Ugandan 
 Ukrainian 
 Uruguayan 
 Uzbek 
 Venezuelan 
 Vietnamese 
 Western Saharan 
 Yemeni 
 Zambian 
 Zimbabwean 
 Ethnic 
 Ainu 
 Arab 
 Indonesian 
 Aromanian 
 Assyrian 
 Balochi 
 Berber 
 Cajun 
 Chinese 
 American 
 Canadian 
 Chifa 
 Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Crimean Tatar 
 Greek American 
 Hazaragi 
 Indian 
 Anglo-Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Indigenous American 
 Inuit 
 Italian American 
 Kurdish 
 Livonian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Malay 
 Ossetian 
 Parsi 
 Pashtun 
 Peranakan 
 Romani 
 Sámi 
 Soul food 
 Sylheti 
 Transylvanian Saxon 
 Yup'ik 
 Religious 
 Buddhist 
 Christian 
 Goan Catholic 
 Mangalorean Catholic 
 Mennonite 
 Hindu 
 Islamic 
 Chinese 
 Ital 
 Jain 
 Jewish 
 American 
 Ashkenazi 
 Bukharan 
 Ethiopian 
 Mizrahi 
 Sephardic 
 Syrian 
 Ritual slaughter 
 Sikh 
 Historical 
 Ancient Egyptian 
 Ancient Greek 
 Ancient Israelite 
 Ancient Roman 
 Antebellum America 
 Aztec 
 Byzantine 
 Early modern European 
 Historical Chinese 
 Historical Indian subcontinent 
 Historical North Indian and Pakistani 
 History of agriculture 
 History of alcoholic drinks 
 History of bread 
 History of seafood 
 History of vegetarianism 
 Historical Argentine 
 Historical Japanese 
 Inca 
 Mayan 
 Muisca 
 Mughal 
 Medieval 
 Ottoman 
 Peasant 
 Soviet 
 Thirteen Colonies 
 Styles 
 Classique 
 Fast food 
 Fusion 
 New American 
 Eurasian 
 Haute 
 Molecular gastronomy 
 Note by Note 
 Nouvelle 
 Lists 
 List of cuisines 
 List of historical cuisines 
 Lists of prepared foods 
 Related 
 Cookbook 
 Cooking 
 Culinary arts 
 Drink 
 Food 
 history 
 Diet 
 Meal preparation 
 
   Food portal 
   Drink portal 
   Category 
   Commons 
   Cookbook 
   WikiProject 
   Outline 
 
 v t e North American cuisine Sovereign states 
 Antigua and Barbuda 
 Bahamas 
 Barbados 
 Belize 
 Canada 
 Costa Rica 
 Cuba 
 Dominica 
 Dominican Republic 
 El Salvador 
 Grenada 
 Guatemala 
 Haiti 
 Honduras 
 Jamaica 
 Mexico 
 Nicaragua 
 Panama 
 Saint Kitts and Nevis 
 Saint Lucia 
 Saint Vincent and the Grenadines 
 Trinidad and Tobago 
 United States 
 Dependencies and other territories 
 Anguilla 
 Aruba 
 Bermuda 
 Bonaire 
 British Virgin Islands 
 Cayman Islands 
 Curaçao 
 Greenland 
 Guadeloupe 
 Martinique 
 Montserrat 
 Puerto Rico 
 Saint Barthélemy 
 Saint Martin 
 Saint Pierre and Miquelon 
 Saba 
 Sint Eustatius 
 Sint Maarten 
 Turks and Caicos Islands 
 United States Virgin Islands 
 
   Food portal 
   Category: North American cuisine 
 
 Authority control : National libraries  
 Israel 
 United States 
 
  
NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw2289
Cached time: 20230311110241
Cache expiry: 1814400
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc, no‐toc‐conversion]
CPU time usage: 0.776 seconds
Real time usage: 1.020 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3665/1000000
Post‐expand include size: 173428/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 13342/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 16/100
Expensive parser function count: 54/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 80033/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.388/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 8852613/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/400
 
 
Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  748.032      1 -total
 24.87%  186.068      1 Template:Reflist
 19.25%  144.008      1 Template:Culture_of_Trinidad_and_Tobago
 18.93%  141.637      1 Template:Culture_of_region
 18.41%  137.701      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 15.81%  118.243      1 Template:Trinidad_and_Tobago_topics
 15.69%  117.349     10 Template:Cite_web
 15.50%  115.959      1 Template:Country_topics
  9.62%   71.963      3 Template:Ambox
  8.93%   66.802      1 Template:More_citations_needed
 
  Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:idhash:812522-0!canonical and timestamp 20230311110240 and revision id 1144026052. Rendering was triggered because: api-parse
  
 esi <esi:include src="/esitest-fa8a495983347898/content" />  
 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Trinidad_and_Tobago_cuisine&oldid=1144026052 " 
 Categories :  Trinidad and Tobago cuisine Caribbean cuisine Hidden categories:  Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from March 2013 All articles needing additional references Pages with non-English text lacking appropriate markup and no ISO hint Pages with non-English text lacking appropriate markup from November 2021 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from October 2022 Articles needing additional references from October 2022 All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from February 2021 Articles with J9U identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  This page was last edited on 11 March 2023, at 11:02  (UTC) . 
 Text is available under the  Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0 ;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the  Terms of Use  and  Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the  Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. 
 
 
 Privacy policy 
 About Wikipedia 
 Disclaimers 
 Contact Wikipedia 
 Mobile view 
 Developers 
 Statistics 
 Cookie statement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
