
 
 
 Jump to content 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle sidebar 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Create account Log in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Personal tools 
 
 
 
 
   Create account   Log in 
 
 
 
 
		Pages for logged out editors  learn more 
 
 
 Contributions Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Navigation 
 
 
 Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate 
 
 
 
 
 Contribute 
 
 
 Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file 
 
 
 
 
 Tools 
 
 
 What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item 
 
 
 
 
 Print/export 
 
 
 Download as PDF Printable version 
 
 
 
 
 In other projects 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons 
 
 
 
 
 Languages 
 
 On this Wikipedia the language links are at the top of the page across from the article title.  Go to top . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CentralNotice  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Contents 
 move to sidebar 
 hide 
 
 
 
 
 (Top) 
 
 
 
 
 
 1 Meat 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 Dumplings 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 Fruit 
 
 
				Toggle Fruit subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 3.1 Melons 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.2 Pomegranate 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.3 Pumpkin 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.4 Tomato 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4 Cereal-based dishes 
 
 
				Toggle Cereal-based dishes subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 4.1 Breads 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.2 Pilaf 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.3 Porridges 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.4 Casseroles 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5 Soups 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6 Beverages 
 
 
				Toggle Beverages subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 6.1 Alcoholic beverages 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 7 Fish 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8 Foreign influences 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 9 See also 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 10 Bibliography 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 11 References 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 12 External links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
						Toggle the table of contents
					 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle the table of contents 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Turkmen cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 16 languages 
 
 
 
 العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Čeština Esperanto Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano ქართული 日本語 Português Русский Svenska Türkçe Українська 
 Edit links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Article Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 English 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 More 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
 
 
 Culinary traditions of Turkmenistan 
 This article is part of  a series  on the Culture of  Turkmenistan 
Society 
 History 
 Language 
 People 
 Religion 
 
Arts and literature 
 Literature 
 Carpets 
 Jewelry 
 Music 
 
Other 
 Cuisine 
 Festivals 
 Sport 
 Ahalteke horses 
 Alabay 
 
 Symbols 
 Flag 
 Emblem 
 World Heritage Sites 
 
 Turkmenistan portal v t e 
   A festive Turkmen luncheon laid out on a  sachak  (Turkmen tablecloth placed on the floor). 
   Sturgeon   kebabs 
 Turkmen cuisine , the  cuisine  of  Turkmenistan , is similar to that of the rest of  Central Asia . Turkmen  seminomadic  culture revolved around animal husbandry, especially sheep herding, and accordingly Turkmen cuisine is noted for its focus on meat, particularly mutton and lamb. [1]  One source notes,  The nomadic past has left a very noticeable trace in Turkmen cuisine - the basis of the diet is meat: lamb, meat of gazelles, non-working camels, wild fowl, chicken. Beef is consumed much less frequently because this food appeared on the table much later, Turkmens don't eat horse meat at all. [2] 
 Turkmen cuisine does not generally use  spices  or seasonings other than salt and black pepper, and is typically cooked with large amounts of widely available  cottonseed oil . [3] 
 A description of Turkmen foods presented at an annual culinary festival included "...more than 15 kinds of soup, meat and fish delicacies, ruddy ichlekli (meat pies), appetizing gutaps with different fillings (pumpkin, spinach), crumbly pilaf, kelle bash ayak and chekdirme, whole roasted lamb, kakmach, hearty yarma, numerous salads, traditional pishme, as well as sweets..." [4]  At a formal ribbon-cutting ceremony for new housing, the offerings included "...all kinds of meat, poultry and fish dishes, cereals, vegetables and gourds, soups, culinary products made of dough, dairy products and drinks prepared according to ancient recipes. These include tamdyrlama, ichlekli, yarma, dograma, different kinds of pilaf, çorba, somsa, pishme, süzme, çal, agaran and much else." [5] 
 
 
 Meat [ edit ] 
 Shashlyk  { Turkmen :  çişlik ), skewered chunks of  mutton, lamb ,  chicken , or sometimes  fish , grilled over  charcoal  and garnished with raw sliced  onion  and a special  vinegar -based sauce, is served in restaurants and often sold in the street. Shashlyk from pork and beef was introduced during the Russian Imperial period, and is easily found in major cities.  Kebabs  of ground meat are commonly prepared from beef and occasionally camel.  Kakmach  ( Turkmen :  kakmaç ) is preserved, dried meat prepared in individual portions or strips.  Kakmach  may be fried in fat or baked in a  tandoor , but it is traditionally dried like  jerky  in the hot desert sun. [1] [3] 
 Gowurma  is deep fat fried meat in bite-sized chunks, typically cooked in a cauldron ( Turkmen :  gazan , a large hemispherical iron pot placed over an open fire).  Gowurma  is used in various soups and can be eaten hot or cold, or put up for later use. [2] 
 
 Dumplings [ edit ] 
 A wide variety of filled pies and dumplings are available in restaurants and  bazaars .  Manty  are steamed dumplings filled with  ground meat ,  onions  or  pumpkin . Typical fried dishes include  somsa ,  gutap  (often filled with  spinach ), fitchi  (fitçi) ,  börek , and  ichlekli   (içlekli) . These are popular with travelers and taxi drivers, as they can be eaten quickly on the run, and are often sold at roadside stands.
 
 Fruit [ edit ] 
 Melons [ edit ] 
   Melon vendor from  Samarkand ,  Russian Turkestan  (picture taken around 1905 to 1915) 
 In the culinary arena, Turkmenistan is perhaps most famous for its  melons  ( Turkmen :  gawun ), especially in the former  Soviet Union , where it was once the major supplier. Turkmen state-controlled media have referred to the melon as the " tsarina  of the garden" ( Russian :  царица бахчи ). [6]  Though very few melons are exported today, [7]  they are a great source of national pride in Turkmenistan and subject of their own  Melon Day  holiday. [8]  Turkmen sources claim the country is home to up to 400 distinct varieties.
 
 Pomegranate [ edit ] 
 Residents of  oases  use  pomegranate  ( Turkmen :  nar ) as a flavoring, often crushing for juice to be added to or mixed into dishes. [9] 
 
 Pumpkin [ edit ] 
 Pumpkins ( Turkmen :  kädi ) are mainly used as a soup flavoring but, hollowed out, may be used as a vessel for baking casseroles or meats. Pumpkin seeds are crushed for cooking oil. [10] 
 
 Tomato [ edit ] 
 Although a foreign import from the  New World , tomatoes have become a major influence on Turkmen cuisine in the last two centuries. Tomatoes are pickled, dried, pureed, and chopped for adding to dishes, and made into tomato soup and juice. [11] 
 
 Cereal-based dishes [ edit ] 
 Breads [ edit ] 
   Turkmen bread baking in tandyr 
   Pishme 
   Turkmen girls at a Novruz festival greet guests with pishme and dried fruits. 
 Meals are almost always served with  naan , Central Asian  flat bread , known locally as  çörek . Turkmen bread is prepared differently from other breads in the region in thick, round disc-shaped loaves baked in a traditional  tamdyr  clay oven. Bread baked with meat inside ( etli çörek , or "meat bread") can be consumed as a meal in itself.  Ýagly çörek  (literally "oily bread, buttery bread") is a flaky, layered type of flat bread made with  butter . Pishme ( Turkmen :  pişme ) are soft, bite-sized, sweetened, fried breads traditionally presented to arriving guests as a welcoming gesture.
 
Bread bears highly symbolic importance in  Turkmen culture . [12]  It is considered highly impolite to turn a loaf of bread upside down or to mistreat bread in any way. There are many superstitions surrounding bread and its preparation. In the words of Turkmen state-controlled media, ...the main role in the hospitality of the peoples of Central Asia is played by bread -  çörek , which also serves as a symbol of hospitality, brotherhood, honor, hard work, prosperity, gratitude and the kindest wishes. Bread is baked in many kinds...ancient recipes have many modern variations, but the matter is not even in the ingredients themselves, which determine the softness, puffiness and taste of dough, but in the special ritual of its preparation, especially for festive meals... [4]  The student of Turkmen culture Sergey Demidov wrote, And yet, despite the high authority of the horse, there was something even higher and more sacred in the Turkmen household, bearing the stamp of taboo from ancient times. This was the tamdyr, the oven for baking  çörek  - a symbol of life, well-being and family hearth, supported by the sanctity of bread and, perhaps, by echoes of  Zoroastrian -Mazdean beliefs associated with fire. Therefore, in the scale of ethical values there might have been a judgment such as: "It is better to slit a horse's throat or rob someone than to destroy a tamdyr". [13] 
 Pilaf [ edit ] 
 Pilaf  ( Turkmen :  palaw ,  Russian :  плов   plov ) is served at celebrations and to honored guests; one source calls it "king in Turkmen cuisine." [14]  It consists of  rice  typically cooked with chunks of  mutton  and  carrots ,  onions , and  garlic , prepared in a large cast-iron cauldron. Different pilaf recipes may call for addition of raisins ( Turkmen :  kişmiş ), fruits, fish, and ground meat. [3]  Pilaf is traditionally eaten with the hands.
 
 Porridges [ edit ] 
 Yarma ( Turkmen :  ýarma , from the Turkmen word  ýarym  "half, split") is cracked wheat cooked in sheep fat with very small pieces of mutton mixed in for flavor. The dish is claimed to have existed for at least one thousand years. [15]  Shule ( Turkmen :  şüle ) is a watery rice porridge with meat, sometimes served with shredded carrots. [16]  Sorghum porridge ( Turkmen :  etli köje ) is a traditional dish for the  Novruz  festival; the dish is ancient, for sorghum was introduced to the Turkmen by trade on the  Silk Road . [17] 
 
 Casseroles [ edit ] 
 Chegdermeh  ( Turkmen :  çegderme ) is a mixture of boiled rice, fried meat, tomato, and chopped, sautéed onions, typically cooked in a cauldron.
 
 Soups [ edit ] 
 Shurpa  ( Turkmen :  şurpa ), meat boullion, is the base of most soups. The most traditional Turkmen soups are various types of unash ( Turkmen :  unaş ), made with milk and noodles or with beans and noodles. Other common soups include  dograma  (also  dogramaly şurpa ), made with diced organ meats and bread, onion, and tomato; [18]  dumpling soup ( Turkmen :  etli börek şurpasy ); and  mung bean  soup ( Turkmen :  şurpa maş ). [2]  Suytlash ( Turkmen :  süýtlaş , also  süýtli unaş  and  süýtli aş ) is a vermicelli pudding traditionally served as the second course at wedding feasts. Some variants use rice in lieu of vermicelli. [19]  Though considered by some Turkmen to be a type of porridge, Turkmen cookbooks categorize it as a soup. [20] [21]  Drawing from culinary traditions of neighbors,  lagman , a soupy  Uyghur  noodle dish, is also common. 
 
   Bottle of Turkmen brandy (cognac) bearing a portrait of  Saparmurat Niyazov  in a military uniform. 
 Beverages [ edit ] 
 As in the rest of  Central Asia ,  green tea  ( Turkmen :  çaý ) is the primary drink, consumed at all hours. In the  Turkmen language ,  çaý  (pronounced "chai") can refer either to a meal (typically breakfast) or to sitting down for a visit over tea. [14] [22]  In the  Dashoguz region , it is sometimes drunk " Kazakh -style" with milk, often to disguise the salty taste of the drinking water in that area.
 Gatyk , a thick drinking  yogurt  similar to  kefir , is often served with  breakfast  and sometimes used as a condiment on  börek  or  manty , replacing the traditional  sour cream . The drink the nation is known for, however, is  çal  ("chal"),  fermented   camel 's  milk , which is a white sparkling beverage with a sour flavour, popular in Central Asia, particularly in Turkmenistan. [23]  Because of specific preparation requirements and its being extremely perishable,  çal  presents a great challenge for exporters to ship outside Turkmenistan or the region for foreign consumption. [24]  It is similar to the Kyrgyz drink  shoro . One source notes that Turkmens like to skim  agaran  (a type of  butter ) from the surface of  chal . [25] 
 
 Alcoholic beverages [ edit ] 
 Vodka  ( Turkmen :  arak ) is the most popular alcoholic beverage, due to its relatively low cost, followed by  beer ,  wine ,  brandy , and  sparkling wine  ( Russian :  шампанское   shampanskoye ).Spirits and beer were introduced during the  Russian imperial  period. Beer was introduced in the 19th century by German brewers and though not a traditional beverage is popular in urban areas. Two domestic beer brands, Berk and Zip, are produced in Turkmenistan. [26] [27] [28] 
 Archeological exploration indicates viticulture in the oasis area north of the  Kopet Dag  Mountains dates to the 3rd-2nd centuries BCE. Wheat was cultivated in the lowlands and vineyards were planted in the foothills. Wine grapes were also grown in the upper  Murghab  Valley near the present-day Turkmenistan-Afghanistan border. Introduction of Islam to Central Asia did not impede continuation of wine production, in part because wine is central to  Sufism . [29]  In the 21st century, Turkmenistan produces over 200 different grape wines and brandies from 100 grape varieties. [30] 
 
 Fish [ edit ] 
 Fish forms part of the traditional diet of  Turkmen tribes  residing near the  Caspian Sea  and along the  Amu Darya . The Caspian Turkmen recipes call for both grilling and frying fish, but serving with "sesame, rice, apricots, raisins, pomegranate juice." [31] 
 
 Foreign influences [ edit ] 
 Restaurants in Turkmenistan often also serve  Russian  fare such as  pelmeni ,  buckwheat  ( grechka ),  golubtsy , and a wide variety of mayonnaise-based  salads . The potato and tomato, both introduced from the  New World , are widely used in meal preparation. [32]  Urban steakhouses have appeared in  Ashgabat , the capital city. [33] [34] [35] 
 
 See also [ edit ] 
 
 Food portal 
 Central Asian cuisine 
 Soviet cuisine 
 Bibliography [ edit ] 
 Bagdasarov, A.; Vanukevich, A.; Hudaýşukurow, T. (1981),  Tуркменская кулинария  [ Turkmen Cuisine ] (in Russian), Ashgabat: Izdatel'stvo "Turkmenistan" 
 Berdimuhamedow, Gurbanguly  (2014),  Turkmen dastarkhan, Dishes of the national cuisine , Ashgabat: Turkmen State Publishing Service   Volume 1 ,  Volume 2 
 Eden, Caroline (2020),  Red Sands , London: Quadrille,  ISBN   978-1-787-134829 
 Esenova, Gyulshat (2019),  Sachak, Traditional Turkmen Recipes in a Modern Kitchen ,  ISBN   978-0-578-81405-6 
 One Turkmen Kitchen , One Turkmen Kitchen , retrieved  25 January  2023 , website with recipes 
 Туркменская национальная кухня и ее особенности  [ Turkmen national cuisine and its particulars ] (in Russian), Infoabad, 20 November 2021 , retrieved  26 January  2023 
 References [ edit ] 
 
 
 ^  a   b   "Туркменская кухня. Особенности"  [Turkmen cuisine. Particulars] (in Russian). Мастер & повар / Кулинарная школа . Retrieved  25 January  2023 . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   Туркменская кухня  (in Russian), Виртуальный музей "Сокровища Туркменистана" , retrieved  25 January  2023 
 
 ^  a   b   c   Bagdasarov, A.; Vanukevich, A.; Hudaýşukurow, T. (1981),  Tуркменская кулинария  [ Turkmen Cuisine ] (in Russian), Ashgabat: Izdatel'stvo "Turkmenistan"   
 
 ^  a   b   Международный фестиваль национальных блюд народов стран Центральной Азии  (in Russian), Туркменистан сегодня, 6 August 2021 
 
 ^   Президент Сердар Бердымухамедов принял участие в открытии нового коттеджного комплекса в приморье  (in Russian), Туркменистан сегодня, 1 August 2022 
 
 ^   Фестиваль национальных блюд народов стран Центральной Азии обогатил традиции добрососедских угощений  (in Russian), Туркменистан сегодня, 13 August 2021 
 
 ^   Turkmenistan: Country Report to the FAO International Technical Conference on Plant Genetic Resource , Leipzig, 1996, p. 6. Retrieved April 15, 2008 
 
 ^   Растения и Животные в Легендах и Верованиях Туркмен  [ Plants and Animals in Legends and Beliefs of Turkmen ]  (PDF) , Этнография туркмен (in Russian), Moscow: Старый сад, 2020, pp. 97–98 
 
 ^   Туркменская кухня  (in Russian), Anur Tour , retrieved  26 January  2023 
 
 ^   Туркменская национальная кухня и ее особенности  [ Turkmen national cuisine and its particulars ] (in Russian), Infoabad, 20 November 2021 , retrieved  26 January  2023 
 
 ^   Bagdasarov, A.; Vanukevich, A.; Hudaýşukurow, T. (1981), "Chapter XII, Jams and other preparations",  Tуркменская кулинария  [ Turkmen Cuisine ] (in Russian), Ashgabat: Izdatel'stvo "Turkmenistan" 
 
 ^   Sacred Words "Tamdyr" and "Chorek"  Paseviev, Ikar. Retrieved April 15, 2008 
 
 ^   Растения и Животные в Легендах и Верованиях Туркмен  [ Plants and Animals in Legends and Beliefs of Turkmen ]  (PDF) , Этнография туркмен (in Russian), Moscow: Старый сад, 2020, p. 349 
 
 ^  a   b   Awde, Nicholas; Dirks, William; Amandurdyev, Amandurdy (2005),  Turkmen Dictionary and Phrasebook , New York: Hippocrene Books,  ISBN   0-7818-1072-8 , page 133 
 
 ^   Berdimuhamedow, Gurbanguly  (2014),  Turkmen dastarkhan, Dishes of the national cuisine , Ashgabat: Turkmen State Publishing Service   Volume 1 , page 154 
 
 ^   Berdimuhamedow, Gurbanguly  (2014),  Turkmen dastarkhan, Dishes of the national cuisine , Ashgabat: Turkmen State Publishing Service   Volume 1 , page 60 
 
 ^   Esenova, Gyulshat (2019),  Sachak, Traditional Turkmen Recipes in a Modern Kitchen ,  ISBN   978-0-578-81405-6 , page 151 
 
 ^     Bagdasarov, A.; Vanukevich, A.; Hudaýşukurow, T. (1981),  Tуркменская кулинария  [ Turkmen Cuisine ] (in Russian), Ashgabat: Izdatel'stvo "Turkmenistan", p. 84 
 
 ^   Vermicelli Pudding (Süýtlaş) , One Turkmen Kitchen , retrieved  26 January  2023 
 
 ^     Bagdasarov, A.; Vanukevich, A.; Hudaýşukurow, T. (1981),  Tуркменская кулинария  [ Turkmen Cuisine ] (in Russian), Ashgabat: Izdatel'stvo "Turkmenistan", p. 90 
 
 ^   Esenova, Gyulshat (2019),  Sachak, Traditional Turkmen Recipes in a Modern Kitchen , p. 134,  ISBN   978-0-578-81405-6 
 
 ^   Heron, Joan (2014),  Chai Budesh? Anyone for Tea?: A Peace Corps Memoir of Turkmenistan , America Star Books,  ISBN   978-1633821538 
 
 ^   Anatoly Khazanov, Nomads and the outside world, Second edition, University of Wisconsin Press, 1994, p. 49 
 
 ^   Great Culinary Dictionary. "Chal"   Archived  2007-10-13 at the  Wayback Machine  in Russian, retrieved April 11, 2007 
 
 ^   I.Barkhanov. Neutral Turkmenistan newspaper   Archived  2005-11-10 at the  Wayback Machine , in Russian, August 9, 2001. 
 
 ^   ZIP company website 
 
 ^   Туркменское пиво  (in Russian), Turkmen.News, 8 August 2012 
 
 ^   Информационный бюллетень   (PDF) , Финансирование и консультации для малого бизнеса в Туркменистане (in Russian),  EBRD , January 2017 
 
 ^   Muradov, Ruslan G. (2019),  Семь тысяч лет виноградарства  [ Seven Thousand Years of Viticulture ] (in Russian), Форум плюс 
 
 ^   В Туркменистане производятся вина и коньяки 200 наименований  [ In Turkmenistan 200 types of wine and brandy are produced ] (in Russian), SNG Today, 22 November 2017 
 
 ^   Berdimuhamedow, Gurbanguly  (2014),  Turkmen dastarkhan, Dishes of the national cuisine , Ashgabat: Turkmen State Publishing Service   Volume 1 , page 148 
 
 ^   Bagdasarov, A.; Vanukevich, A.; Hudaýşukurow, T. (1981),  Tуркменская кулинария  [ Turkmen Cuisine ] (in Russian), Ashgabat: Izdatel'stvo "Turkmenistan" 
 
 ^   Argentina Steak House 
 
 ^   Nevada Steak House 
 
 ^   Alp Et Steakhouse 
 
 
 External links [ edit ] 
 Vopr Pitan. "Chemical composition of chal (fermented camel's milk)", 1954 Jul-Aug;13(4):41-2 
 Martinenko, N.l., Yagodinskaya, S.G., Adhundov, A.A., Charyev, K.C. and Khumedov, O. (1977). Content of trace elements, copper, manganese, molybdenum in culture of chal and camel's milk and their clinical significance. Dairy Sci. Abst., 40(7802), p. 824 
 B. Faye and P. Esenov (eds.). Desertification Combat and Food Safety. The Added Value of Camel Producers. Volume 362 NATO Science Series: Life and Behavioural Sciences. OS Press Publication, February 2005, 240 pp., hardcover   ISBN   1-58603-473-1 
 Filip Noubel, "GOLDEN CENTURY OF THE TURKMENS:" A BLEAK PICTURE OF VILLAGE LIFE IN THE DESERT. EurasiaNet photo essay , 25 October 2002 
 v t e Asian cuisine Sovereign states 
 Afghanistan 
 Armenia 
 Azerbaijan 
 Bahrain 
 Bangladesh 
 Bhutan 
 Brunei 
 Burma (Myanmar) 
 Cambodia 
 China 
 Cyprus 
 East Timor (Timor-Leste) 
 Egypt 
 Georgia 
 India 
 Indonesia 
 Iran 
 Iraq 
 Israel 
 Japan 
 Jordan 
 Kazakhstan 
 North Korea 
 South Korea 
 Kuwait 
 Kyrgyzstan 
 Laos 
 Lebanon 
 Malaysia 
 Maldives 
 Mongolia 
 Nepal 
 Oman 
 Pakistan 
 Philippines 
 Qatar 
 Russia 
 Saudi Arabia 
 Singapore 
 Sri Lanka 
 Syria 
 Tajikistan 
 Thailand 
 Turkey 
 Turkmenistan 
 United Arab Emirates 
 Uzbekistan 
 Vietnam 
 Yemen 
 States with limited recognition 
 Abkhazia 
 Artsakh 
 Northern Cyprus 
 Palestine 
 South Ossetia 
 Taiwan 
 Dependencies and other territories 
 British Indian Ocean Territory 
 Christmas Island 
 Cocos (Keeling) Islands 
 Hong Kong 
 Macau 
 
 v t e Cuisines Continental 
 African 
 North 
 West 
 list 
 Americas 
 Caribbean 
 North 
 South 
 list 
 Asian 
 Caucasian 
 Central 
 Indian subcontinent 
 Levantine 
 list 
 European 
 Balkan 
 Central 
 Eastern 
 list 
 Oceanic 
 Intercontinental
 Global 
 Latin American 
 Mediterranean 
 Middle Eastern 
 National  and regional 
 Afghan 
 Albanian 
 Algerian 
 American 
 Californian 
 Floribbean 
 Hawaiian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Lowcountry (South Carolina) 
 New England 
 New Mexico 
 Pacific Northwest 
 Pennsylvania Dutch 
 Puerto Rican 
 Southern US 
 Southwest US 
 Texas 
 Angolan 
 Argentine 
 Armenian 
 Australian 
 Austrian 
 Azerbaijani 
 Bahraini 
 Bangladeshi 
 Barbadian 
 Belarusian 
 Belgian 
 Belizean 
 Beninese 
 Bhutanese 
 Bolivian 
 Bosnian-Herzegovinian 
 Botswana 
 Brazilian 
 British 
 Channel Islands 
 English 
 Gibraltarian 
 Northern Irish 
 Saint Helena 
 Scottish 
 Welsh 
 Bruneian 
 Bulgarian 
 Burkinabé 
 Burmese 
 Burundian 
 Cambodian 
 Cameroonian 
 Canadian 
 Acadian 
 Québécois 
 Central African Republic 
 Chadian 
 Chilean 
 Chinese 
 Cantonese 
 Hong Kong 
 Macanese 
 Tibetan 
 Xinjiang 
 Colombian 
 Congolese 
 Corsican 
 Croatian 
 Cuban 
 Cypriot 
 Czech 
 Danish 
 Faroese 
 Greenlandic 
 Djiboutian 
 Dominican 
 Dominican Republic 
 Dutch 
 East Timorese 
 Ecuadorian 
 Egyptian 
 Emirati 
 Equatorial Guinean 
 Eritrean 
 Estonian 
 Ethiopian 
 Fijian 
 Filipino 
 Finnish 
 French 
 Occitan 
 French Guianan 
 Gabonese 
 Gambian 
 Georgian 
 German 
 Ghanaian 
 Greek 
 Cretan 
 Epirotic 
 Greek Macedonian 
 Heptanesean 
 Guatemalan 
 Guinea-Bissauan 
 Guinean 
 Haitian 
 Honduran 
 Hungarian 
 Icelandic 
 Indian 
 Arunachalese 
 Assamese 
 Bengali 
 Bihari 
 Goan 
 Gujarati 
 Himachal Pradesh 
 Kashmiri 
 Jharkhandi 
 Karnataka 
 Kerala 
 Maharashtrian 
 Manipuri 
 Meghalayan 
 Mizo 
 Naga 
 Odia 
 Punjabi 
 Rajasthani 
 Sikkimese 
 Sindhi 
 Tamil 
 Telangana 
 Telugu 
 Indonesian 
 Acehnese 
 Balinese 
 Banjar 
 Batak 
 Betawi 
 Indo 
 Javanese 
 Madurese 
 Makassar 
 Minahasan 
 Minangkabau 
 Palembangese 
 Sundanese 
 Iranian 
 Iraqi 
 Irish 
 Israeli 
 Italian 
 Abruzzese 
 Ligurian 
 Lombard 
 Lucanian 
 Neapolitan 
 Roman 
 Sardinian 
 Sicilian 
 Venetian 
 Ivorian 
 Jamaican 
 Japanese 
 Okinawan 
 Jordanian 
 Kazakh 
 Kenyan 
 Korean 
 North Korean 
 South Korean 
 Kosovan 
 Kuwaiti 
 Kyrgyz 
 Lao 
 Latvian 
 Lebanese 
 Lesotho 
 Liberian 
 Libyan 
 Liechtensteiner 
 Lithuanian 
 Luxembourg 
 Macedonian 
 Malagasy 
 Malawian 
 Malaysian 
 Sabahan 
 Sarawakian 
 Maldivian 
 Malian 
 Maltese 
 Mauritanian 
 Mauritian 
 Mexican 
 Moldovan 
 Monégasque 
 Mongolian 
 Montenegrin 
 Moroccan 
 Mozambican 
 Namibian 
 Nauruan 
 Nepalese 
 New Zealand 
 Nicaraguan 
 Niger 
 Nigerian 
 Niuean 
 Norwegian 
 Omani 
 Pakistani 
 Palestinian 
 Panamanian 
 Peruvian 
 Polish 
 Portuguese 
 Qatari 
 Romanian  (incl.  Transylvanian Saxon ) 
 Russian 
 Bashkir 
 Chechen 
 Circassian 
 Komi 
 Mordovian 
 Sakha 
 Tatar 
 Udmurt 
 Yamal 
 Rwandan 
 Saint Lucian 
 Salvadoran 
 Sammarinese 
 São Tomé and Príncipe 
 Saudi Arabian 
 Senegalese 
 Serbian 
 Seychellois 
 Sierra Leonean 
 Singaporean 
 Slovak 
 Slovenian 
 Somali 
 South African 
 Spanish 
 Andalusian 
 Asturian 
 Balearic 
 Basque 
 Canarian 
 Cantabrian 
 Catalan 
 Extremaduran 
 Galician 
 Manchegan 
 Valencian 
 Sri Lankan 
 Sudanese 
 Swazi 
 Swedish 
 Swiss 
 Syrian 
 Taiwanese 
 Tajik 
 Tanzanian 
 Zanzibari 
 Thai 
 Togolese 
 Tunisian 
 Turkish 
 Turkmen 
 Trinidadian and Tobagonian 
 Ugandan 
 Ukrainian 
 Uruguayan 
 Uzbek 
 Venezuelan 
 Vietnamese 
 Western Saharan 
 Yemeni 
 Zambian 
 Zimbabwean 
 Ethnic 
 Ainu 
 Arab 
 Indonesian 
 Aromanian 
 Assyrian 
 Balochi 
 Berber 
 Cajun 
 Chinese 
 American 
 Canadian 
 Chifa 
 Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Crimean Tatar 
 Greek American 
 Hazaragi 
 Indian 
 Anglo-Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Indigenous American 
 Inuit 
 Italian American 
 Kurdish 
 Livonian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Malay 
 Ossetian 
 Parsi 
 Pashtun 
 Peranakan 
 Romani 
 Sámi 
 Soul food 
 Sylheti 
 Transylvanian Saxon 
 Yup'ik 
 Religious 
 Buddhist 
 Christian 
 Goan Catholic 
 Mangalorean Catholic 
 Mennonite 
 Hindu 
 Islamic 
 Chinese 
 Ital 
 Jain 
 Jewish 
 American 
 Ashkenazi 
 Bukharan 
 Ethiopian 
 Mizrahi 
 Sephardic 
 Syrian 
 Ritual slaughter 
 Sikh 
 Historical 
 Ancient Egyptian 
 Ancient Greek 
 Ancient Israelite 
 Ancient Roman 
 Antebellum America 
 Aztec 
 Byzantine 
 Early modern European 
 Historical Chinese 
 Historical Indian subcontinent 
 Historical North Indian and Pakistani 
 History of agriculture 
 History of alcoholic drinks 
 History of bread 
 History of seafood 
 History of vegetarianism 
 Historical Argentine 
 Historical Japanese 
 Inca 
 Mayan 
 Muisca 
 Mughal 
 Medieval 
 Ottoman 
 Peasant 
 Soviet 
 Thirteen Colonies 
 Styles 
 Classique 
 Fast food 
 Fusion 
 New American 
 Eurasian 
 Haute 
 Molecular gastronomy 
 Note by Note 
 Nouvelle 
 Lists 
 List of cuisines 
 List of historical cuisines 
 Lists of prepared foods 
 Related 
 Cookbook 
 Cooking 
 Culinary arts 
 Drink 
 Food 
 history 
 Diet 
 Meal preparation 
 
   Food portal 
   Drink portal 
   Category 
   Commons 
   Cookbook 
   WikiProject 
   Outline 
 
 Authority control : National libraries  
 Israel 
 United States 
 
  
NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw2392
Cached time: 20230310202733
Cache expiry: 1814400
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc, no‐toc‐conversion]
CPU time usage: 0.816 seconds
Real time usage: 0.951 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 18868/1000000
Post‐expand include size: 160702/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 6065/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 5/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 122752/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.468/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 22753450/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/400
 
 
Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  777.763      1 -total
 31.33%  243.685     31 Template:Citation
 26.51%  206.187      1 Template:Reflist
 21.87%  170.093      2 Template:Navbox
 19.34%  150.405      1 Template:Asian_topic
 13.90%  108.093     20 Template:Lang-tk
 10.30%   80.098     52 Template:Iso2country
  9.40%   73.118      1 Template:Culture_of_Turkmenistan
  9.16%   71.211      1 Template:Sidebar
  6.70%   52.112      1 Template:Short_description
 
  Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:idhash:12843421-0!canonical and timestamp 20230310202732 and revision id 1137269233. Rendering was triggered because: page-view
  
 esi <esi:include src="/esitest-fa8a495983347898/content" />  
 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Turkmen_cuisine&oldid=1137269233 " 
 Categories :  Turkmenistan cuisine Central Asian cuisine Hidden categories:  CS1 Russian-language sources (ru) Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Turkmen-language text Articles containing Russian-language text Region topic template using suffix Articles with J9U identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  This page was last edited on 3 February 2023, at 18:59  (UTC) . 
 Text is available under the  Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0 ;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the  Terms of Use  and  Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the  Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. 
 
 
 Privacy policy 
 About Wikipedia 
 Disclaimers 
 Contact Wikipedia 
 Mobile view 
 Developers 
 Statistics 
 Cookie statement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
