
 
 
 Jump to content 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle sidebar 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Create account Log in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Personal tools 
 
 
 
 
   Create account   Log in 
 
 
 
 
		Pages for logged out editors  learn more 
 
 
 Contributions Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Navigation 
 
 
 Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate 
 
 
 
 
 Contribute 
 
 
 Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file 
 
 
 
 
 Tools 
 
 
 What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item 
 
 
 
 
 Print/export 
 
 
 Download as PDF Printable version 
 
 
 
 
 In other projects 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons Wikibooks 
 
 
 
 
 Languages 
 
 On this Wikipedia the language links are at the top of the page across from the article title.  Go to top . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CentralNotice  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Contents 
 move to sidebar 
 hide 
 
 
 
 
 (Top) 
 
 
 
 
 
 1 Culinary customs 
 
 
				Toggle Culinary customs subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 1.1 Breakfast 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.2 Homemade food 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.3 Restaurants 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.4 Summer cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.5 Key ingredients 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.6 Oils and fats 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.7 Fruit 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.8 Meats 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 Dishes and foods 
 
 
				Toggle Dishes and foods subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 2.1 Dairy products 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.1.1 Cheeses 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.2 Soups 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.3 Bread 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.4 Pastries 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.5 Pilav and pasta 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.6 Vegetarian dishes 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.6.1 Vegetable dishes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.7 Egg dishes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.8 Meze and salads 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.9 Dolma and sarma 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.10 Meat dishes 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.10.1 Kebabs 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.10.2 Fish 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.11 Desserts 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.12 Street food 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 Beverages 
 
 
				Toggle Beverages subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 3.1 Alcoholic beverages 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.2 Non-alcoholic beverages 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4 Related cuisines 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5 See also 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6 References 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 7 Bibliography 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8 External links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
						Toggle the table of contents
					 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle the table of contents 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Turkish cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 43 languages 
 
 
 
 العربية Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা Català Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Jawa ქართული Қазақша Kurdî Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar Македонски მარგალური مصرى Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 
 Edit links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Article Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 English 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 More 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
 
 
 Culinary traditions of Turkey 
 Not to be confused with  Turkey as food . 
 
 
 Turkish cuisine 
 Part of  a series  on the Culture of Turkey 
 History 
 People 
 Languages 
 Mythology  and  Folklore 
 Cuisine 
 Festivals 
 Religion 
 Art 
 Literature 
 Music  and Performing arts 
 Theatre 
 
 Media 
 Radio 
 Television 
 Cinema 
 
 Sport 
 Monuments 
 World Heritage Sites 
 
 Symbols 
 Flag 
 Coat of arms 
 National anthem 
 
   Turkey portal v t e 
 Turkish cuisine  ( Turkish :  Türk mutfağı ) is the cuisine of  Turkey  and the  Turkish diaspora . It is largely the heritage of  Ottoman cuisine , which can be described as a fusion and refinement of  Mediterranean ,  Balkan ,  Middle Eastern ,  Central Asian  and  Eastern European cuisines . [1] [2] [3]  Turkish cuisine has in turn influenced those and other neighbouring cuisines, including those of  Southeast Europe  ( Balkans ),  Central Europe , and  Western Europe . [3]  The  Ottomans  fused various culinary traditions of their realm taking influences from and influencing  Mesopotamian cuisine ,  Greek cuisine ,  Levantine cuisine ,  Egyptian cuisine ,  Balkan cuisine , along with traditional  Turkic  elements from  Central Asia  (such as  mantı ,  ayran ,  kaymak ), creating a vast array of specialities. Turkish cuisine also includes dishes invented in the  Ottoman palace  kitchen.
 Turkish cuisine varies across the country. The cooking of  Istanbul ,  Bursa ,  Izmir , and rest of the  Anatolia  region inherits many elements of  Ottoman court   cuisine , including moderate use of spices, a preference for rice over  bulgur ,  koftes , and a wider availability of vegetable stews ( türlü ),  eggplant , stuffed  dolmas  and fish. The cuisine of the  Black Sea Region  uses fish extensively, especially the  Black Sea anchovy  ( hamsi ) and includes  maize  dishes. The cuisine of the southeast (e.g.  Urfa ,  Gaziantep ,  Adıyaman  and  Adana ) is famous for its variety of  kebabs ,  mezes  and dough-based desserts such as  baklava ,  şöbiyet ,  kadayıf ,  katmer  and   künefe .
 Especially in the western parts of Turkey, where olive trees grow abundantly,  olive oil  is the major type of oil used for cooking. [4]  The cuisines of the  Aegean ,  Marmara  and  Mediterranean  regions are rich in vegetables, herbs, and fish.  Central Anatolia  has many famous specialties, such as  keşkek ,  mantı  (especially from  Kayseri ) and  gözleme . Food names directly cognate with  mantı  are also found in  Chinese  ( mantou  or steamed bun) and  Korean cuisine  ( mandu ) and it is generally considered to have originated in Mongolia during the 13th century. [5] 
 Specialties are often named for places, and may refer to different styles of preparation. For example,  Urfa kebap  is less spicy and thicker than  Adana kebap . Although meat-based foods such as kebabs are common in Turkish cuisine abroad, meals in Turkey largely center around  rice ,  vegetables , and  bread .
 
 
 Culinary customs [ edit ] 
 Breakfast [ edit ] 
   Simit , a circular bread with sesame seeds, is a common breakfast item in Turkey. 
 A traditional Turkish breakfast is rich in variety. A typical serving consists of cheese ( beyaz peynir ,  kaşar , etc.), butter, olives, eggs,  muhammara , tomatoes, cucumbers, jam, honey, and  kaymak ,  sucuk  (a spicy Turkish meat similar to sausages),  pastırma ,  börek ,  simit ,  poğaça ,  açma , fried dough (known as  pişi ), as well as soups are eaten as a morning meal in Turkey. A specialty for breakfast is called  menemen , which is prepared with tomatoes, green peppers, onion, olive oil and eggs. The breakfast menu can also include  kuymak  (depending on the province the dish is also known as  muhlama, mıhlama  and  yağlaş ). Another specialty is the  Balkan Turkish  dish  çılbır , also known as Turkish eggs, made with poached eggs and yogurt. Invariably,  Turkish tea  is served at breakfast. The Turkish word for breakfast,  kahvaltı , means "before coffee".
 
 Homemade food [ edit ] 
 Homemade food is still preferred by Turkish people. Although the newly introduced way of life pushes the new generation to eat out; Turkish people generally prefer to eat at home. A typical meal starts with soup (especially in wintertime), followed by a dish made of vegetables (olive oil or with grounded meat), meat or legumes boiled in a pot (typically with meat or  minced  meat), often with or before Turkish pilav, [6]  pasta or  bulgur   pilav  accompanied by a salad or  cacık  (diluted cold yogurt dish with garlic, salt, and cucumber slices). In summertime many people prefer to eat a cold dish of vegetables cooked with olive oil ( zeytinyağlı  yemekler ) instead of the soup, either before or after the main course, which can also be a chicken, meat or fish plate.
 
 Restaurants [ edit ] 
   Food from Turkey including  börek  and  sarma 
   Adana kebab 
 Although fast food is gaining popularity and many major foreign fast food chains have opened all over Turkey, Turkish people still rely primarily on the rich and extensive dishes of Turkish cuisine. In addition, some traditional Turkish foods, especially  köfte ,  döner ,  kokoreç ,  kumpir ,   midye tava,   börek  and  gözleme , are often served as fast food in Turkey. Eating out has always been common in large commercial cities. [7]   Esnaf lokantası  (meaning restaurants for shopkeepers and tradesmen) are widespread, serving traditional Turkish home cooking at affordable prices.
 
 Summer cuisine [ edit ] 
 In the hot Turkish summer, a meal often consists of fried vegetables such as eggplant (aubergine) and peppers or potatoes served with yogurt or tomato sauce.  Menemen  and  çılbır  are typical summer dishes, based on eggs. Sheep cheese, cucumbers, tomatoes, watermelons and melons also make a light summer meal. Those who like  helva  for dessert prefer "summer helva", which is lighter and less sweet than the regular version.
 
 Key ingredients [ edit ] 
   Manti  of Kayseri 
 Frequently used ingredients in Turkish specialties include lamb, chicken, beef, fish, rice,  eggplants ,  green peppers ,  onions ,  garlic ,  lentils ,  beans ,  zucchinis ,  chickpeas  and  tomatoes . Nuts, especially  pistachios ,  chestnuts ,  almonds ,  hazelnuts , and  walnuts , together with spices, have a special place in Turkish cuisine, and are used extensively in desserts or eaten separately.  Semolina  flour is used to make a cake called  revani  and  irmik helvasi .
 
 
 Commonly used spices and flavorings:
 
 
 Name
 
 Turkish
 
 Used in
 
 References
 
 
 Allspice 
 
 Yenibahar  or  Dolma bahar 
 
 Dolma , vegetables, pilav, fish, köfte
 
 [8] [9] 
 
 
 Anise 
 
 Anason 
 
 Peksimet ,  rakı , used to season nut and dried fruit mixtures in both sweet and savory dishes
 
 [8] [9] 
 
 
 Black pepper 
 
 Kara biber 
 
 egg dishes, meat dishes,  Laz böreği 
 
 [8] 
 
 
 Cardamom 
 
 Kakule 
 
 Rarely used, mostly in coffee. A common ingredient in Persian and Indian desserts, Turkish variations usually replace it with  vanilla  and rosewater
 
 [9] 
 
 
 Cinnamon 
 
 Tarçın 
 
 desserts, pastries,  salep ,  boza ,  iç pilav , fish, lamb, vegetables, tomato sauces, milk puddings, desserts
 
 [8] [9] 
 
 
 Clove 
 
 Karanfil 
 
 fruit  compotes , spiced  black tea , meat casseroles, sweets, breads, pastries
 
 [8] [9] 
 
 
 Coriander 
 
 Kişniş 
 
 Extremely rare. Used in some fish and meat dishes, particularly in southern and eastern Anatolia
 
 [9] 
 
 
 Cumin 
 
 Kimyon 
 
 kofta  spice,  pastirma 
 
 [8] 
 
 
 Fenugreek 
 
 Çemen otu 
 
 Vegetables, fish, breads,  pastirma 
 
 [9] 
 
 
 Haspir
 
 Yalancı safran  (Fake saffron)
 
 Used primarily in the regional cuisine of  Gaziantep  to give yogurt soups a saffron-like tint
 
 [8] 
 
 
 Isot 
 
 Urfa biberi 
 
 Çiğ köfte 
 
 [8] 
 
 
 Mahlep 
 
 Mahlep 
 
 baked goods
 
 [8] 
 
 
 Mastic 
 
 Sakız 
 
 Used in milk desserts, ice creams,  Turkish delight 
 
 [8] 
 
 
 Nigella  seeds
 
 Çörek otu 
 
 savory pastries, homemade cheese
 can be mixed with coriander, cumin and haspir to make a spice for fish
 
 
 [8] [9] 
 
 
 Red pepper 
 
 kırmızı biber ,  pul biber 
 
 garnish for soups,  manti ,  Adana kebab 
 
 [8] [9] 
 
 
 Rose water 
 
 Gül suyu ,
 
 Su  muhallebisi ,  güllaç ,  aşure 
 
 [8] 
 
 
 Poppy seeds 
 
 Haşhaş 
 
 bread, rolls, meat, fish, light sauces and yogurt dressings
 
 [9] 
 
 
 Saffron 
 
 Safran 
 
 Zerde ,  pilav 
 
 [8] 
 
 
 Salep 
 
 Salep 
 
 A winter beverage made with milk and sugar
 
 [8] 
 
 
 Sesame seeds 
 
 Susam 
 
 Simit ,  tahini ,  helva 
 
 [8] 
 
 
 Sumac 
 
 Sumak 
 
 Juice from sumac berries can be used in a marinade for fish or chicken
 Ground sumac can be used to season salads, pilav and soups. A spice mix of sumac, dried  thyme  and roasted sesame seeds is used with grilled meats.
 
 
 [9] 
 
 Olives  are also common on various breakfasts and meze tables frequently.  Beyaz peynir  and  yoğurt  are part of many dishes including  börek ,  manti ,  kebab  and  cacık .
 
 Oils and fats [ edit ] 
   Meze  from Turkey uses different types of oil 
 Butter  or  margarine ,  olive oil ,  sunflower oil ,  canola oil , and  corn oil  are widely used for cooking.  Sesame ,  hazelnut ,  peanut  and  walnut  oils are used as well.  Kuyruk yağı  ( tail fat  of  sheep ) is sometimes used in kebabs and meat dishes.
 
 Fruit [ edit ] 
 The rich and diverse flora of Turkey means that fruit is varied, abundant and cheap. In Ottoman Cuisine, fruit frequently accompanied meat as a side dish.  Plums ,  apricots ,  pomegranates ,  pears ,  apples ,  grapes ,   figs  and  quinces  along with many kinds of  citrus  are the most frequently used fruit, either fresh or dried, in Turkish cuisine. For example,  komposto  (compote) or  hoşaf  (from Persian  khosh âb , literally meaning "nice water") are among the main side dishes to meat or pilav.  Dolma  and  Pilav  usually contain currants or raisins.  Etli  Yaprak Sarma  (vine leaves stuffed with meat and rice) used to be cooked with sour plums in Ottoman cuisine.  Turkish desserts  do not normally contain fresh fruit, but may contain dried varieties.
 Eggplant ( Turkish :  patlıcan ) has a special place in the Turkish cuisine.
 
 Meats [ edit ] 
 In some regions, meat, which was mostly eaten only at wedding ceremonies or during the  Kurban Bayramı  ( Eid ul-Adha ) as  etli pilav  ( pilav  with meat), has become part of the daily diet since the introduction of industrial production.  Veal , formerly shunned, is now widely consumed.
 The main use of meat in cooking remains the combination of ground meat and  vegetable , with names such as  kıymalı  fasulye  (beans with ground meat) or  kıymalı ıspanak  (spinach with ground meat, which is sometimes served with  yoğurt ).
 Alternatively, in coastal towns cheap fish such as  sardalya  (sardines) or  hamsi  (anchovies) are widely available, as well as many others with seasonal availability. Poultry consumption, almost exclusively of chicken and eggs, is common. Milk-fed  lambs , once the most popular source of meat in Turkey, comprise a small part of contemporary consumption.  Kuzu çevirme , cooking milk-fed lamb on a spit, once an important ceremony, is rarely seen.
 
 Dishes and foods [ edit ] 
 Dairy products [ edit ] 
   Fresh  ayran  with a head of foam 
 Yoğurt  is an important element in Turkish cuisine. [4]  In fact, the English word yogurt or yoghurt derives from the Turkish word  yoğurt . Yoğurt can accompany almost all meat dishes (kebabs, köfte), vegetable dishes (especially fried eggplant, courgette, spinach with minced meat etc.),  meze  and a specialty called  mantı  (folded triangles of dough containing minced meat). In villages, yoğurt is regularly eaten with  pilav  or bread. A thicker, higher-fat variety,  süzme yoğurt  or "strained yogurt", is made by straining the yoğurt curds from the  whey . One of the most common Turkish drinks,  ayran , is made from yoğurt. Also, yoğurt is often used in the preparation of cakes, some soups and pastries.  Kashk  is a fermented and strained sour yogurt that can be consumed on its own as a cheese, or used as an ingredient in soups.
 
 Cheeses [ edit ] 
   Beyaz peynir  with eggs 
   Varieties of  tulum : center "Otlu tulum peyniri", or Tulum with herbs, in  Ankara 
 Turkey produces many varieties of  cheese , mostly from  sheep 's milk. In general, these cheeses are not long matured, with a comparatively low fat content. The production of many kinds of cheese is local to particular regions. There are 193 different cheeses in Turkey, but only 8 of these cheeses have geographical indication.
 
 Beyaz peynir  is a salty  brined cheese  taking its name from its white color ("white cheese"). It is similar to  feta  but not as strong. This is produced in styles ranging from unmatured cheese curds to a quite strong mature version. It has many varieties due to source of milk, region ( Ezine  or  Thrace ) and production methods (classic or cultured). It is eaten plain (e.g. as part of the traditional Turkish breakfast), used in salads, and incorporated into cooked foods such as  menemen ,  börek  and  pide . 
 Çerkez peyniri , means " Circassian  cheese". It has two variations, smoked or non-smoked. 
 Çökelek  is dried  cottage cheese . There are many regional varieties of  çökelek . Some are eaten fresh while others are preserved, either by storage in goatskin bags or pottery jars, or by drying in the sun. 
 Çömlek cheese  is a typical artisanal cheese from Central Anatolia. 
 Kurut  and  keş  are regional names for dried bricks of yogurt made from low-fat milk or from  çökelek  made from buttermilk. [10] 
 Golot cheese  is one of the most important traditional cheeses produced in the region of East Black Sea. 
 Gravyer  is produced in Turkey as well. Among others,  Kars  is famous for this type of cheese. 
 Hellim  is a salty, firm-textured goat cheese, generally with some mint added, made in  Cyprus . In Turkey, it is common to fry  hellim  in a pan in some olive oil. 
 Kaşar  is Turkey's other ubiquitous cheese, a moderately fatty sheep's cheese similar to the Greek  kasseri , sometimes marketed as "Turkish cheddar", being closer in consistency and taste to mild  cheddar-style cheese  than other Turkish cheeses. Less matured  kaşar , called fresh  kaşar , is widely consumed as well. Two varieties are popular  Kars  and Thrace. 
 Kaşkaval  is a wheel-shaped yellow sheep's cheese, similar to fresh  kaşar . The name comes from Romanian word  cașcaval , which bears the Italian structure of  caciocavallo . 
 Lor  is the other type of unsalted whey cheese, similarly made from the whey left over from  kaşar  or  strained yogurt  manufacture.  Lor  is used in traditional foods and desserts made from unsalted cheese like "ekşimik" and  höşmerim 
 Mihaliç peyniri  or  Kelle peyniri  is a hard sheep's cheese that can be grated, like  Parmesan cheese . Sometimes goat or cow milk is used. It is a specialty from Karacabey, a town in Bursa province which was called Mihaliç during Byzantine and Ottoman period. Mostly it is produced from non-pasteurized milk and processed by salt. 
 Örgü peyniri , " braided cheese ", is a specialty from  Diyarbakır . 
 Otlu peynir ,  Van herbed cheese  ("herbed cheese") is produced in many areas, chiefly in East Anatolia. Traditionally sheep's or goat's milk is used, but more recently cow's milk  otlu peynir  has been produced. The type of herb used varies by region: in Van  wild garlic  is traditional; Bitlis  otlu peynir  contains a damp-loving herb known as  sof otu . In other areas horse mint ( Mentha longifolia ) and  Pimpinella rhodentha  are used. [10] 
 Tulum  is a mostly sheep's curd molded in an animal skin bag called as tulum. There are regional varieties of  tulum peynir  in such areas as İzmir, Ödemiş and Erzincan. [10]  And each of the tulum cheeses have very different characteristics. 
 Soups [ edit ] 
 A Turkish meal usually starts with a thin  soup  ( çorba ). Soups are usually named after their main ingredient, the most common types being mercimek ( lentil ) çorbası, yogurt, and  wheat  (often mashed) called  tarhana  çorbası. Delicacy soups are the ones that are usually not the part of the daily diet, such as  İşkembe soup  and  paça  çorbası, although the latter also used to be consumed as a nutritious winter meal. Before the popularisation of the typical Turkish breakfast, soup was the default morning meal for some people.
The most common soups in Turkish cuisine are:
 
   Yayla çorbası , also known as yogurt soup. 
   Sulu köfte 
   Ezogelin soup 
 
 Analı kızlı soup 
 Yayla çorbası 
 Erişte aşı 
 Buğday aşı / Ayran çorbası  (which is served cold) 
 Corba 
 Domates çorbası   ( tomato soup ) 
 Düğün çorbası  (wedding soup) 
 Ekşi Aşı 
 Ezogelin çorbası 
 İşkembe çorbası 
 Keledoş 
 Lahana çorbası  ( cabbage  soup) 
 Mahluta 
 Mercimek çorbası  ( lentil soup ) 
 Paça 
 Pazı 
 Şehriye 
 Sheep's sorrel soup 
 Sulu köfte 
 Sumak aşı 
 Tarhana çorbası 
 Tavuk  ( chicken soup ; with almond it becomes  bademli tavuk ) 
 Toyga soup 
 Trabzon  Balık  çorbası 
 Tutmaç  (lentil dish with noodles) 
 Yüksük çorbası 
 Arabaşı çorbası 
 
 Bread [ edit ] 
 Bazlama 
 Gözleme 
 Mısır ekmeği  ( corn bread ) 
 Lavaş 
 Poğaça 
 Pide  (a broad, round and flat bread made of wheat flour) 
 Simit  (known as " gevrek " in Izmir, another type of ring-shaped bread covered with sesame seeds. Simit is commonly eaten in Turkey, plain or with cheese, butter or marmalade). 
 Açma 
 Yufka , also known as  sac ekmeği  a round and flat bread, made of wheat flour, thinner than pide. 
 Pişi 
 Pastries [ edit ] 
   Lahmacun  ready to be served. 
   Maraş  Börek  can be with cheese, potato, spinach and many other fillings 
 Turkish cuisine has a range of savoury and sweet pastries. Dough-based specialties form an integral part of traditional Turkish cuisine.
 The use of layered dough is rooted in the nomadic character of early Central Asian Turks. [11] [12] [13]  The combination of domed metal  sac  and  oklava  (the Turkish rod-style rolling pin) enabled the invention of the layered dough style used in  börek  (especially in  Su Böreği , or 'water pastry', a salty baklava-like pastry with cheese filling),  güllaç  and  baklava . [11] [12] [13] 
 Börek  is the general name for salty pastries made with  yufka  (a thick phyllo dough), which consists of thin layers of dough.  Su Böreği , made with boiled yufka/phyllo layers, cheese and parsley, is the most frequently eaten.  Çiğ börek  (also known as  Tatar böreği ) is fried and stuffed with minced meat.  Kol böreği  is another well-known type of börek that takes its name from its shape, as do fincan (coffee cup),  muska  (talisman),  Gül böreği  (rose) or  Sigara böreği  (cigarette). Other traditional Turkish böreks include Talaş böreği (phyllo dough filled with vegetables and diced meat), Puf böreği.  Laz böreği  is a sweet type of börek, widespread in the  Black Sea region .
 Poğaça  is the label name for dough based salty pastries. Likewise  çörek  is another label name used for both sweet and salty pastries.
 Gözleme  is a food typical in rural areas, made of  lavash  bread or phyllo dough folded around a variety of fillings such as spinach, cheese and parsley, minced meat or potatoes and cooked on a large griddle (traditionally  sac ).
 Katmer  is another traditional rolled-out dough. It can be salty or sweet according to the filling. Katmer with  pistachio  and  kaymak  is a sweet food and one of the most popular breakfast items in  Gaziantep .
 Lahmacun  (meaning dough with meat in Arabic) is a thin flatbread covered with a layer of spiced minced meat, tomato, pepper, onion or garlic.
 Pide , which can be made with minced meat (together with onion, chopped tomatoes, parsley and spices),  kashar  cheese, spinach, white cheese, pieces of meat, braised meat ( kavurma ), sucuk,  pastırma  or/and eggs put on rolled-out dough, is one of the most common traditional stone-baked Turkish specialities.
 Açma  is a soft bagel found in most parts of Turkey. It is similar to simit in shape, is covered in a glaze, and is usually eaten as a part of breakfast or as a snack.
 
 Pilav and pasta [ edit ] 
   Mantı  with yogurt and garlic, spiced with red pepper powder and melted butter. 
   Typical Turkish pilav. Rice with  orzo . 
 
 
 Turkish
 
 English
 
 Definition
 
 
 Sade pilav
 
 Plain rice pilav is often the primary side dish to any meal. It is made by sauteing rice with butter until lightly toasted and simmering with water or stock.
 
 
 Pilav 
 
 
 Domatesli pilav
 
 tomato pilaf
 
 
 Etli pilav
 
 rice containing meat pieces
 
 
 Nohutlu pilav
 
 rice cooked with chickpeas
 
 
 İç pilav
 
 rice with liver slices, currants, peanuts, chestnut, cinnamon and a variety of herbs
 
 
 Patlıcanlı pilav
 
 rice with eggplant
 
 
 Özbek pilavı
 
 Uzbek pilaf
 
 rice with lamb, onion, tomato, carrot
 
 
 Acem pilavı
 
 Persian pilaf
 
 rice with lamb, cooked in meat broth with pistachios, cinnamon, etc. [14] 
 
 
 Bulgur  pilavı
 
 a cereal food generally made of  durum  wheat. Most of the time, tomato, green pepper and minced meat are mixed with bulgur. The Turkish name ( bulgur pilavı ) indicates that this is a kind of rice but it is, in fact, wheat.
 
 
 Perde pilavı
 
 rice with chicken, onion and peanuts enveloped in a thin layer of dough, topped with almonds
 
 
 Hamsili pilav
 
 spiced rice covered with anchovies, cooked in an oven. A speciality from the Black Sea Region.
 
 
 Frik pilavı
 
 rice made of burnt wheat. A speciality from Antioch/ Antakya .
 
 
 Mantı 
 
 Turkish pasta that consists of folded triangles of dough filled with minced meat, often with minced onions and parsley. It is typically served hot topped with garlic yogurt and melted butter or warmed olive oil, and a range of spices such as oregano, dried  mint , ground  sumac , and  red pepper  powder. The combination of meat-filled dough with yogurt differentiates it from other dumplings such as tortellini, ravioli, and Chinese wonton. Mantı is usually eaten as a main dish. Minced chicken and quail meats are also used to prepare mantı in some regions of Turkey.
 
 
 Erişte 
 
 homemade pasta is called erişte in Turkey. It can be combined with vegetables but it can also be used in soups and rice.
 
 
 Keşkek 
 
 a meat and wheat (or barley) stew
 
 
 Kuskus 
 
 the Turkish version of  couscous , which can be served with any meat dish or stew
 
 Vegetarian dishes [ edit ] 
 Vegetable dishes [ edit ] 
   İmam bayıldı 
 A vegetable dish can be a main course in a Turkish meal. A large variety of vegetables are used, such as  spinach ,  leek ,  cauliflower ,  artichoke ,  cabbage ,  celery ,  eggplant , green and red  bell peppers ,  string bean  and  sunchokes . A typical vegetable dish is prepared with a base of chopped onions, carrots sautéed first in olive oil and later with tomatoes or  tomato paste . The vegetables and hot water will then be added. Quite frequently a spoon of rice and lemon juice is also added. Vegetable dishes usually tend to be served with its own water (the cooking water) thus often called in colloquial Turkish  sulu yemek  (literally "a dish with juice"). Minced meat can also be added to a vegetable dish but vegetable dishes that are cooked with olive oil  ( zeytinyağlılar )  are often served cold and do not contain meat. Spinach, leek, string bean and artichoke with olive oil are among the most widespread dishes in Turkey.
 
   Mücver 
 Dolma  is the name used for stuffed vegetables. Like the vegetables cooked with olive oil as described above dolma with olive oil does not contain meat. Many vegetables are stuffed, most typically green peppers ( biber dolması ), eggplants, tomatoes, or  zucchini /courgettes ( kabak dolması ), vine leaves ( yaprak dolması ). If vine leaves are used, they are first pickled in brine. However, dolma is not limited to these common types; many other vegetables and fruits are stuffed with a meat or pilav mixture. For example, artichoke dolma ( enginar dolması ) is an Aegean region specialty. Fillings used in dolma may consist of parts of the vegetable carved out for preparation, pilav with spices or minced meat.
 Mercimek köftesi , although being named köfte, does not contain any meat. Instead, red lentil is used as the major ingredient together with spring onion, tomato paste etc.
 İmam bayıldı  is a version of  karnıyarık  with no minced meat inside. It can be served as a meze as well.
 Fried eggplant and pepper is a common summer dish in Turkey. It is served with yoğurt or tomato sauce and garlic.
 Mücver  is prepared with grated squash/courgette or potatoes, egg, onion, dill or cheese and flour. It can be either fried or cooked in the oven.
 Pilav  can be served either as a side dish or main dish but  bulgur pilavı  (pilav made of boiled and pounded wheat -  bulgur ) is also widely eaten. The dishes made with  kuru fasulye  ( white beans ),  nohut  ( chickpeas ),  mercimek  ( lentils ),  börülce  ( black-eyed peas ), etc., combined with onion, vegetables, minced meat, tomato paste and rice, have always been common due to being economical and nutritious.
 Turşu  is pickle made with brine, usually with the addition of garlic. It is often enjoyed as an appetizer. It is made with a large variety of vegetables, from cucumber to courgette. In the towns on the Aegean coast, the water of  turşu  is consumed as a drink. It comes from the Persian "Torshi", which refers to pickled "Torsh" (sour) vegetables.
 
 Egg dishes [ edit ] 
   Menemen  (left) as part of a Turkish breakfast 
 Menemen  consists of scrambled eggs cooked in tomato, green pepper, and optionally onion and garlic. 
 Çılbır  is made with poached eggs, yogurt and oil. 
 Ispanaklı yumurta  consists of eggs with spinach and onion. 
 Kaygana  can be described as something of a cross between the crepe and the omelet in Ottoman cuisine. It used to be served with cheese, honey, crushed nuts, or eggplant. 
 Meze and salads [ edit ] 
   A plate of Turkish meze 
   A bowl of  Cacık , the original form of seasoned, diluted  yogurt  with chopped cucumber, eaten throughout the former Ottoman world, under different names, like the  tarator  and  tzatziki  of the  Balkans . 
   A plate of piyaz 
   A plate of  kısır  decorated with green  olive  and  cucumber  pieces 
   Çoban salatası 
 Meze  is a selection of food served as the appetizer course with or without drinks. Some of them can be served as a main course as well.
 Aside from  olive , mature  kaşar   kashar cheese , white cheese, various mixed pickles  turşu , frequently eaten Turkish mezes include:
 
 Acılı ezme – hot spicy freshly mashed tomato with onion and green herbs 
 Acuka  (also known as muhammara) – a spread having both  Circassian  and  Syrian  origins, prepared with from  Aleppo pepper  paste, ground  walnuts , tomato paste, bread crumbs, garlic, and spices 
 Arnavut ciğeri  (literally "Albanian liver") – fried liver cubes served with onion, parsley and hot pepper 
 Roka ( arugula ) salatası 
 Patlıcan salatası  – eggplant salad 
 Piyaz  – white bean or potato salad with onion and vinegar 
 Şakşuka  or in another version  köpoğlu  – fried and chopped eggplants and peppers served with garlic yogurt or tomato sauce 
 Bakla ezmesi  – hummus prepared from broad bean 
 Barbunya  pilaki  –  borlotti beans  cooked with garlic, tomato paste, carrot and olive oil 
 Borani 
 Börek  – very thin dough layers stuffed with cheese, meat or vegetables 
 Cacık  – cucumber with yogurt, dried mint and olive oil 
 Cevizli biber  – a meze prepared with walnut, red pepper, pepper paste, onion and cumin 
 Çerkez tavuğu  (literally "Circassian chicken") 
 Ahtapot ( octopus ) – in seatowns served as a salad or grilled 
 Çiğ köfte  – raw meat patties, similar to  steak tartare , prepared with ground beef (sometimes lamb) and fine-ground  bulgur ; a vegetarian version using tomato paste is known as  etsiz çiğ köfte  (literally "meatless raw meatballs") 
 Çoban salatası  – a mixed salad of tomato, cucumber, onion, green peppers, and parsley 
 Deniz börülcesi salatası , a salad made with young shoots of  Salicornia europaea  (also called common  glasswort  or  marsh samphire ), garlic, lemon juice and olive oil 
 Dolma  – vine leaves, cabbage leaves, chard leaves, peppers, tomato, squash, pumpkin, eggplant or mussels stuffed with rice or meat 
 Fasulye  pilaki  –  white beans  cooked with garlic, tomato paste, carrot and olive oil 
 Ezme  - red pepper, onion, garlic, parsley leaves with tomato paste. The salad is seasoned with lemon, olive oil, cumin, salt and pepper. 
 Fava  – broad/horse bean puree 
 Gavurdağı salatası 
 Hardalotu  – mustard plant salad 
 Haydari 
 Humus  (from the  Arabic  for "chickpea") – a spread prepared from sesame  tahini , chickpeas, garlic, olive oil, and lemon juice. 
 İçli köfte  (also known as oruk) – served either as a meze or a main dish; especially in the east of Turkey, when it is cooked through boiling in a pot, içli köfte is served as a main dish 
 Kabak çiçeği dolması  – stuffed  zucchini  blossoms, a kind of  dolma 
 Kalamar ( calamari ) – fried or grilled, served with  tarator  sauce 
 Karides ( shrimp ) – served as a salad, grilled, or stewed with vegetables in a  güveç  (a casserole) 
 Kısır  (also known as 'sarma içi') – a very popular meze or side dish prepared with fine-ground bulgur, tomato paste, parsley, onion, garlic, sour pomegranate juice and a lot of spices 
 Kızartma , various fried vegetables (eggplants, peppers, courgettes) served with yogurt or tomato-and-garlic sauce 
 Köfte  – meatballs 
 Lakerda  - picked bonito traditionally served with raki at  taverns 
 Muhammara : see Acuka 
 Oruk: see İçli köfte 
 Semizotu ( summer purslane ) salatası – served with yogurt 
 Sıgara boreğı - feta or hot dogs wrapped in phyllo dough and fried 
 Soslu patlıcan - cubed eggplant served in a sauce of olive oil and tomato 
 Tarama  – a spread made with fish  roe 
 Turp otu  salatası 
 Zeytin piyazi  - olives and green onion salad 
 Dolma and sarma [ edit ] 
   Turkish  yaprak sarma 
 Dolma  is a  verbal noun  of the  Turkish  verb  dolmak  'to be stuffed (or filled)', and means simply 'stuffed thing'. [15]  Sarma is also a  verbal noun  of the  Turkish  verb  sarmak  'to wrap', and means simply 'wrapped/wrapping'. Dolma and sarma have a special place in Turkish cuisine. They can be eaten either as a meze or a main dish. They can be cooked either as a vegetable dish or meat dish. If a meat mixture is put in, they are usually served hot with yogurt and spices such as oregano and red pepper powder with oil. If the mixture is vegan, only olive oil, rice or bulgur are used, with some nuts and raisins inside, especially blackcurrant.
 Zeytinyağlı yaprak sarması  (stuffed leaves with olive oil) is the sarma made with vine leaves stuffed with a rice-spice mixture and cooked with olive oil. This type of dolma does not contain meat, is served cold and also referred to as  sarma , which means "wrapping" in Turkish.  Dried fruit  such as blackcurrant, raisins, figs or cherries, and cinnamon and allspice used to be added into the mixture to sweeten  zeytinyağlı dolma  in Ottoman cuisine.  Vine leaves  ( yaprak ) could be filled not only with rice and spices but also with meat and rice,  etli yaprak sarma , in which case it was often served hot with yogurt. The word  sarma  is also used for some types of desserts, such as  fıstık sarma  (wrapped pistachio).
 Melon  dolma along with  quince  or  apple  dolma was one of the palace's specialties (raw melon stuffed with minced meat, onion, rice, almonds, cooked in an oven). In contemporary Turkey, a wide variety of dolma is prepared. Although it is not possible to give an exhaustive list of dolma recipes,  courgette  ("kabak"),  aubergine  ("patlıcan"),  tomato  ("domates"),  pumpkin  ("balkabağı"),  pepper  ("biber"),  cabbage  ("lahana") (black or white cabbage),  chard  ("pazı") and  mussel  ("midye") dolma constitute the most common types. Instead of dried cherries in the Palace Cuisine, currants are usually added to the filling of dolma cooked in olive oil. A different type of dolma is  mumbar  dolması, for which the membrane of intestines of sheep is filled up with a spicy rice pilav-nut mixture.
 
 Meat dishes [ edit ] 
   Karnıyarık 
   Kokoreç  dish in Ankara 
   Pastırma  with three eggs, a common Turkish breakfast dish 
 Consisted of chicken or lean veal, Döner kebap is a common Turkish fast food. 
 Tantuni  (similar to  dürüm , meat cut in very small pieces, served with lavash, a specialty from the  Mersin  province of Turkey) 
 Kuzu güveç (lamb cooked in earthenware casserole) 
 Pastırmalı  kuru fasulye  (white kidney bean stew with  pastırma ) 
 Kuzu kapama  (spring lamb stewed) 
 Haşlama (boiled lamb with vegetables and lemon juice) 
 Kavurma  which means frying, roasting or parching in Turkish, is generally used for roasted lamb or a variety of fried meat dishes. Çoban kavurma is a variety of it, prepared with diced lamb with tomatoes, onions, mushrooms, peppers and herbs. Kavurma is one of the favorite dishes of Ramadan. 
 Alinazik , a home-style Turkish  kebab  variety which is a specialty of the  Gaziantep province . 
 Hünkârbeğendi [16]  (the name means that the sovereign/sultan liked it, the dish consists of a puree of grilled eggplant with kaşar cheese, topped with cubed lamb meat) 
 Türlü  (a stew of vegetables and meat cooked in güveç-casserole) 
 Külbastı 
 Ankara tava  (pilav with lamb) 
 Elbasan tava 
 Tandır (without adding any water, the meat is cooked very slowly with a special technique) 
 İncik ( lamb shank  cooked in the oven) 
 Boraniye  (broad bean/spinach/squash boraniye, vegetables cooked together with meat, yogurt and chickpea) 
 Karnıyarık [16]  (split-belly eggplant) (eggplants are cut off and fried. Then they are filled with minced meat, onion, garlic and tomato paste and cooked in the oven. 
 Kanat (chicken wings) 
 Köfte  (meatball) is another meat dish in Turkey. The word  köfte  is sometimes preceded by the name of a town, which refers to the technique for cooking it or the ingredients or spices specifically used in that region, for example;  İnegöl köftesi ,  İzmir köfte ,  Akçaabat köfte ,  pideli köfte  (Bursa),  Filibe  köfte,  Tire köfte ,  Islama köfte  (mainly in  Sakarya province ) etc. Its main ingredients are minced meat, parsley, bread-egg (not necessarily, usually homemade köfte contains egg yolk and some crumbled bread) and a range of spices: cumin, oregano, mint powder, red or black pepper powder with onion or garlic.  Kadınbudu köfte  is another traditional speciality; minced meat is mixed with cooked rice and fried.  Içli köfte  can be described as a shell of "bulgur" filled with onion, minced meat and nuts.  Çiğ köfte  is a meze from south-eastern Turkey meaning raw meatballs, prepared with bulgur wheat and raw minced meat (like beef or lamb). Today in most Turkish restaurants, the raw meat is usually omitted and instead extra-fine Bulgar is used. [17]  Terbiyeli Sulu Köfte is another meatball speciality cooked with flour, tomato paste and water in which lemon and egg sauce is added. 
 Sucuk  is a form of raw sausage (made with beef meat and a range of spices, and garlic) commonly eaten with breakfast. Instead of classical sausages ( sosis ), sucuk is the most used ingredient for snacks and fast-food style toasts and sandwiches in Turkey. 
 Pastırma  is another famous beef delicacy. Both pastırma and sucuk can be put in  kuru fasulye  (dry beans) to enrich the aroma. Both can be served as a meze as well. Sucuk or pastırma with  scrambled eggs , served in a small pan called sahan, is eaten at breakfast in Turkey. 
 Kokoreç  (the intestines of sheep) with spices is a traditional low-price fast food in Turkey. 
 Liver  is fried in Turkish cuisine. "Arnavut ciğeri" (meaning Albanian liver), served with onion and  sumac , is usually eaten as a meze, in combination with other mezes such as fava. " Edirne ciğeri " is another famous liver dish from  Edirne . Liver is first frozen so that it can be cut into very thin layers. After being cut off, liver layers are fried. 
 Kelle (roasted sheep's head) 
 Kuzu etli enginar (artichokes with lamb) 
 Etli taze fasulye (green beans stew with meat) 
 Etli bamya (okra with meat) 
 İşkembeli nohut (chickpea with tripe) 
 Piliç dolma (stuffed chicken with spice filling) 
 Kebabs [ edit ] 
   Alinazik kebab over garlic-eggplant puree with vermicelli rice pilaf, grilled tomato and green bell pepper. 
   Doner  being carved. 
   İskender kebap 
   Pastirma  is a highly seasoned, air-dried cured beef 
 Main article:  Kebab 
 For a list of kebab variants, see  List of kebabs . 
 Kebab  refers to a great variety of meat-based dishes in Turkish cuisine. Kebab in Turkey encompasses not only grilled or skewered meats, but also stews and casseroles.
 
 Adana kebap  or  kıyma kebabı  – kebab with hand-minced meat mixed with chili on a flat wide metal skewer (shish); associated with  Adana  region although very popular all over Turkey. [18] 
 Ali Paşa kebabı , "Ali Pasha kebab" – cubed lamb with tomato, onion and parsley wrapped in phillo. [18] 
 Alinazik kebab  – Ground meat kebab sautéed in a saucepan, with garlic, yogurt and eggplants added. 
 Bahçıvan kebabı , 'gardener's kebab' – Boneless lamb shoulder mixed with chopped onions and tomato paste. 
 Beyti kebab  – Ground lamb or beef, seasoned and grilled on a skewer, often served wrapped in  lavash  and topped with  tomato sauce  and  yogurt , traced back to the famous kebab house  Beyti  in  Istanbul  and particularly popular in Turkey's larger cities. 
 Bostan kebabı  – Lamb and aubergine casserole. [18] 
 Buğu kebabı , "steamed kebap" – cooked in low heat until the meat releases its moisture and reabsorbs it. 
 Cağ kebab , 'spoke kebab' – Cubes of lamb roasted first on a  cağ  (a horizontal  rotating spit ) and then on a skewer, a specialty of  Erzurum  region with recently rising popularity. 
 Ciğer kebabı , 'liver kebab' - usually eaten with sliced onions, salad and bread. 
 Ciğerli kağıt kebabı , 'liver paper kebab' – Lamb liver kebab mixed with meat and marinated with  thyme ,  parsley  and  dill . 
 Çardak kebabı , 'arbor kebab' – Stuffed lamb meat in a  crêpe . 
 Çökertme kebabı  – Sirloin veal kebap stuffed with  yogurt  and potatoes. 
 Çömlek kebabı , 'earthenware bowl kebab' – Meat and vegetable casserole (called a  güveç  in Turkish) with eggplant, carrots, shallots, beans, tomatoes and green pepper. 
 Çöp şiş , "small skewer kebab" – a speciality of  Selçuk  and  Germencik  near  Ephesus , pounded boneless meat with tomatoes and garlic marinated with black pepper,  thyme  and oil on wooden skewers. [19] 
 Döner kebab 
 Hünkâri kebabı , 'Sultan's kebab' – Sliced lamb meat mixed with  patlıcan beğendi  (aubergine purée), basil,  thyme  and  bay leaf . [18] 
 İskender kebap  – döner kebap served with  yogurt , tomato sauce and  butter , originated in  Bursa . The kebab was invented by İskender Efendi in 1867. He was inspired from Cağ kebab and turned it from horizontal to vertical. 
 İslim kebabı , 'steamed kebab' – Another version of the aubergine kebab without its skin, marinated in sunflower oil. [18] [19] 
 Kağıt kebabı  – Lamb cooked in a paper wrapping. [19] 
 Kuyu kebabı , 'pit kebab' – Prepared from the goat it is special for  Aydın  region, similar to  tandır kebabı . 
 Kuzu incik kebabı , 'lamb shank kebab' – Lamb shanks mixed with peeled eggplants and chopped tomatoes, cream, salt and pepper. 
 Kuzu şiş  – Shish prepared with marinated milk-fed lamb meat. 
 Köfte kebap  or  Shish köfte  – minced lamb meatballs with herbs, often including  parsley  and  mint , on a stick, grilled. 
 Manisa kebabı  – This  Manisa  region version of the kebab is smaller and flat size shish meat on the sliced  pide  bread, flavored with butter, and stuffed with tomato, garlic and green pepper. 
 Orman kebabı , 'forest kebab' – Lamb meat on the bone and cut in large pieces mixed with carrots, potatoes and peas. [18] 
 Patates kebabı , 'potato kebab' – Beef or chicken mixed with potatoes, onions, tomato sauce and bay leaves. 
 Patlıcan kebabı , 'aubergine kebab' – Special kebap meat marinated in spices and served with  eggplant  (aubergine), hot pide bread and a yogurt sauce. [19] 
 Ramazan kebabı , ' Ramadan  kebab' – Meat mixed with yogurt, tomato and garlic stuffed with fresh mint or garnish on Pide bread. 
 Shish kebab  – Prepared with fish, lamb or chicken meat on thin metal or reed rods, grilled. [18] [19] 
 Şiş tavuk  or  Tavuk şiş  –  Yogurt - marinated  chicken grilled on a stick. [19] 
 Sivas kebabı  – Associated with the  Sivas  region, similar to Tokat kebab but especially lamb ribs are preferred and it also differs from Tokat kebabı on the point that there are no potatoes inside. 
 Susuz kebap , 'waterless kebab' – Cooked after draining excess fluid from the meat rubbed with salt and cinnamon in saucepan. 
 Talaş kebabı , 'sawdust kebab' – Diced lamb, mixed with grated onions, brown meat mixed with flour dough. 
 Tandır kebabı , 'tandoor kebab' – Lamb pieces (sometimes a whole lamb) baked in an oven called a  tandır , which requires a special way of cooking for hours. Served with bread and raw onions. [18] 
 Tas kebabı , 'bowl kebab' – Stewed kebab in a bowl, beginning with the cooking of the vegetables in butter employing a method called  yaga vurmak , ("butter infusion"), before the meat itself is cooked in the same grease. 
 Testi kebabı , 'earthenware-jug kebab' – Ingredients are similar to  çömlek kebabı , prepared in a  testi  instead of a  güveç , generally found in Central Anatolia and the Mid-Western Black Sea region. 
 Tokat kebabı  – Associated with the  Tokat  region, it is made with veal marinated in olive oil, aubergine, tomatoes, potatoes, onion, garlic and special  pita  bread. 
 Urfa kebabı  – is similar to  Adana kebabı , but less spicy. 
 Fish [ edit ] 
 Turkey is surrounded by seas that contain a large variety of fish. Fish are grilled, fried or cooked slowly by the  buğulama  (poaching) method.  Buğulama  is fish with lemon and parsley, covered while cooking so that it will be cooked with steam. The term  pilâki  is also used for fish cooked with various vegetables, including onion in the oven. In the Black Sea region, fish are usually fried with thick corn flour. Fish are also eaten cold; as smoked (isleme) or dried (çiroz), canned, salted or pickled (lâkerda). Fish is also cooked in salt or in dough in Turkey. Pazıda Levrek is a seafood speciality which consists of  sea bass  cooked in  chard  leaves. In fish restaurants, it is possible to find other fancy fish varieties like  balık dolma  (stuffed fish),  balık iskender  (inspired by  İskender kebap ), fishballs or fish en papillote.  Fish soup  prepared with vegetables, onion and flour is common in coastal towns and cities. In  Istanbul 's  Eminönü  and other coastal districts, grilled fish served in bread with tomatoes, herbs and onion is a popular fast food. In the inner parts of Turkey,  trout   alabalık  is common as it is the main type of freshwater fish. Popular seafood mezes at coastlines include stuffed mussels, fried  mussel  and fried  kalamar  ( squid ) with  tarator  sauce.
 Popular sea fish in Turkey include: [20] 
 
   Istavrit on display at a fish market 
 anchovy   hamsi 
 sardine   sardalya 
 bonito   palamut 
 gilt-head bream   çupra  or  çipura 
 red mullet   barbun(ya) 
 sea bass   levrek 
 whiting  or  bakalyaro 
 haddock   mezgit 
 swordfish   kılıç balığı 
 Black Sea Turbot   kalkan 
 red pandora   mercan 
 Jack mackerel   istavrit 
 white grouper   lagos 
 bluefish   lüfer 
 Desserts [ edit ] 
 See also:  List of Turkish desserts 
   Baklava  is prepared on large trays and cut into a variety of shapes. 
   Sütlaç , or Turkish  rice pudding . 
   Turkish delight . 
   Kazandibi , means the bottom of cauldron because of its burnt surface. 
   Şekerpare . 
 Cuisine in the late Ottoman Empire  was heavily influenced by  alafranga  style food, in fashion all over Europe and in Russia in the late 19th century. In the Turkish context it has been regarded as a symbol of  Westernization . This influence could still be seen in the earliest cookbooks of the early Republican period like the first edition of the  Türk Kadınlar Tatlı Kitabı  (Turkish Women's Book of Desserts) which had recipes for Western style  sponge cake  ( pandispanya ),  mille feuille ,  petit beurre  and other western  desserts. The revised edition published in 1966 devoted far more attention to traditional  confectionery  like  şekerpare ,  baklava  and  helva . [21] 
 One of the world-renowned desserts of Turkish cuisine is  baklava . Baklava is made either with pistachios or walnuts. Turkish cuisine has a range of baklava-like desserts which include  şöbiyet ,  bülbül yuvası ,  saray sarması ,  sütlü nuriye , and  sarı burma .
 Kadaif  ('Kadayıf') is a common Turkish dessert that employs shredded yufka. There are different types of  kadaif : tel (wire) or  Burma  (wring) kadayıf, both of which can be prepared with either walnuts or pistachios.
 Although carrying the label "kadayıf",  ekmek kadayıfı  is totally different from "tel kadayıf".  Künefe  and  ekmek kadayıfı  are rich in syrup and butter, and are usually served with  kaymak  (clotted/scrambled butter). Künefe contains wire kadayıf with a layer of melted cheese in between and it is served hot with pistachios or walnuts.
 Katmer  is made as a dessert with kaymak (clotted cream,) and like many other delicacies from  Gaziantep  and  Kilis  , is also filled and topped with pistachios.
 Among milk-based desserts, the most popular ones are  muhallebi ,  su muhallebisi ,  sütlaç  (rice pudding),  keşkül ,  kazandibi  (meaning the bottom of "kazan" because of its burnt surface), and  tavuk göğsü  (a sweet, gelatinous, milk pudding dessert quite similar to kazandibi, to which very thinly peeled chicken breast is added to give a chewy texture). A speciality from the Mediterranean region is  haytalı , which consists of pieces of starch pudding and ice cream (or crushed ice) put in rose water sweetened with syrup.
 Helva  (halva):  un helvası  (flour helva is usually cooked after someone has died),süt helvası(its ingredients are raw cow's milk, butter, flour and sugar. it is cooked by frying the top in an oven at 250 °C.is popular in  Bursa )  irmik helvası  (cooked with semolina and pine nuts), hoşmerim  (cheese helva),  yaz helvası  (made from walnut or almond [22] ),  tahin helvası  (crushed sesame seeds. it is also eaten for breakfast),  kos helva ,  pişmaniye  (floss halva).
 Other popular desserts include;  Revani  (with semolina and starch),  şekerpare ,  kalburabasma ,  dilber dudağı ,  vezir parmağı ,  hanım göbeği ,  kemalpaşa ,  tulumba ,  zerde ,  paluze ,  irmik tatlısı/peltesi ,  lokma .
 Güllaç  is a dessert typically served at Ramadan, which consists of very thin, large dough layers put in milk and rose water, served with pomegranate seeds and walnuts. A story is told that in the kitchens of the Palace, those extra thin dough layers were prepared with "prayers", as it was believed that if one did not pray while opening phyllo dough, it would never be possible to obtain such thin layers.
 Aşure  can be described as a sweet soup containing boiled beans, wheat and dried fruits. Sometimes cinnamon and rose water is added when being served. According to legend, it was first cooked on  Noah's Ark  and contained seven different ingredients in one dish. All the Anatolian peoples have cooked and are still cooking aşure especially during the month of Muharrem.
 Some traditional Turkish desserts are fruit-based:  ayva tatlısı  ( quince ),  incir tatlısı  ( fig ),  kabak tatlısı  ( pumpkin ),  elma tatlısı  ( apple ) and  armut tatlısı  ( pear ). Fruits are cooked in a pot or in an oven with sugar, carnations and cinnamon (without adding water). After being chilled, they are served with walnuts or pistachios and  kaymak .
 Homemade cookies/biscuits are commonly called  kurabiye  in Turkish. The most common types are  acıbadem kurabiyesi  (prepared only with eggs, sugar and almonds),  un kurabiyesi  (flour kurabiye) and cevizli kurabiye (kurabiye with walnuts). Another dough based dessert is  ay çöreği .
 Tahin-pekmez  is a traditional combination especially in rural areas. Tahin is  sesame paste  and  pekmez  is grape syrup. These are sold separately and mixed before consumption.
 Lokum  ( Turkish delight ), which was eaten for digestion after meals and called "rahat hulkum" in the Ottoman era, is another well-known sweet/candy with a range of varieties.
 Cezerye ,  cevizli sucuk  (named after its sucuk/sujuk like shape, also known as  Churchkhela  in Circassian region) and  pestil  (fruit leather) are among other common sweets.
 Marzipan   badem ezmesi  or  fıstık ezmesi  (made of ground pistachios) is another common confection in Turkey.
 Another jelly like Turkish sweet is  macun .  Mesir macunu  of  Manisa / İzmir  (which was also called "nevruziye" as this Macun was distributed on the first day of spring in the Ottoman Palace) contains 41 different spices. It is still believed that "mesir macunu" is good for health and has healing effects. As with lokum,  nane macunu  (prepared with mint) used to be eaten as a digestive after heavy meals. Herbs and flowers having curative effects were grown in the gardens of Topkapı under the control of the chief doctor "hekimbaşı" and pharmacists of the Palace who used those herbs for preparing special types of  macun  and  sherbet . [23] 
 There are also several types of ice creams based on  salep  powder or  Cornstarch  with  Rose water  such as  Dondurma  (Turkish gum ice cream), dried fruit ice cream, ice cream rose petals.
 Dried fruit, used in dolma, pilav, meat dishes and other desserts is also eaten with almonds or walnuts as a dessert. Figs, grapes, apricots are the most widespread dried fruits.
 Kaymak  (clotted cream-butter) is often served with desserts to cut through their sweetness.
 Turkish tea  or  Turkish coffee , with or without sugar, is usually served after dinner or more rarely together with desserts.
 
 Street food [ edit ] 
 This section  does not  cite  any  sources .  Please help  improve this section  by  adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and  removed .   ( May 2017 )  ( Learn how and when to remove this template message ) 
   Turkish desserts served with  Dondurma 
 Dondurma 
 iced almonds  buzlu badem 
 fried mussels, stuffed mussels  midye 
 fresh walnuts  taze ceviz 
 gözleme is a kind of food that a thin flat bread called "yufka" stuffed with potato, white or kaşar cheese, spinach, ground meat and/or other ingredients with or without spices and traditionally cooked over "sac", a traditional cooking equipment 
 kokoreç 
 fish bread  balık ekmek 
 sucuk ekmek 
 köfte ekmek 
 kumpir a baked potato served with  kaşar  cheese and many other toppings 
 lokma 
 roasted corn  közde mısır 
 roasted chesnuts  kestane 
 simit 
 Macun 
 Beverages [ edit ] 
 Alcoholic beverages [ edit ] 
 See also:  Turkish wine ,  Alcohol laws of Turkey , and  Beer in Turkey 
   Toasting with rakı, in typical rakı glasses 
 Although the majority of Turks profess the Islamic religion,  alcoholic beverages  are as widely available as anywhere.  Rakı  (pronounced [ɾaˈkɯ]) is the most popular alcoholic drink in Turkey.
 
   A Turkish beer brand,  Efes Pilsen 
 There are a few local brands of  lager  such as  Bomonti , Marmara 34 and  Efes Pilsen  and a small selection of international beers that are produced in Turkey such as Skol,  Beck's ,  Miller ,  Foster's ,  Carlsberg  and  Tuborg . In Turkey,  craft beers  became popular in present-day;  Gara Guzu ,  Feliz Kulpa ,  Pablo  and  Graf  are some Turkish craft beer brands
 
   Wine-producing regions in Turkey. 
 There are a variety of local  wines  produced by Turkish brands such as  Sevilen ,  Kavaklıdere , Doluca, Corvus, Kayra, Pamukkale and Diren which are getting more popular with the change of climatic conditions that affect the production of wine. A range of grape varieties are grown in Turkey. For the production of red wine, the following types of grapes are mainly used; in the Marmara Region,  Pinot noir ,  Adakarası ,  Papazkarası ,  Semillion ,  Kuntra ,  Gamay ,  Cinsault ; in the Aegean Region,  Carignane ,  Çalkarası ,  Merlot ,  Cabernet Sauvignon ,  Alicante Bouschet ; in the Black Sea Region and the eastern part of the country,  Öküzgözü ,  Boğazkere ; in Central Anatolia,  Kalecik Karası ,  Papazkarası ,  Dimrit ; in the Mediterranean Region,  Sergi Karası ,  Dimrit . As for white wine, the grapes can be listed as follows; in the Marmara Region,  Chardonnay ,  Riesling ,  Semillion ,  Beylerce ,  Yapıncak ; in the Aegean Region,  muscat  and  semillion ; in the Black Sea Region,  Narince ; in Central Anatolia,  Emir , Goat Cheese. In addition to mass production, it is quite popular to produce wines in private farms and sell them in the locality. Visitors can find different "home made" wines in Central Anatolia (Kapadokya/ Cappadocia  region -  Nevşehir ), the Aegean coast ( Selçuk  and  Bozcaada  (an island in the Aegean Sea)).
 
 Non-alcoholic beverages [ edit ] 
   Turkish tea 
   Turkish coffee 
 At breakfast and all day long Turkish people drink  black tea  ( çay ). Tea is made with two teapots in Turkey. Strong bitter tea made in the upper pot is diluted by adding boiling water from the lower.  Turkish coffee  ( kahve ) is usually served after meals or with dessert.
 Ayran  (yogurt drink) is the most common cold beverage, which may accompany almost all dishes in Turkey, except those with fish and other seafood. It's a mix of yogurt and water, similar to  lassi . It may be served with salt, according to taste.
 Şalgam suyu  (mild or spicy fermented  black carrot  juice) is another important non-alcoholic beverage that is usually combined with kebabs or served together with  rakı .
 Boza  is a traditional winter drink, which is also known as millet wine (served cold with cinnamon and sometimes with  leblebi ).
 Sahlep  is another favorite in winter (served hot with cinnamon). Sahlep is extracted from the roots of wild orchids and may be used in Turkish ice cream as well. This was a popular drink in western Europe before coffee was brought from Africa and came to be widely known.
 Limonata  (lemonade) is very popular. It is traditionally served with baklava and other sweets. Sometimes lemonade is served with strawberry flavoring. This is called  çilekli limonata .
 Sherbet  (Turkish  şerbet,  pronounced  [ʃeɾˈbet] ) is a syrup which can be made from any of a wide variety of ingredients, especially fruits, flowers, or herbs. Examples include pears, quinces, strawberries, apples,  cornelian cherry , pomegranates, oranges, rose petals, rose hips, or licorice and spices. Sherbet is drunk diluted with cold water.
 In classical Turkish cuisine,  hoşaf  (from the Persian "Khosh-ab", meaning "fresh water") alternatively accompanies meat dishes and  pilav  ( pilaf ).
 
 Related cuisines [ edit ] 
 
 Albanian cuisine 
 Armenian cuisine 
 Azerbaijani cuisine 
 Balkan cuisine 
 Caucasian cuisine 
 Central Asian cuisine 
 Cypriot cuisine 
 Greek cuisine 
 Iranian cuisine 
 Levantine cuisine 
 Mediterranean cuisine 
 Mesopotamian cuisine 
 Middle Eastern cuisine 
 Mongolian cuisine 
 Ottoman cuisine 
 Turkmen cuisine 
 
 See also [ edit ] 
 
 Baklava 
 Doner kebap 
 İskender kebap 
 Gözleme 
 Kadaif 
 Kumpir 
 Mangal 
 Mantı 
 Meze 
 Pide 
 Turkish coffee 
 Turkish rakı 
 Turkish tea 
 Turkish stuffed dishes 
 
 References [ edit ] 
 
 
 ^   İlkin, Nur; Kaufman, Sheilah (2002).  A Taste of Turkish cuisine . Hippocrene Books.  ISBN   978-0781809481 . Retrieved  12 December  2017 . 
 
 ^   Aarssen, Jeroen; Backus, Ad (2000).  Colloquial Turkish .  Routledge . p. 71.  ISBN   978-0-415-15746-9 . Retrieved  15 April  2009 . 
 
 ^  a   b   Kia, Mehrdad (2011).  Daily Life in the Ottoman Empire . ABC-CLIO. p. 225.  ISBN   9780313064029 . 
 
 ^  a   b   "Ethnic Cuisine - Turkey by Terrie Wright Chrones" . Archived from  the original  on 29 April 2007 . Retrieved  17 February  2007 . 
 
 ^   Warren, Ozlem (18 December 2013).  "Mantı, Turkish Dumplings with Ground Meat, Onions, and Spices" .  Ozlem's Turkish Table . {{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: url-status ( link ) 
 
 ^   Sommer, Peter.  "Pilav - Turkish Rice" .  Peter Sommer Travels . {{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: url-status ( link ) 
 
 ^   Whiting, Dominic (2000).  Turkey Handbook . Footprint Handbooks. p. 56.  ISBN   978-1-900949-85-9 . Retrieved  15 April  2009 . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   e   f   g   h   i   j   k   l   m   n   o   p   Akin, Engin (6 October 2015).  Essential Turkish Cuisine . Abrams.  ISBN   978-1-61312-871-8 . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   e   f   g   h   i   j   k   Basan, Ghillie (15 April 1997).  Classic Turkish Cooking . Macmillan.  ISBN   978-0-312-15617-6 . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   "Turkish Cheeses" . 2 June 2005. Archived from  the original  on 15 January 2013 . Retrieved  7 December  2007 . 
 
 ^  a   b   Perry, Charles.  "The Taste for Layered Bread among the Nomadic Turks and the Central Asian Origins of Baklava" , in  A Taste of Thyme: Culinary Cultures of the Middle East  (ed. Sami Zubaida, Richard Tapper), 1994. p. 89. 
 
 ^  a   b   NTV MSNBC.  "Charles Perry:Baklava Türk tatlısıdır"  (in Turkish). Archived from  the original  on 7 October 2011 . Retrieved  31 March  2009 . 
 
 ^  a   b   Arab Studies Journal .  Georgetown University . 2001. p. 115 . Retrieved  31 March  2009 . 
 
 ^   Marianna Yerasimos - Ottoman cuisine 
 
 ^   "Definition of DOLMA" .  www.merriam-webster.com . 
 
 ^  a   b   Ken Albala (2011).  Food Cultures of the World Encyclopedia . ABC-CLIO. pp. 307–.  ISBN   978-0-313-37626-9 . 
 
 ^   Herman, Louis.  "What is çiğ köfte?" .  Sirkeci Restaurants . {{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: url-status ( link ) 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   e   f   g   h   Turkish Cookery  by M.Günür  ISBN   975-479-100-7 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   e   f   The Complete Book of Turkish Cooking , A.Algar (1985)  ISBN   0-7103-0334-3 
 
 ^   English names for fish from  Alan Davidson ,  Mediterranean Seafood , Penguin, 1972.  ISBN   0-14-046174-4 
 
 ^   Isin, Priscilla (2013).  Sherbet and Spice: The Complete Story of Turkish Sweets and Desserts . I. B. Tauris.  ISBN   978-1-84885-898-5 . 
 
 ^   Nevin Halıcı - Sufi cuisine 
 
 ^   Marianna Yerasimos, Ottoman cuisine 
 
 
 Bibliography [ edit ] 
 Budak, Süheyl,  Antakya Mutfağı , Hatay 2008,  OCLC   705454123  (1996 edition) 
 Antakya-cuisine with Süheyl Budak and 75 ladies 
 Gürsoy, Deniz,  Turkish Cuisine in Historical Perspective , Istanbul, 2006,  ISBN   975-329-564-2 . 
 Halıcı, Nevin,  Konya Yemek Kültürü ve Konya Yemekleri , Istanbul 2005,  ISBN   975-6021-16-0 . 
 Halıcı, Nevin,  Sufi Cuisine , Saqi 2005. 
 Lambraki, Mirsini & Akın, Engin,  Aynı Sofrada İki Ülke, Türk ve Yunan Mutfağı , Istanbul 2003,  ISBN   975-458-484-2 . 
 Roden, Claudia ,  A New Book of Middle Eastern Food , 2000,  ISBN   0-14-046588-X . 
 Şavkay, Turgut,  Halk Mutfağımız Geleneksel Tatlarımızdan Seçmeler , Istanbul 2005,  ISBN   975-98180-2-7 . 
 Şavkay, Turgut,  Turkish Cuisine , Istanbul 2003,  ISBN   975-285-114-2 
 Ünsal, Artun & Süt, Uyuyunca,  Türkiye Peynirleri , Istanbul,  ISBN   975-363-755-1 . 
 Ünsal, Artun & Silivrim, Kaymak,  Türkiye'nin Yoğurtları , Istanbul 2007,  ISBN   978-975-08-1276-7 . 
 Yerasimos, Marianna,  Osmanlı Mutfağı , Istanbul 2002; published in English as  500 Years of Ottoman Cuisine . 
 Zubaida, Sami & Tapper, Richard,  A Taste of Thyme: Culinary Cultures of the Middle East , London and New York, 1994 and 2000,  ISBN   1-86064-603-4 . 
 External links [ edit ] 
 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons has media related to  Cuisine of Turkey . 
 
 
 
 
 Wikibooks  Cookbook  has a recipe/module on
 
  Turkish cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wikibooks  Cookbook  has a recipe/module on
 
  Turkish Cooking 
 
 
 Turkish Cultural Foundation -  Turkish Cuisine Portal 
 Cornucopia  recipe index -  Cookery Listing 
 "Turkish Cousine" (Study In Turkey) 
 v t e Turkey   topics History Overview 
 Renaissance (1400–1500) 
 Conquest of Constantinople 
 Early modern period (1500–1750) 
 Sultanate of Women 
 Köprülü era 
 Tulip era 
 Late modern period (1750–1923) 
 Tanzimat 
 Ottoman Reform Edict of 1856 
 First Constitutional Era 
 Second Constitutional Era 
 Partition 
 Contemporary period (1923–present) 
 War of Independence 
 One-party period 
 Multi-party period 
 By topic 
 Constitutional 
 Economic 
 Empire 
 Foreign relations 
 1814–1919 
 Military 
 Society and its environment Overview 
 Climate 
 Climate change 
 Boundaries 
 Geology 
 Landform regions 
 By topic 
 Education 
 Language reform 
 Health and welfare 
 Individual, family and gender relations 
 LGBT rights 
 Marriage 
 Status of women 
 Population 
 Population distribution and settlement in Turkey 
 Migration 
 Government policies 
 Religious life 
 Economy Overview 
 Growth of the economy 
 Development planning 
 Economic development 
 Foreign economic relations 
 Foreign trade 
 Regional economic integration 
 By sector 
 Agriculture 
 Industry 
 Construction 
 Energy 
 Mineral resources 
 Services 
 Banking and Finance 
 Transportation  and  Telecommunications 
 Airlines 
 Railways 
 Tourism 
 Government   and politics 
 Administrative divisions 
 The constitutional system 
 Provisions 
 Electoral system 
 Government 
 Parliament 
 President 
 Council of Ministers 
 Prime minister 
 Judiciary 
 Constitutional Court 
 Court of Cassation 
 Court of Jurisdictional Disputes 
 Council of State 
 Political Dynamics
 Political parties 
 Mass media 
 Newspapers and periodicals 
 Radio and television 
 Foreign relations 
 National security  in Turkey 
 External security concerns 
 Near Eastern conflicts 
 Syria 
 Iran 
 Greece  and  Cyprus 
 Military 
 Participation in NATO 
 Defense spending 
 Sources and quality of personnel 
 Education and training 
 Air Force 
 Navy 
 Uniforms, ranks, and insignia 
 Domestic arms industry 
 Internal security concerns 
 Kurdish nationalism 
 Armenian terrorism 
 Islamists 
 Police system 
 National Police 
 Gendarmerie 
 Intelligence Services 
 Individual rights 
 Culture 
 Architecture 
 Ottoman architecture 
 Art 
 Cinema 
 Cuisine 
 wine 
 Dance 
 Festivals 
 Folklore 
 Languages 
 Turkish 
 Literature 
 Media 
 Newspapers 
 Radio stations 
 TV 
 Music 
 Names 
 Theater 
 
 Category 
 Portal 
 WikiProject 
 v t e Turkish cuisine Beverages 
 Non-alcoholic beverages 
 Mırra 
 Pekmez 
 Rize tea 
 Salep 
 Şalgam 
 Şerbet 
 Şıra 
 Turkish coffee 
 Turkish tea 
 Fermented beverages 
 Ayran 
 Hardaliye 
 Boza 
 Kefir 
 Yayık ayranı 
 Beers 
 Beer in Turkey  (main article) 
 Efes 
 Bomonti 
 Pera 
 GaraGuzu 
 Tekel  (inactive) 
 Distilled beverages 
 Rakı 
 Kanyak 
 Wines 
 Turkish wine  (main article) 
 Adakarası 
 Boğazkere 
 Çalkarası 
 Kalecik Karası 
 Öküzgözü 
 Papazkarası 
 Breads 
 Bazlama 
 Boyoz 
 Çerkes simidi 
 Gözleme 
 Kandil simidi 
 Katmer 
 Lavaş 
 Nokul 
 Pide 
 Pişi 
 Poğaça 
 Saj bread 
 Simit 
 Tandır bread 
 Kete (food) 
 Appetizers and salads 
 Meze  (main article) 
 Acuka 
 Bakla Ezmesi 
 Cacık 
 Çiğ köfte 
 Çoban salad 
 Deniz börülcesi salatası 
 Dolma 
 Humus 
 Katık 
 İçli köfte 
 İmam bayıldı 
 Kabak çiçeği dolması 
 Kısır 
 Kokoreç 
 Lakerda 
 Mercimek köftesi 
 Midye dolma 
 Pastırma 
 Patlıcan salatası 
 Pilaki 
 Piyaz 
 Sarma 
 Sucuk 
 Şakşuka 
 Taramasalata 
 Tarator 
 Turkish cold bulgur soup 
 Yoğurt 
 Cheeses 
 Beyaz peynir 
 Braided cheese 
 Circassian cheese 
 Civil peyniri 
 Çömlek cheese 
 Dolaz cheese 
 Hellim 
 Kars gravyer cheese 
 Kaşar cheese 
 Kaşkaval cheese 
 Künefe peyniri 
 Lavaş cheese 
 Lor cheese 
 Mihaliç cheese 
 Saganaki cheese 
 Teleme peyniri 
 Tomas peyniri 
 Tulum cheese 
 Van herbed cheese 
 Soups 
 Çorba  (main article) 
 Analı kızlı soup 
 Balık çorbası 
 Ezogelin 
 İşkembe 
 Kuzukulağı çorbası 
 Mercimek 
 Tarhana 
 Toyga soup 
 Yayla çorbası 
 Erişte aşı 
 Keledoş 
 Kelle paça 
 Chicken soup 
 Dishes 
 Arnavut ciğeri 
 Ayva dolması 
 Balık ekmek 
 Börek 
 Buğu kebabı 
 Bulgur 
 Bursa Cantik Pide 
 Çorbalık kesme 
 Şevketibostan yemeği 
 Şırdan 
 Çiğ börek 
 Çılbır 
 Colocasia with lamb 
 Corn poppy with lamb 
 Domates dolması 
 Etli makarna 
 Kabaklı peynirli börek 
 Kavurma 
 Erişte 
 Kelle Paça 
 Kömbe 
 Kuru köfte 
 Elma dolması 
 Harput meatballs 
 Ispanaklı Selanik Böreği 
 İçli Pide 
 İzmir köfte 
 Kapuska 
 Karnıyarık 
 Keşkek 
 Kuru fasulye 
 Lâpa 
 Lahmacun 
 Lepsi 
 Libje lebje basta 
 Mallow with lamb 
 Mantı 
 Menemen 
 Mirik meatball 
 Musakka 
 Papucaki 
 Patlıcan dolması 
 Patlıcan kızartması 
 Patlıcan kebabı 
 Perdeli pilav 
 Pilav 
 Piyaziye 
 Puf Böreği 
 Siron 
 Su Böreği 
 Soğan dolma 
 Tas kebap 
 Tatar böreği 
 Türlü 
 Uzun erişte 
 Van köfte 
 Yahni 
 Grilled meats 
 Kebab  (main article) 
 Adana kebab 
 Akçaabat meatballs 
 Alinazik kebab 
 Beyti kebab 
 Cağ kebab 
 Döner kebab 
 İnegöl meatballs 
 İskender kebab 
 Köfte 
 Miskender 
 Eggplant kebab 
 Pideli köfte 
 Şiş kebab 
 Şiş köfte 
 Şiş tavuk 
 Tire meatballs 
 Desserts 
 Turkish desserts  (main article) 
 Acıbadem kurabiyesi 
 Aşure 
 Ayva tatlısı 
 Balparmak tatlısı 
 Baklava 
 Bülbül yuvası 
 Cevizli sucuk 
 Cevizli kuru incir tatlısı 
 Cevizli Irmik Tatlısı 
 Cezerye 
 Dilber dudağı 
 Dibile 
 Dondurma 
 Ekmek kadayıfı 
 Fig roll 
 Fenike tatlısı 
 Güllaç 
 Helva 
 Hanım göbeği 
 Hoşaf 
 Hoşmerim 
 Ispanaklı kek 
 İzmir Bomb Kurabiye 
 Kabak tatlısı 
 Kalburabastı 
 Kavala Almond Cookies 
 Kazandibi 
 Kaysefe 
 Kestane şekeri 
 Keşkül 
 Köylü pastası 
 Kurabiye 
 Künefe 
 Lokma 
 Lokum 
 Macun 
 Mesir macunu 
 Muğla halkası 
 Muhallebi 
 Murabbalı mecidiye 
 Nevzine tatlısı 
 Orcik candy 
 Pepeçura 
 Pestil 
 Pişi 
 Pişmaniye 
 Şambali 
 Şekerpare 
 Şıllık 
 Supangle 
 Sütlaç 
 Revani 
 Sütlü Nuriye 
 Şöbiyet 
 Tahin - pekmez 
 Tahini roll 
 Tavukgöğsü 
 Trileçe 
 Tulumba 
 Un kurabiyesi 
 Vezir parmağı 
 Zerde 
 Frequent ingredients 
 Vegetables 
 Bean 
 Bell pepper 
 Eggplant 
 Leek 
 Lentil 
 Spinach 
 Tomato 
 Herbs & spices 
 Almond 
 Black pepper 
 Chestnut 
 Cinnamon 
 Cumin 
 Dried apricot 
 Garlic 
 Hazelnut 
 Mint 
 Nut 
 Onion 
 Oregano 
 Paprika 
 Parsley 
 Pistachio 
 Pul biber 
 Red pepper 
 Thyme 
 Urfa pepper 
 Walnut 
 Unique instruments 
 Cezve 
 Çaydanlık 
 Kazan 
 Mangal 
 Oklava 
 Sac 
 Semaver 
 Tandır 
 Related cuisines 
 Arab 
 Balkan 
 Caucasian 
 Central Asian 
 Greek 
 Iranian 
 Kurdish 
 Levantine 
 Mediterranean 
 Middle Eastern 
 Mongolian 
 Ottoman 
 Tatar 
 
     Food portal 
   Turkey Portal 
 
 v t e European cuisine Sovereign states European Union 
 Austria 
 Belgium 
 Bulgaria 
 Croatia 
 Cyprus 
 Czech Republic 
 Denmark 
 Estonia 
 Finland 
 France 
 Germany 
 Greece 
 Hungary 
 Republic of Ireland 
 Italy 
 Latvia 
 Lithuania 
 Luxembourg 
 Malta 
 Netherlands 
 Poland 
 Portugal 
 Romania 
 Slovakia 
 Slovenia 
 Spain 
 Sweden 
 Other 
 Albania 
 Andorra 
 Armenia 
 Azerbaijan 
 Belarus 
 Bosnia and Herzegovina 
 Georgia 
 Iceland 
 Kazakhstan 
 Liechtenstein 
 Moldova 
 Monaco 
 Montenegro 
 North Macedonia 
 Norway 
 Russia 
 San Marino 
 Serbia 
 Switzerland 
 Turkey 
 Ukraine 
 United Kingdom 
 Vatican City 
 States with limited recognition 
 Abkhazia 
 Kosovo 
 Nagorno-Karabakh 
 Northern Cyprus 
 South Ossetia 
 Transnistria 
 Dependencies  and other territories 
 Faroe Islands 
 Gibraltar 
 Guernsey 
 Isle of Man 
 Jersey 
 
 v t e Mediterranean cuisine Regions Southern Maghrebi 
 Algerian 
 Chakhchoukha 
 Berber 
 Libyan 
 Bazin 
 Moroccan 
 Méchoui 
 Tajine 
 Tunisian 
 Shakshouka 
 Regional
 Couscous 
 Egyptian 
 Duqqa 
 Ful medames 
 Kushari 
 Mulukhiyah 
 Levant 
 Israeli 
 Hamin 
 Lebanese 
 Kibbeh 
 Palestinian 
 Musakhan 
 Syrian 
 Regional 
 Baba ghanoush 
 Hummus 
 Northern Turkish 
 Cheeses 
 Desserts 
 Kebabs 
 Rakı 
 Turkish tea 
 Greek 
 Gyros 
 Greek salad 
 Stifado 
 Feta 
 Skordalia 
 Loukaniko 
 Melomakarono 
 Ionian Islands 
 Bourdeto 
 Pastitsada 
 Crete 
 Dakos 
 Paximadi 
 Other Balkan 
 Albanian 
 Aromanian 
 Bosnia and Herzegovina 
 Croatian 
 Montenegrin 
 Slovenian 
 Regional
 Pita 
 Shish kebab 
 Yogurt 
 Baklava 
 Moussaka 
 Italian 
 Regional
 Pasta 
 Pizza 
 Abruzzese 
 Arrosticini 
 Mortadella di Campotosto 
 Maccheroni alla chitarra 
 Pizzelle 
 Timballo 
 Bocconotto 
 Parrozzo 
 Apulian 
 Arbëreshë 
 Ligurian 
 Ciuppin 
 Focaccia 
 Pesto 
 Ravioli 
 Lombard 
 Mantuan 
 Lucanian 
 Neapolitan 
 Neapolitan ragù 
 Pasta e fagioli 
 Roman 
 Carbonara 
 Sardinian 
 Pane carasau 
 Malloreddus 
 Mirto (liqueur) 
 Abbamele 
 Pecorino sardo 
 Culurgiònes 
 Bottarga 
 Seada 
 Sicilian 
 Cannoli 
 Caponata 
 Pasta alla Norma 
 Scaccia 
 Tuscan 
 Ribollita 
 Venetian 
 Carpaccio 
 Polenta 
 Risotto 
 French 
 Corsican 
 Brocciu 
 Occitan 
 Cassoulet 
 Brandade 
 Provencal 
 Bouillabaisse 
 Ratatouille 
 Salade niçoise 
 Spanish 
 Andalusian 
 Gazpacho 
 Sherry 
 Balearic 
 Caldereta 
 Tombet 
 Catalan 
 Escalivada 
 Escudella 
 Ollada 
 Valencian 
 Paella 
 Other 
 Gibraltarian 
 Monégasque 
 Islands 
 Cypriot 
 Afelia 
 Halloumi 
 Maltese 
 Staples 
 Wheat 
 Bread 
 Couscous 
 Pasta 
 Pizza 
 Semolina 
 Olive 
 Olive oil 
 Grape 
 Wine 
 Shared 
 Anise spirits 
 Bottarga 
 Lamb 
 Exemplars 
 Elizabeth David 
 A Book of Mediterranean Food 
 
 Category 
 
 v t e Middle Eastern cuisine Arab 
 Bahraini 
 Egyptian 
 Iraqi 
 Jordanian 
 Kuwaiti 
 Lebanese 
 Omani 
 Palestinian 
 Qatar 
 Saudi Arabian 
 Syrian 
 United Arab Emirates 
 Yemeni 
 Non-Arab 
 Cypriot 
 Iranian 
 Israeli 
 Turkish 
 Ethnic and religious 
 Assyrian 
 Azerbaijani 
 Baloch 
 Caspian cuisine 
 Jewish 
 Kurdish 
 Levantine 
 Related cuisines 
 Afghanistan 
 Armenian 
 Balkan 
 Caucasian 
 Circassian 
 Georgian 
 Greek 
 Indian 
 Pakistani 
 Pashtun 
 
 v t e Cuisines Continental 
 African 
 North 
 West 
 list 
 Americas 
 Caribbean 
 North 
 South 
 list 
 Asian 
 Caucasian 
 Central 
 Indian subcontinent 
 Levantine 
 list 
 European 
 Balkan 
 Central 
 Eastern 
 list 
 Oceanic 
 Intercontinental
 Global 
 Latin American 
 Mediterranean 
 Middle Eastern 
 National  and regional 
 Afghan 
 Albanian 
 Algerian 
 American 
 Californian 
 Floribbean 
 Hawaiian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Lowcountry (South Carolina) 
 New England 
 New Mexico 
 Pacific Northwest 
 Pennsylvania Dutch 
 Puerto Rican 
 Southern US 
 Southwest US 
 Texas 
 Angolan 
 Argentine 
 Armenian 
 Australian 
 Austrian 
 Azerbaijani 
 Bahraini 
 Bangladeshi 
 Barbadian 
 Belarusian 
 Belgian 
 Belizean 
 Beninese 
 Bhutanese 
 Bolivian 
 Bosnian-Herzegovinian 
 Botswana 
 Brazilian 
 British 
 Channel Islands 
 English 
 Gibraltarian 
 Northern Irish 
 Saint Helena 
 Scottish 
 Welsh 
 Bruneian 
 Bulgarian 
 Burkinabé 
 Burmese 
 Burundian 
 Cambodian 
 Cameroonian 
 Canadian 
 Acadian 
 Québécois 
 Central African Republic 
 Chadian 
 Chilean 
 Chinese 
 Cantonese 
 Hong Kong 
 Macanese 
 Tibetan 
 Xinjiang 
 Colombian 
 Congolese 
 Corsican 
 Croatian 
 Cuban 
 Cypriot 
 Czech 
 Danish 
 Faroese 
 Greenlandic 
 Djiboutian 
 Dominican 
 Dominican Republic 
 Dutch 
 East Timorese 
 Ecuadorian 
 Egyptian 
 Emirati 
 Equatorial Guinean 
 Eritrean 
 Estonian 
 Ethiopian 
 Fijian 
 Filipino 
 Finnish 
 French 
 Occitan 
 French Guianan 
 Gabonese 
 Gambian 
 Georgian 
 German 
 Ghanaian 
 Greek 
 Cretan 
 Epirotic 
 Greek Macedonian 
 Heptanesean 
 Guatemalan 
 Guinea-Bissauan 
 Guinean 
 Haitian 
 Honduran 
 Hungarian 
 Icelandic 
 Indian 
 Arunachalese 
 Assamese 
 Bengali 
 Bihari 
 Goan 
 Gujarati 
 Himachal Pradesh 
 Kashmiri 
 Jharkhandi 
 Karnataka 
 Kerala 
 Maharashtrian 
 Manipuri 
 Meghalayan 
 Mizo 
 Naga 
 Odia 
 Punjabi 
 Rajasthani 
 Sikkimese 
 Sindhi 
 Tamil 
 Telangana 
 Telugu 
 Indonesian 
 Acehnese 
 Balinese 
 Banjar 
 Batak 
 Betawi 
 Indo 
 Javanese 
 Madurese 
 Makassar 
 Minahasan 
 Minangkabau 
 Palembangese 
 Sundanese 
 Iranian 
 Iraqi 
 Irish 
 Israeli 
 Italian 
 Abruzzese 
 Ligurian 
 Lombard 
 Lucanian 
 Neapolitan 
 Roman 
 Sardinian 
 Sicilian 
 Venetian 
 Ivorian 
 Jamaican 
 Japanese 
 Okinawan 
 Jordanian 
 Kazakh 
 Kenyan 
 Korean 
 North Korean 
 South Korean 
 Kosovan 
 Kuwaiti 
 Kyrgyz 
 Lao 
 Latvian 
 Lebanese 
 Lesotho 
 Liberian 
 Libyan 
 Liechtensteiner 
 Lithuanian 
 Luxembourg 
 Macedonian 
 Malagasy 
 Malawian 
 Malaysian 
 Sabahan 
 Sarawakian 
 Maldivian 
 Malian 
 Maltese 
 Mauritanian 
 Mauritian 
 Mexican 
 Moldovan 
 Monégasque 
 Mongolian 
 Montenegrin 
 Moroccan 
 Mozambican 
 Namibian 
 Nauruan 
 Nepalese 
 New Zealand 
 Nicaraguan 
 Niger 
 Nigerian 
 Niuean 
 Norwegian 
 Omani 
 Pakistani 
 Palestinian 
 Panamanian 
 Peruvian 
 Polish 
 Portuguese 
 Qatari 
 Romanian  (incl.  Transylvanian Saxon ) 
 Russian 
 Bashkir 
 Chechen 
 Circassian 
 Komi 
 Mordovian 
 Sakha 
 Tatar 
 Udmurt 
 Yamal 
 Rwandan 
 Saint Lucian 
 Salvadoran 
 Sammarinese 
 São Tomé and Príncipe 
 Saudi Arabian 
 Senegalese 
 Serbian 
 Seychellois 
 Sierra Leonean 
 Singaporean 
 Slovak 
 Slovenian 
 Somali 
 South African 
 Spanish 
 Andalusian 
 Asturian 
 Balearic 
 Basque 
 Canarian 
 Cantabrian 
 Catalan 
 Extremaduran 
 Galician 
 Manchegan 
 Valencian 
 Sri Lankan 
 Sudanese 
 Swazi 
 Swedish 
 Swiss 
 Syrian 
 Taiwanese 
 Tajik 
 Tanzanian 
 Zanzibari 
 Thai 
 Togolese 
 Tunisian 
 Turkish 
 Turkmen 
 Trinidadian and Tobagonian 
 Ugandan 
 Ukrainian 
 Uruguayan 
 Uzbek 
 Venezuelan 
 Vietnamese 
 Western Saharan 
 Yemeni 
 Zambian 
 Zimbabwean 
 Ethnic 
 Ainu 
 Arab 
 Indonesian 
 Aromanian 
 Assyrian 
 Balochi 
 Berber 
 Cajun 
 Chinese 
 American 
 Canadian 
 Chifa 
 Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Crimean Tatar 
 Greek American 
 Hazaragi 
 Indian 
 Anglo-Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Indigenous American 
 Inuit 
 Italian American 
 Kurdish 
 Livonian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Malay 
 Ossetian 
 Parsi 
 Pashtun 
 Peranakan 
 Romani 
 Sámi 
 Soul food 
 Sylheti 
 Transylvanian Saxon 
 Yup'ik 
 Religious 
 Buddhist 
 Christian 
 Goan Catholic 
 Mangalorean Catholic 
 Mennonite 
 Hindu 
 Islamic 
 Chinese 
 Ital 
 Jain 
 Jewish 
 American 
 Ashkenazi 
 Bukharan 
 Ethiopian 
 Mizrahi 
 Sephardic 
 Syrian 
 Ritual slaughter 
 Sikh 
 Historical 
 Ancient Egyptian 
 Ancient Greek 
 Ancient Israelite 
 Ancient Roman 
 Antebellum America 
 Aztec 
 Byzantine 
 Early modern European 
 Historical Chinese 
 Historical Indian subcontinent 
 Historical North Indian and Pakistani 
 History of agriculture 
 History of alcoholic drinks 
 History of bread 
 History of seafood 
 History of vegetarianism 
 Historical Argentine 
 Historical Japanese 
 Inca 
 Mayan 
 Muisca 
 Mughal 
 Medieval 
 Ottoman 
 Peasant 
 Soviet 
 Thirteen Colonies 
 Styles 
 Classique 
 Fast food 
 Fusion 
 New American 
 Eurasian 
 Haute 
 Molecular gastronomy 
 Note by Note 
 Nouvelle 
 Lists 
 List of cuisines 
 List of historical cuisines 
 Lists of prepared foods 
 Related 
 Cookbook 
 Cooking 
 Culinary arts 
 Drink 
 Food 
 history 
 Diet 
 Meal preparation 
 
   Food portal 
   Drink portal 
   Category 
   Commons 
   Cookbook 
   WikiProject 
   Outline 
 
 Portals :   Food   Turkey 
 Authority control   National libraries 
 Spain 
 France 
 BnF data 
 Israel 
 United States 
 Japan 
 Other 
 IdRef 
 
  
NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw2401
Cached time: 20230310194926
Cache expiry: 1814400
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc, no‐toc‐conversion]
CPU time usage: 1.249 seconds
Real time usage: 1.558 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 29335/1000000
Post‐expand include size: 307656/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 11464/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 18/100
Expensive parser function count: 46/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 147244/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.502/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 19403636/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/400
 
 
Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1058.734      1 -total
 32.25%  341.433     13 Template:Navbox
 16.85%  178.363      1 Template:Reflist
 12.94%  137.029      1 Template:European_topic
 11.58%  122.582      1 Template:Infobox_candidate
  9.84%  104.138      1 Template:Culture_of_Turkey
  9.69%  102.602      1 Template:Culture_of_region
  9.37%   99.162      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  9.17%   97.084      9 Template:Cite_book
  7.97%   84.364     55 Template:Iso2country
 
  Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:idhash:31427-0!canonical and timestamp 20230310194925 and revision id 1138072796. Rendering was triggered because: api-parse
  
 esi <esi:include src="/esitest-fa8a495983347898/content" />  
 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Turkish_cuisine&oldid=1138072796 " 
 Categories :  Turkish cuisine Mediterranean cuisine Middle Eastern cuisine Hidden categories:  CS1 maint: url-status CS1 Turkish-language sources (tr) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from May 2021 Articles using infobox templates with no data rows Articles containing Turkish-language text Articles needing additional references from May 2017 All articles needing additional references Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with BNE identifiers Articles with BNF identifiers Articles with J9U identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers Articles with NDL identifiers Articles with SUDOC identifiers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  This page was last edited on 7 February 2023, at 22:09  (UTC) . 
 Text is available under the  Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0 ;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the  Terms of Use  and  Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the  Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. 
 
 
 Privacy policy 
 About Wikipedia 
 Disclaimers 
 Contact Wikipedia 
 Mobile view 
 Developers 
 Statistics 
 Cookie statement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
