
 
 
 Jump to content 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle sidebar 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Create account Log in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Personal tools 
 
 
 
 
   Create account   Log in 
 
 
 
 
		Pages for logged out editors  learn more 
 
 
 Contributions Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Navigation 
 
 
 Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate 
 
 
 
 
 Contribute 
 
 
 Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file 
 
 
 
 
 Tools 
 
 
 What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item 
 
 
 
 
 Print/export 
 
 
 Download as PDF Printable version 
 
 
 
 
 In other projects 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons 
 
 
 
 
 Languages 
 
 On this Wikipedia the language links are at the top of the page across from the article title.  Go to top . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CentralNotice  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Contents 
 move to sidebar 
 hide 
 
 
 
 
 (Top) 
 
 
 
 
 
 1 History 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 Appetizers, entrees and snacks 
 
 
				Toggle Appetizers, entrees and snacks subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 2.1 Aperitif 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.2 Entrees 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.2.1 Picada 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.2.2 Matambre relleno 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.2.3 Lengua a la vinagreta 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.2.4 Pescado en escabeche 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 Side dishes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4 Sauces 
 
 
				Toggle Sauces subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 4.1 Picantina 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.2 Mojo 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.3 Chimichurri 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.4 Salsa criolla 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.5 Salsa golf 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.6 Mostaza La pasiva 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.7 Salsa Caruso, estofado and tuco 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5 Barbecue and salads 
 
 
				Toggle Barbecue and salads subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 5.1 Salads 
 
 
 
 
 
 5.1.1 Ensalada criolla 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5.1.2 Ensalada rusa 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5.1.3 Ensalada de papa y huevo 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5.1.4 Ropa vieja 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5.1.5 Salpicon de ave 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5.1.6 Palmitos con salsa golf 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5.1.7 Watercress salad 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6 Asado 
 
 
				Toggle Asado subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 6.1 Ingredients 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6.2 Preparation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6.3 Variants - Asado con cuero 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 7 Beverages 
 
 
				Toggle Beverages subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 7.1 Grappa 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 7.2 Uvita 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 7.3 Medio y medio 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 7.4 Mate 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 7.5 Grapa con limon 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 7.6 Caña 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 7.7 Grapamiel 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8 Stews and puchero 
 
 
				Toggle Stews and puchero subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 8.1 Puchero 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8.2 Ensopado 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8.3 Guiso carrero 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8.4 Buseca 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8.5 Feijoada 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8.6 Bacalao 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8.7 Italian style stews 
 
 
 
 
 
 8.7.1 Niños envueltos 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8.7.2 Estofado 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8.7.3 Albondigas con papas 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 9 Minutas 
 
 
				Toggle  Minutas  subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 9.1 Choripan 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 9.2 Hungaras 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 9.3 Milanesas 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 9.4 Postas de pescado a la marinera 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 9.5 Panchos 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 9.6 Croquetas 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 9.7 Empanadas 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 9.8 Buñuelos 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 10 Pizzas, pastas and breads 
 
 
				Toggle Pizzas, pastas and breads subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 10.1 Pizza 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 10.2 Fainá 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 10.3 Figazza 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 10.4 Lahmajun 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 10.5 Fideos con tuco 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 10.6 Fideos con estofado 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 10.7 Ñoquis 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 10.8 Capeletis a la Caruso 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 10.9 Breads 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 11 Sandwiches 
 
 
				Toggle Sandwiches subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 11.1 Chivito 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 11.2 Choripán 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 11.3 Sándwich Olímpico 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 11.4 Sándwich caliente 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 11.5 Jesuitas 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 12 Confectioneries for mate 
 
 
				Toggle Confectioneries for mate subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 12.1 Tortas fritas 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 12.2 Bizcochos 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 12.3 Pasteles 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 12.4 Alfajores 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 13 Desserts 
 
 
				Toggle Desserts subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 13.1 Cakes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 13.2 Confectioneries 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 13.3 Cookies 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 13.4 Custards and ice creams 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 13.5 Pastries 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 14 See also 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 15 References 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 16 External links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
						Toggle the table of contents
					 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle the table of contents 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Uruguayan cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 13 languages 
 
 
 
 العربية Català Čeština Español Français 한국어 Italiano Jawa ქართული Português Русский Svenska Українська 
 Edit links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Article Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 English 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 More 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
 
 
 Culinary traditions of Uruguay 
   Asado  with achuras ( offal ) and sausages 
 This article is part of  a series  on the Culture of Uruguay 
 People 
 Demography 
 Uruguayans 
 Native 
 Immigration 
 Afro-Uruguayans 
 Emigration 
 
 Languages 
 Spanish 
 Rioplatense 
 Vesre 
 Portuñol 
 Portuñol riverense 
 Uruguayan Sign Language 
 
 Cuisine 
 Asado 
 Achuras 
 Chivito 
 Choripán 
 Empanadas 
 Fainá 
 Matambre 
 Milanesa 
 Mondongo 
 Ñoquis 
 Panchos 
 Puchero 
 Sauces and condiments
 Caruso 
 Chimichurri 
 Salsa criolla 
 Drinks
 Mate 
 Grappamiel 
 Uruguayan wine 
 Desserts
 Alfajor 
 Bizcocho 
 Buñuelo 
 Dulce de leche 
 Dulce de membrillo 
 Garrapiñada 
 Isla flotante 
 Pastafrola 
 
 Feasts & Festivals 
 Uruguayan Carnival 
 Nostalgia Night 
 
 Religion 
 Christianity
 Roman Catholicism 
 Mennonitism 
 Methodism 
 Mormonism 
 Waldensians 
 Baháʼí 
 Hinduism 
 Islam 
 Judaism 
 Irreligion 
 
 Arts and literature 
 Architecture 
 Visual arts 
 Universal Constructivism 
 Writers 
 Generación del 45 
 Tabaré 
 La leyenda patria 
 
 Music 
 Musicians 
 Composers 
 Musical instruments 
 Candombe drums 
 Murga 
 Tango 
 
 Media 
 Radio 
 Internet 
 News 
 
 Sports 
 Football in Uruguay 
 Clásico 
 Clubs 
 1924 
 1928 
 1930 
 1950 
 1980 
 
   Uruguay Portal v t e 
 Uruguayan cuisine  is a fusion of cuisines from several European countries, especially of  Mediterranean foods  from  Spain ,  Italy ,  Portugal  and  France . Other influences on the cuisine resulted from  immigration  from countries such as  Germany  and  Scotland . Uruguayan  gastronomy  is a result of immigration, rather than local  Amerindian  cuisine, because of late-19th and early 20th century immigration waves of, mostly, Italians. Spanish influences are very abundant:  desserts  like  churros  (cylinders of  pastry , usually fried, sometimes filled with dulce de leche),  flan ,  ensaimadas  yoo 
(Catalan sweet bread), and alfajores were all brought from Spain. There are also all kinds of stews known as  guisos  or estofados, arroces (rice dishes such as  paella ), and fabada ( Asturian  bean stew). All of the guisos and traditional  pucheros  (stews) are also of Spanish origin. Uruguayan preparations of fish, such as  dried salt cod  ( bacalao ),  calamari , and  octopus , originate from the  Basque  and  Galician  regions, and also Portugal. Due to its strong Italian tradition, all of the famous Italian  pasta  dishes are present in Uruguay including  ravioli ,  lasagne ,  tortellini ,  fettuccine , and the traditional  gnocchi . Although the pasta can be served with many sauces, there is one special sauce that was created by Uruguayans.  Caruso sauce  is a pasta sauce made from  double cream , meat, onions, ham and  mushrooms . It is very popular with  sorrentinos  and  agnolotti . Additionally, there is  Germanic  influence in Uruguayan cuisine as well, particularly in sweet dishes. The pastries known as bizcochos are Germanic in origin:  croissants , known as  medialunas , are the most popular of these, and can be found in two varieties: butter- and lard-based. Also German in origin are the  Berlinese  known as  bolas de fraile  ("friar's balls"), and the rolls called  piononos . The  facturas  were re-christened with local names given the difficult German phonology, and usually Uruguayanized by the addition of a dulce de leche filling. Even dishes like  chucrut  ( sauerkraut ) have also made it into mainstream Uruguayan dishes.
 The base of the country's diet is meat and animal products: primarily  beef  but also  chicken ,  lamb ,  pig  and sometimes  fish . The preferred  cooking methods  for meats and vegetables are still  boiling  and  roasting , although modernization has popularized  frying  (see  milanesas  and  chivitos ). Meanwhile,  wheat  and fruit are generally served fried ( torta frita  and  pasteles ),  comfited  ( rapadura  and ticholos de banana), and sometimes  baked  ( rosca  de  chicharrones ), a new modern style.  Bushmeat  comes from  mulitas  and  carpinchos . Regional fruits like  butia  and  pitanga  are commonly used for flavoring caña, along with  quinotos  and  nísperos .
 Although Uruguay has considerable native  flora  and  fauna , with the exception of  yerba mate ,  native plants and animals largely do not figure into  Uruguayan cuisine. Uruguayan food often comes with fresh bread; bizcochos  and  tortas fritas  are a must for drinking  mate , the national drink. The dried leaves and twigs of the  yerba mate  plant ( Ilex paraguariensis ) are placed in a small cup. Hot water is then poured into a gourd just below the boiling point, to avoid burning the herb and spoiling the flavor. The drink is sipped through a metal or reed straw, known as a  bombilla .  Wine  is also a popular drink. Other spirits consumed in Uruguay are  caña ,  grappa , lemon-infused grappa, and  grappamiel  (a grappa honey liquour). Grappamiel is very popular in rural areas, and is often consumed in the cold autumn and winter mornings to warm up the body.
 Popular  sweets  are membrillo  quince  jam and  dulce de leche , which is made from caramelized milk. A sweet paste,  dulce de leche , is used to fill cookies, cakes, pancakes,  milhojas , and  alfajores . The alfajores are  shortbread  cookies sandwiched together with  dulce de leche  or a fruit paste. Dulce de leche is used also in  flan con dulce de leche .
 
   A typical Uruguayan  parrillero 
   milanesa  a caballo 
   Bacalao  typically served on  Semana Santa  (Easter). 
   A  chivito  with lettuce, tomato, thin filet steak, bacon, ham, mushrooms, olives, mozzarella cheese, onion, egg, and garlic mayonnaise on a bun without sesame seeds 
   Vegetable starter with tomato, green peas, maize, eggplant and sweet peppers. 
 Pizza (locally pronounced pisa or pitsa) has been wholly included in Uruguayan cuisine, and in its Uruguayan form more closely resembles an Italian  calzone  than it does its Italian ancestor. Typical Uruguayan pizzas include  pizza rellena  (stuffed pizza),  pizza por metro  (pizza by the meter), and  pizza a la parrilla  ( grilled pizza ). While Uruguayan pizza derives from  Neapolitan cuisine , the Uruguayan  fugaza  (fugazza) comes from the  focaccia xeneise  ( Genoan ), but in any case its preparation is different from its Italian counterpart, and the addition of cheese to make the dish ( fugaza con queso  or  fugazzeta ) started in Argentina or Uruguay. [ citation needed ] 
 Sliced pizza is often served along with fainá, made with chickpea flour and baked like pizza. For example, it is common for pasta to be eaten with white bread ("French bread"), which is unusual in Italy. This can be explained by the low cost of bread, and that Uruguayan pasta tends to come together with a large amount of tuco sauce (Italian:  suco  - juice), and accompanied by  estofado  (stew). Less commonly, pastas are eaten with a sauce of  pesto , a green sauce made with  basil , or  salsa blanca  ( Béchamel sauce ). During the 20th century, people in pizzerias in Montevideo commonly ordered a "combo" of moscato, which is a large glass of a sweet wine called ( muscat ), plus two stacked pieces (the lower one being pizza and the upper one fainá). Despite both pizza and faina being Italian in origin, they are never served together in Italy.
 Polenta  comes from  Northern Italy  and is very common throughout Uruguay. Unlike Italy, this cornmeal is eaten as a main dish, with tuco (meat sauce) and melted cheese and or ham.
 
 
 History [ edit ] 
 The current roots of Uruguayan cuisine can be traced back to a  subsistence economy  adopted by  gauchos , and sustained on  subsistence agriculture  implanted by the Spanish and  Criollos  at the start of  European colonization . The native peoples did not stay in one place, and Uruguay was used as a remote  port , with few incursions for  treasure hunting . [1] 
 The only permanent establishment at the time was constituted by  Franciscan friars  and was located in a territory now belonging to  Brazil  called  Misiones , because their mission there was to  Christianize  the native peoples. The tradition of mate started during this time, with the monks brewing a beverage with the leaves of yerba mate that the  Guarani  people used to chew. [1] 
 Cattle was later introduced by  Hernando Arias de Saavedra .
 The first group of immigrants came from poor families from  Buenos Aires  and the  Canary Islands , along with their empanadas and  cocidos . Everything was sold from  pulperias  that were both stores and  saloons .
 The asado tradition came with gauchos that lived in the country, descendants of those first families that having no land nor home, made  cattle raiding  their way of life.
 Portuguese and Brazilian influence was also added during Portuguese colonization.  Feijoada  was incorporated into the rest of the guisos.
 Food was rudimentary and based on Spanish tradition until immigration at the end of the 19th century and the beginning of the 20th century when the first families came mostly from Italy and  Spain . Immigration increased following  World War I  and  World War II , when people from all over  Europe  and the  Middle East  came to Uruguay, including people from  Germany ,  Russia , Italy, and  Armenia . Such immigration enriched the importation of dishes, as there is now pasta, Russian salad and innumerable types of pastries from France and Germany, resulting in  chajá  and alfajores.
 
 Appetizers, entrees and snacks [ edit ] 
   Matambre relleno with Russian salad 
 In Uruguayan cuisine, there is a significant list of preparations and dishes that are included in this category, the most typical or  autochthonous  is the  picada , probably descending from the Spanish  tapas , and as for everyday food there are also  matambre relleno  and  lengua a la vinagreta .
 
 Aperitif [ edit ] 
 Common spirits produced in Uruguay include  grappa  and  caña ; grappa is considered an excellent  apéritif , and caña is considered a liqueur. Liquor made with caña has good digestive qualities and is mainly consumed as a drink and not as an aperitif. Apéritifs such as  martini ,  vermouth ,  whisky ,  medio y medio  (half and half) and also  uvita ,  sangria  and wine are popular. [2] 
 Medio y medio is a special blend of  dry wine  and  sparkling wine , or sparkling wine and caña (rum). Uvita is a  fortified wine  with caña that resembles  marsala wine .
 
 Entrees [ edit ] 
 Picada [ edit ] 
 Picada can be described as the main entrée of a typical asado (barbecue) and is consumed with aperitifs.  It is constituted by cheese (typically Colonia, of Uruguayan origin), olives,  longaniza ,  salami , chips and salted peanuts; peanuts and other snacks are served on small pots and all of the other ingredients are served on a wood table with slices of bread.
 
 Matambre relleno [ edit ] 
 See also:  Matambre 
 Matambre relleno  is a common dish in  Rio de la plata , both in Uruguay as in Argentina. It is one of two dishes prepared from matambre, a meat cut that is a  flank steak . It is prepared as luncheon meat by rolling thin slices over spinach, carrots and boiled eggs, tied up and sewn with a strong string, boiled and later pressed and consumed cold.
 
 Lengua a la vinagreta [ edit ] 
 Lengua a la vinagreta [3] [ circular reference ]  (Spanish for  tongue  with  vinaigrette ) is a cold preparation of beef tongue that is previously peeled and boiled and served with a vinagreta sauce made with chopped boiled eggs, parsley, garlic, onions, olive oil, and vinegar. [4] 
 
 Pescado en escabeche [ edit ] 
 Escabeche  is a preserved method common in Spain and Spanish-speaking countries. It consists of a mix of oil and vinegar that is used as a  marination  that also preserves the food.
 Pescado en escabeche (escabeche fish) is a cold dish often made from  Argentine hake  that is buttered as in pescado a la marinera.
 After being separately fried, it is parboiled on a vinaigrette made of oil and vinegar that is added to sliced onions and carrots and whole garlic cloves and black pepper. [5] 
 
 Side dishes [ edit ] 
 Food is mostly eaten with bread, and sometimes rice, salad or chips. Along with asado, accompaniments are chorizo,  morcilla , offal, and also  stuffed peppers , and papas al plomo (roasted potatoes).
 
 Sauces [ edit ] 
 The most notable sauces in Uruguayan cuisine are chimichurri,  salsa criolla  and  salsa Caruso .
 
 Picantina [ edit ] 
 Picantina is a spicy sauce commonly added to frankfurters (panchos), hungaras, choripanes and hamburgers. It is common to find in fast food dispensers in the street and is locally called 'carritos'. It resembles hot mustard or mayonnaise.
 
 Mojo [ edit ] 
 Sharing the same name as the  Spanish mojo , it is a simple sauce made with garlic, oil, parsley, oregano, paprika, water and salt, and is added to asado during the cooking process and optionally on the dish. Mojo differs from chimichurri in that it has water besides vinegar and less paprika.
 
 Chimichurri [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Chimichurri 
 Chimichurri is between a vinaigrette and a pesto variant, made with parsley, chopped garlic, oregano, red pepper flakes, paprika, oil, vinegar, and salt. Along with salsa criolla it is preferred for asado.
 
 Salsa criolla [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Salsa criolla 
 Made with finely chopped tomatoes and onions, oil and salt, salsa criolla [6]  is used for garment of asado,  choripan  and sometimes panchos. [7] 
 
 Salsa golf [ edit ] 
 This section is an excerpt from  Salsa golf . [ edit ] 
 
 
 Salsa golf  (Spanish for "golf sauce") is a cold  sauce  of somewhat thick consistency, common in Argentina. It is made from  mayonnaise  with a smaller amount of tomato-based sauce such as  ketchup , as well as seasonings including  pimento ,  oregano , and  cumin . 
 Mostaza La pasiva [ edit ] 
 La Pasiva is a famous chain of restaurants in Uruguay, dedicated to fast food or minutas, as known in the region.  Their specialties are panchos and hungaras and they are renowned for their  chivito .  Moustard La pasiva  is a white-colored hot mustard served along with panchos. It is made with  beer , starch,  mustard grains , pepper, salt and vinegar. Though it has never been sold commercially, small quantities are sometimes given as a gift for clients.
 Mostaza La pasiva is also used among other mustards as a sauce for puchero meat.
 
 Salsa Caruso, estofado and tuco [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Caruso sauce 
 All three are necessary pasta sauces among other foreign pasta sauces. Salsa Caruso was made in honor of the opera singer  Enrico Caruso  and became a popular sauce (especially for its main dish 'cappelettis a la Caruso'); estofado is a stewed version of  ragu  made from steaks and sometimes eaten alone; tuco, when it is with chopped meat, resembles a  bolognese sauce .
 
 Barbecue and salads [ edit ] 
 Salads [ edit ] 
 Uruguayan cuisine has adopted and created many  salads , the most typical being  ensalada criolla .
 
 Ensalada criolla [ edit ] 
 See also:  Chilean salad 
 With slight variants, it is common for a family of salads that are widespread over the southern  south cone  region; most variants as in the  Chilean salad  always include onion and lettuce. The salad common to Uruguay contains tomato along with lettuce and onion and is served with a single vinaigrette made of oil, vinegar, salt, garlic, and oregano. As it is a basic form of salad, it is an ideal accompaniment for asado.
 
 Ensalada rusa [ edit ] 
 See also:  Olivier salad 
 More similar to the polish sałatka jarzynowa than the typical  olivier salad , it contains potatoes, carrots, and peas with mayonnaise.
 
 Ensalada de papa y huevo [ edit ] 
 This is a potato and egg salad or onion and potato salad or simply potato mayonnaise and parsley.
 
 Ropa vieja [ edit ] 
 See also:  Salpicon 
 Resembling an old Spanish salpicon, ropa vieja (Spanish for old clothes) intends to include everything that exceeds from asado, mainly the best cuts of meat chopped with vegetables such as potatoes or ensalada criolla. It is not to be confused with the Cuban  ropa vieja  which is also a derivative dish but resembles more a  sancocho  than a salad.
 
 Salpicon de ave [ edit ] 
 Another derivative salpicon, chicken salpicon is made with chicken, eggs, and potatoes.
 
 Palmitos con salsa golf [ edit ] 
 See also:  Heart of palm 
 Simply heart of palm sometimes rolled in ham slices and served with salsa.
 
 Watercress salad [ edit ] 
 Basically  watercress , olive oil and lemon juice.
 
 Asado [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Asado 
 See also:  Barbecue 
   A typical parrilla with chorizos and morcillas 
 Barbecue asado can be said to make the meal or is the meal itself. The meal and cut of meat are also called  asado  or  tira de asado .
 In most Uruguayan homes, it is common to find a special grill on the patio called an asador.  It is a structure made of  iron  and  brick . Most asadores are at least two meters by one meter, have a  chimney , a place for  firewood  and a large grill for the meat.  Embers  produced by the firewood are placed under the grill.
 In many towns and cities, street vendors sell asado. These small barbecue grills are called  medio tanque  (half barrel), because they are made with on adaptation of a split  steel   drum . Asado cooked this way is sold often on the street as a snack or light lunch.
 
   Line cooks grilling sausages and other meats in a market near the port of Montevideo, Uruguay. 
 In the larger cities, such as Montevideo, markets commonly have one or more grill stations where customers can order and eat asado directly at the bar, which may be served with offal, sausages,  tapenades , and tapas. It is usually served with  lager  beer for lunch.
 The person making the meal is also called  asador .
 Asado is often preceded by apéritives such as vermouth, uvita, and medio y medio, an entree called picada and some chorizos, morcillas, and some offal.
 
 Ingredients [ edit ] 
 Ingredients of a complete Uruguayan asado include chorizo, morcilla, pulpon, entraña, tira de asado,  cow gizzards ,  chinchulines , chotos, and  kidneys . Poultry may also be included.
 Sometimes, especially on festive days, pork, fish, and lamb are consumed as a substitute for beef, constituting a variant.
 
 Preparation [ edit ] 
   A parrilla 
 A typical asado takes from one hour to two hours to be prepared, and even more, if a different kind of meat is going to be barbecued (for example a whole pig takes at least four hours to be ready).
 The asador starts the fire in the burner and, once the fire is started, the meat is salted and condiments added; condiments may include oregano, garlic, paprika, parsley and mojo.  The first embers are put in place, the meat put on the grill and embers added to as they fall from the burner. The meat is slowly cooked and smoked on the asador and mojo is added periodically for flavor.
 The meat is served with bread and salads, condiments such as mojo, chimichurri and Uruguayan salsa criolla and beverages such as wine, clerico and sangria.
 
 Variants - Asado con cuero [ edit ] 
 Asado con cuero (barbecue with its  leather ), is a favorite variant rurally and is also appreciated in the capital.  It requires a more complex technique than that employed for making asado in that the animal is barbecued whole and even with its hide, though the bones are discarded.  This practice was initiated by the pampa people who, if they needed to move on in a hurry, could easily take with them the rolled-up meat.
 
 Beverages [ edit ] 
 Typical Uruguayan beverages are mate, caña, uvita,  grappamiel  and  medio y medio  (half and half).
 
 Grappa [ edit ] 
 Grappa was brought by Italian immigrants as they kept coming at the immediation of  SXIX . Grappamiel and grapa con limon were made in the country from this Italian influence. [8] 
 
 Uvita [ edit ] 
 See also:  Marsala 
 A taste for wine [9]  was acquired from Mediterranean influence, also sangria and clerico. Uvita (little grape) is a fortified wine [10]  resembling marsala wine.
 
 Medio y medio [ edit ] 
 Literally meaning half and half, medio y medio is a drink blend of caña and sparkling wine or dry wine and sparkling wine. It is made and sold under the trademark Roldos.
 
 Mate [ edit ] 
   A typical Uruguayan mate with tortas fritas 
 Main article:  Mate (beverage) 
 See also:  Yerba mate 
 See also:  Mate cocido 
 Mate is consumed at any time and on any occasion, solely with tortas fritas or biscochos. It is so important that the act of drinking mate is a ritual of friendship between those involved. Even carrying a thermos of hot water facilitates this practice and on hot summer days it is still said to be refreshing.
 
   Mate cocido served in a glass 
 Uruguay is the first global consumer of mate, with a consumption of 6.8 kilograms of yerba mate per capita a year, surpassing Argentina by 1.2 kilograms per capita at year. [11] 
 Yerba mate also is consumed as mate cocido. When it is prepared with milk it is called mate de leche and milk is added, it is called mate con leche.
 
 Grapa con limon [ edit ] 
 Grappa is sold under various trademarks but the most significant one is San Remo.  It is  distilled  and bottled by  ANCAP  and there was also an attempt to produce the original Italian grappa by some local cellars. When macerated with lemon it is called grapa con limon.
 
 Caña [ edit ] 
 Caña is an amber-coloured drink distilled similar to  aguardiente  made from  sugar cane mill . Its caramel colour is due to aging in barrels. It is distilled and bottled under the brand name De los 33. [12] 
 
 Grapamiel [ edit ] 
 This section is an excerpt from  Grappamiel . [ edit ] 
 This article is part of  a series  on the Culture of Uruguay 
 People 
 Demography 
 Uruguayans 
 Native 
 Immigration 
 Afro-Uruguayans 
 Emigration 
 
 Languages 
 Spanish 
 Rioplatense 
 Vesre 
 Portuñol 
 Portuñol riverense 
 Uruguayan Sign Language 
 
 Cuisine 
 Asado 
 Achuras 
 Chivito 
 Choripán 
 Empanadas 
 Fainá 
 Matambre 
 Milanesa 
 Mondongo 
 Ñoquis 
 Panchos 
 Puchero 
 Sauces and condiments
 Caruso 
 Chimichurri 
 Salsa criolla 
 Drinks
 Mate 
 Grappamiel 
 Uruguayan wine 
 Desserts
 Alfajor 
 Bizcocho 
 Buñuelo 
 Dulce de leche 
 Dulce de membrillo 
 Garrapiñada 
 Isla flotante 
 Pastafrola 
 
 Feasts & Festivals 
 Uruguayan Carnival 
 Nostalgia Night 
 
 Religion 
 Christianity
 Roman Catholicism 
 Mennonitism 
 Methodism 
 Mormonism 
 Waldensians 
 Baháʼí 
 Hinduism 
 Islam 
 Judaism 
 Irreligion 
 
 Arts and literature 
 Architecture 
 Visual arts 
 Universal Constructivism 
 Writers 
 Generación del 45 
 Tabaré 
 La leyenda patria 
 
 Music 
 Musicians 
 Composers 
 Musical instruments 
 Candombe drums 
 Murga 
 Tango 
 
 Media 
 Radio 
 Internet 
 News 
 
 Sports 
 Football in Uruguay 
 Clásico 
 Clubs 
 1924 
 1928 
 1930 
 1950 
 1980 
 
   Uruguay Portal v t e 
 Grappamiel  or Grapamiel or is a mixed  alcoholic beverage  popular in  Uruguay  containing  grappa ,  spirits  obtained from various  grains  plus  honey  and  water . In agreements with the  European Union , the drink is a  food protected by geographical indications. [13]  The definition is provided by CONSULTA Nº 4.548 of the Uruguay Government. [14] 
 Stews and puchero [ edit ] 
 Specially suitable for cold days, Uruguayan guisos or stews are highly revitalizing, especially for their puchero, followed by  buseca , guiso carrero, guiso de fideos (noodle stew), estofado and feijoada.
 Spanish culinary influence is marked in Uruguayan stews, Also there are Italian and Portuguese-Brazilian influences, this last coming from the  Luso-Brazilian invasion  of Uruguay.
 
 Puchero [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Puchero § Río de la Plata puchero 
 From Spanish tradition puchero, Uruguayan puchero differs not much from others of the region, it is like a rough soup where dry ingredients are separated from the broth after cooked to make two separate preparations, a new soup that is first consumed, and later the soup all the other succulent ingredients are consumed with bread.
 A typical puchero may contain all type of cuts with bones,  skirt steak ,  ossobucco ,  bacon , cabbage, sweet corn,  rape , onions, celery, carrot, sweet potato, squash, and potatoes.
 All these ingredients cut in big pieces are cooked and served, with the broth are made different soups containing small noodles, rice or any cereal of predilection.
 It is usual that each commensal makes their  puree  on his dish with all the cooked vegetables that have been served, aligning it with oil if desired, and also to take off the caracu (bone marrow) from the ossobucco bone and spread it over pieced bread.
 Mustards of the brand Savora and also La pasiva are used for garnishing puchero meat.
 
 Ensopado [ edit ] 
 A dish for summer days and popular on rural areas, consisted on broth, noodles and gross slices of meat, chorizo  sausage . and tocino bacon boiled together. [15] 
 Its vegetable composition is reduced due is pretended to not  ferment  on hot days, so it only has few onions and squash.
 Its name comes from verb ensopar (to moist, to soup), participle ensopado (being souped).
 
 Guiso carrero [ edit ] 
 Sometimes it is hard to say what is Argentinian and what is Uruguayan (history links people strongly). Guiso carrero is part of not only cuisine, but Uruguayan folklore. It is a succulent meal consistent of meat,  butterbeans , and noodles.
 Popular chefs can assure that it is a delicious stew containing potato, sweet potato, noodles, squash, onion, tomato, beans, and the best meat.
 Guiso carrero is served with  red wine , bread and grated cheese.
 When guiso carrero does not contain noodles, it is called guiso de porotos, and when it does not have beans, it is called guiso de fideos or ensopado.
 
 Buseca [ edit ] 
 See also:  Sopa de mondongo 
 Buseca from Italian tradition also known as cazuela de mondongo in Spain.
 Its main ingredient is the mondongo, which is a  tripe  from the cow's stomach, it is pre-cooked and boiled along with meat, chorizo,  peachick , tomato and potato.
 
 Feijoada [ edit ] 
 See also:  Feijoada 
 A dish originating from  Portuguese Brazilian  influence that takes a bit from the main Rioplatense culture.
 Very popular all over Brazil, feijoada also is popular in Uruguay (though not in Argentina). Consumed not only on the northeast but also all along with the country, it is a black bean stew that, unlike the Brazilian feijoada, comes with potatoes (besides bananas and  fariña ), and made with beef more often than pork. It is also common to find chorizo and chorizo Colorado in Uruguayan feijoada.
 
 Bacalao [ edit ] 
 See also:  Bacalhau 
 Bacalao is a dry fish stew made from  dried and salted cod ,  chickpeas , onions, potatoes, tomato sauce, and parsley, it is usually consumed on Uruguay over Easter, as it is a Spanish catholic tradition.
 
 Italian style stews [ edit ] 
 Also very popular on Uruguayan cuisine, ragu styled stews still are very popular, such as albondigas con papas and estofado.
 
 Niños envueltos [ edit ] 
 Literally meaning wrapped children, a stew consisting of small wraps the length of a human finger.  They are made of  loin  slices that are filled with bacon, spinach, and carrots, and later boiled in a tomato sauce and served with peas and boiled potatoes.
 
 Estofado [ edit ] 
 Made from poultry or cow meat, it is called estofado de pollo when made with poultry and estofado de carne when it has cow meat.  It is a dish that contains meat and chorizo or chicken, stewed in tomato sauce, and sometimes served with a side of boiled potatoes or pasta.
 
 Albondigas con papas [ edit ] 
 Spanish for  meatballs  with potatoes, albondigas con papas is a dish made from meatballs boiled in tomato sauce with potatoes and peas.
 Albondigas con papas are eaten with cheese and parsley.
 
 Minutas [ edit ] 
 Minuta  is the local name for  Río de la Plata 's fast food.
 Common side dishes are  fried eggs , croquetas,  French fries ,  purée , and salads.
 The most notable  minutas  are milanesas,  refuerzos  such as  choripanes ,  chivitos  and pizza and  faina ; also, the  bauru  is common along the Brazilian border.
 
 Choripan [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Choripán 
   A Choripan sandwich 
 Choripan, Spanish  portmanteau  for sausage (chorizo) and bread (pan) also called chorizo al pan (sausage on bread), is a sandwich made with barbecued chorizo (that is sliced in half to fit), mayonnaise, ketchup, tomato, lettuce, onions, etc.
 
 Hungaras [ edit ] 
 Hungaras are like panchos, boiled sausages but more spicy and thinner and longer; like panchos also they come served on bread and they are found on the street served as fast food and also sold apart in supermarkets.
 
 Milanesas [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Milanesa Milanesa (from Italian  cotoletta alla milanese ) is a thin breaded cutlet that can be  veal , chicken or fish.
   Milanesa 
 Breading consists of three successive steps that its order defines mostly the character of the milanesa, most of Montevideo's bars and old style restaurants make breading starting with egg so that the latest dip is also egg, this method generated by galician and Spanish barists leaves a coat of egg that turns into a film at frying, it is a curious variation that is often served on those restaurants because the main breading has inverse order and is the type of milanesa that is served everywhere else including homemade milanesas.
 Also milanesas are sold on  butcher shops  on every step previous to frying: sliced, tendered or breaded and ready to fry.
 
   Milanesa a la napolitana does not come from Naples. 
 A typical dish of milanesa is sided with fried eggs (or "a caballo" -horse riding- when egg garn besides siding), french fries or salad, The way that milanesa is served determinates the name of the dish that can be served "a caballo" or "a la napolitana" ( Naples  style) or "al pan" (milanesa sandwich).
 A milanesa a la napolitana, not original from Naples, consists of a milanesa garnished with tomato sauce, ham and mozzarella cheese slices (on that order) that is finely grated.
 Milanesa al pan consists of a sandwich made with milanesa, felipe bread (a type of  bread roll ), tomato slices, lettuce, mayonnaise, bacon, ham, cheese and olives, when a milanesa al pan is mayor in size it is cut in half and called milanesa en dos panes (double bread), home made and street versions of this dish are called refuerzo de milanesa and it differs in that it is made with baguette besides felipe bread.
 
 Postas de pescado a la marinera [ edit ] 
 See also:  Fish and chips 
 Often served on portuary sides of the country, pescado a la marinera  battered   fish fry  that it is commonly served sided with lemon slices.
 Battering is made from beer (preferably from brand Patricia), flour and salt.
 
 Panchos [ edit ] 
 Hot dogs are referred to as panchos, coming in two sizes: cortos (short ones) and largos (longer ones).
 La Pasiva is a restaurant chain in Uruguay that specializes in serving panchos and with time, was renowned by its La Pasiva mustard sauce for panchos that comes among every pancho order and also serves local specialities as panchos con panceta (panchos with bacon) and panchos porteños.
 
 Panchos con panceta.  Grilled frankfurter that is previously wrapped on a spiral with sliced bacon and served on bread. 
 Panchos porteños.  frankfurter wrapped with mozzarella cheese and served on bread. 
 Croquetas [ edit ] 
 See also:  Croquettes 
 Croquetas are  croquettes  made with  potato  and ham,  rice  and ham,  béchamel  and ham.
 
 Empanadas [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Empanadas 
   Empanada de pino frita 
 Empanadas are a kind of pastry that originated in Spain. In Uruguay, empanadas are more commonly baked and usually include a filling of choice. Empanadas de carne are filled with  ground meat , chopped boiled eggs, garlic and onions, Empanadas de carne may also be "dulces" (sweet, filled with  raisins ) or "saladas" (salty, filled with olives). Empanadas de pollo are made with ground poultry meat. Empanadas de jamon y choclo or  humitas  are filled with ham and corn. Empanadas de queso y cebolla are filled with onion and cheese. Empandas de dulce, or empanadas de membrillo are filled with  quince cheese .
 Empanadas are not to be confused with pasteles, a similar baked good.
 
 Buñuelos [ edit ] 
 See also:  Buñuelos 
 Buñuelos are fried dough balls of different types, the most common one are buñuelos de  acelga , buñuelos de sesos (doughs that contains  brain ), buñuelos de manzana (apple dough) and buñuelos de banana (banana dough).
 Sweet buñuelos are served powdered with  cane sugar .
 
 Pizzas, pastas and breads [ edit ] 
 Brought by Italian tradition and spread all over the world, Pizza is not an exception, pizza-like bread and pasta are part of everyday food.
 
   Typical Muzzarella Pizza 
 Pizza [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Pizza 
 Uruguayan style pizza, usually rectangular in shape, has a thicker crust and this rising higher than the usual  Neapolitan pizza . It is commonly sliced squared, resembling  pizza al taglio  or  Sicilian pizza . Pizzas with an even thicker crust are referred to as "pizza de cumpleaños" (birthday party pizzas) as it is common to serve to guests on such occasions.
 Pizza can come with a lot of ingredients, but most common are  pizza  (without cheese nor topings) and  pizza-muzzarella .
 
 Fainá [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Farinata 
   
 Fainás are often served in pizza bars and restaurants throughout the country.
 It consists of a thin, round chickpea flour baked crepe paste than can be ordered as "fainá de orilla" (fainá from the border) when is the thinnest part of the border. that is desired or "fainá del medio" (faina from the middle) when it is referred to the taller middle part of a fainá.
 Unlike the common use in Italy that fainá is peppered on the plate by the crust, Uruguayan use implies peppering on the plate with white chopped pepper by the other side.
 When fainá is served upside a pizza it is called "pizza a caballo" that may be translated as horse-riding pizza.
 
 Figazza [ edit ] 
 A figazza is a pizza bread not containing tomato sauce, topped with onions and often also muzzarella. [16]  It is probably descended from the  Genoese  focaccia (where it is known as  fügàssa  [ it ] ), and it is also consumed in Argentina under the name fugazzeta.
 Typical ingredients of a figazza are onions, peppers, and olives.
 
 Lahmajun [ edit ] 
 Lahmajun  (locally known as "lehmeyún") was brought by Armenian immigrants. Nowadays it is very popular, found at several small restaurants and pizzerias. [17] 
 
 Fideos con tuco [ edit ] 
 Tuco is an Uruguayan tomato sauce made with chopped meat, tomato sauce, onions, oreganon and garlic, fideos meaning noodles.
 Tuco can be served with any pasta, fresh or dry, but most common are tallarines con tuco (spaghetti with tuco), ñoquis con tuco (gnocchi), moñitas con tuco ( farfalle ), raviolis con tuco (ravioli), and canelones con tuco ( cannelloni ).
 Canelones con tuco are covered with bechamel and later covered with tuco.
 
 Fideos con estofado [ edit ] 
 Estofado and tuco are interchangeable for any of the mentioned noodles though estofado can serve also as a dish by itself when served alone or with potatoes.
 Estofado is made by cooking meat pieces in tomato sauce by long coctions.
 
 Ñoquis [ edit ] 
 Gnocchi, or ñoquis of the 29th is a tradition of having gnocchi every 29, brought in by the immigration from Veneto, the tradition of Saint Pantaleo, who had many miracles attributed to him, is said to honor him.
 Families and friends gather on the 29th to eat gnocchi, the tradition is that everyone at the table puts money under the plate for good fortune.
 
 Capeletis a la Caruso [ edit ] 
   
 Caruso sauce was invented by chef Raymundo Monti and takes its name from the famous tenor Enrico Caruso. It is a warm sauce that is made of cream, sliced onions, ham, cheese, nuts, and mushrooms and is served with  cappelletti .
 
 Breads [ edit ] 
 Pan de chicharrones 
 Literally meaning  rind  bread, also  rosca de chicharrones , is a leavened bread made of cow lard and added with small rinds made of cow fat, commonly found on local bakeries among with sweet variations without rinds such as rosca de membrillo, (quince (cheese-filled) bread) and rosca de dulce de leche (dulce de leche (filled) bread).
 
 Flauta 
 Pan flauta  (flute bread) is an elongated bread that is a variant of  baguette .
 
 Tortuga 
 Pan tortuga  it is a small round-shaped bread with a soft crust, thus its name  tortuga  (Spanish for turtle).
 
 Felipe 
 Felipe  is a hard-crusted small bread.
 
 Porteño 
 Porteño  is called after the eponym of the inhabitants of  Buenos Aires  and is similar to Felipe but with a smaller crumb.
 
 Marsellés 
 Marsellés  is named after the city of  Marseille  and resembles a pair of twin  Vienna bread  with harder crust and covered with maize flour.
 
 Pan de sándwich 
 Pan de sándwich  is a soft crumb mold bread specially made for making sandwiches.
 
 Sandwiches [ edit ] 
 There is a wide variety of sandwiches in Uruguay which are locally classified into two types called  refuerzo  (reinforcement) and sándwich (sandwich) respectively.
Sandwiches in Rio de la Plata are particular and different of those from other parts of the world because of the bread with which are made that is  pan de sándwich , this type of sandwiches are simply called  sándwiches  and are commonly sold on local bakeries.
Also note that the Spanish distinction between  refuerzo  and  sándwich  which is also present in Mexico with  torta  and sándwich, which differentiates common bread sandwich from others similar to the British  train sandwich , is not so pronounced on the Argentinian dialect where difference is simply made by adding  de miga  (crumby) to the latter.
Notable types of  refuerzos  are chivito, choripán and milanesa al pan.
 
 Chivito [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Chivito (sandwich) 
 See also:  chivito 
   A complete chivito 
 Chivito  meaning literally small goat is a popular type of  sandwich  originated in Uruguay, its name comes from an unaccomplished desire from a client that literally wanted a beef of small goat or a  chivito , being that goat is not consumed in Uruguay client had to be satisfied anyway with this now popular dish.   Platted chivito with Russian salad, ensalada criolla and heart of palm . Hence a thin slice of  filet mignon  substituted the beef of small goat, nowadays it is uncertain if  bacon ,  mozzarella ,  ham ,  onion ,  Hard-cooked eggs ,  tomato  slices,  mayonnaise ,  olives  and bread really complement the goat flavour.
 Variants from  chivito  are, as  milanesa  en dos panes,  chivito  en dos panes,  chivito canadiense  (added with  Canadian bacon ),  chivito canadiense  al plato and  chivito  al plato (platted chivito).
 A complete chivito is served with  french fries  and when is dished is also sided with ensalada rusa and ensalada criolla.
 
 Choripán [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Choripán 
   
 Choripán, Spanish  portmanteu  for sausage (chorizo) and bread (pan) also called chorizo al pan (sausage on bread), is a sandwich made with barbecued  chorizo  (that is sliced in half to fit), mayonnaise, ketchup, tomato, lettuce, onions, etc.
 
 Sándwich Olímpico [ edit ] 
 Sándwich Olímpico  (Olympic sandwich) is a very popular sandwich in Uruguay made with three slices of  pan de sándwich  filled with ham, cheese, olives tomato and lettuce.
 
 Sándwich caliente [ edit ] 
 Sándwich caliente  (hot sandwich) or "tostado" (toasted) as it is called in Argentina is a variant of the  croqué monsieur  made with two slices of  pan de sánguche  filled ham and cheese and toasted.
 
 Jesuitas [ edit ] 
 Jesuitas  are made with two layers of puff pastry filled with ham and cheese and covered with  meringue icing  This is a sweet and salty taste.
 
 Confectioneries for mate [ edit ] 
 Tortas fritas [ edit ] 
 Tortas fritas (fried cakes) are a simple pastry, typical from Uruguay and Argentina and which has many variants along South America. The recipe for the  sopaipilla , from which it descends,  is argued to be from what is now Germany but they were introduced to Spain by the Arabs at the times of the invasion. 
 
   
 Specifically Tortas fritas are leavened fried thin round pieces of bread but the aspects that describe them best is the flourishing with sugar, its distinctive hole in the center and the use of cow fat, both for frying and for making the batter.
 
 Within Uruguayan folklore is stated that tortas fritas are better if made and eaten on rainy days. 
 Bizcochos [ edit ] 
   Assorted  bizcochos , a buttery flaky pastry 
 Main articles:  Bizcocho § Uruguay , and  Bizcocho Uruguayan bizcochos are small pastries different from the Spaniard  sponge cake  of the same name that in Uruguay is called bizcochuelo.
 Bizcochos are consumed with  mate ,  coffee  and  tea , they are the more common pastry of  Uruguay , and commonly sold on local  bakeries .
 Bizcochos come in various kinds, like  corazanes ,  margaritas  and  pan con grasa .
 
 Pasteles [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Pasteles 
 Pasteles (pastries) are triangular-shaped empanadas that are made from a batter identical to such of tortas fritas with the addition of being puffed using cow fat. As tortas fritas they are also flourished with sugar after frying. Pasteles are filled only with quince jam or dulce de leche.
 
 Tortas fritas and pasteles are commonly sold on streets. 
 Alfajores [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Alfajor 
   Triple layered alfajores Alfajores consist of two round sweet spongy doughs poured together filled with dulce de leche and covered onto two variants: ″chocolate″ and ″nieve″ (snow).
 Nieve variant is called due to its white snowy aspect conferred by the  meringue  covering.
 
 Yo-yo: Layered pastry filled with Dulce de Leche and coated with chocolate on the upper half. It is shaped like a yo-yo. 
 Desserts [ edit ] 
 Cakes [ edit ] 
 Chajá (postre)  [ es ] : a dessert with meringue,  sponge cake , "Chajá" cream and peaches. It is created by a well known firm in the city of  Paysandú . [18] 
 Isla Flotante , made with  egg white  and sugar, and served with  zabaione . 
 Massini: Made of two layers of  pionono  (a thin sponge cake), filled with whipped cream and topped with caramelized  sabayon . 
 Bizcocho borracho: a dessert from Spanish origin, it's a spongy dough dipped with a syrup made of liquor 
 Confectioneries [ edit ] 
 Garrapinyades : a very popular treat, made with peanuts covered with cocoa, vanilla and sugar, resembling whole-nut  pralines . It is sold in little bags in the downtown streets. 
 Damasquitos: Jelly apricot candies, a delicacy from the city of  Minas . 
 Yemas acarameladas: Egg candy made mainly with egg yolks, vanilla, and sugar. It has a spherical shape of about one-inch diameter and covered with a thin layer of hard, transparent, caramelized sugar coating. 
 Zapallo en almíbar: Squash in syrup. 
 Cookies [ edit ] 
 Churros: came from Spain, and are just like those, except some have fillings, like custard cream or Dulce de Leche. 
 Custards and ice creams [ edit ] 
   Homemade oven-steamed  crème caramel 
 Dulce de leche: a sweet treat made of milk and sugar. It is used in many Uruguayan desserts. 
 Dulce de membrillo : a sweet quince jelly-like preserve. 
 Budín inglés : in English, 'English pudding'. A pudding with fruits and nuts, very popular on Christmas and New Year's Eve. 
 Flan : a kind of rich custard dessert with a layer of soft caramel on top. as opposed to  crème brûlée . 
 Martín Fierro : a slice of cheese and a slice of quince preserve ( dulce de membrillo ). 
 Ricardito : Also as popular, this is a cream-filled treat, covered with chocolate on a waffle base. It has different variants and it is sold in most kiosks in individual boxes. 
 Pastries [ edit ] 
 Pastafrola : pie made of quince paste ( dulce de membrillo ). 
 See also [ edit ] 
 Cuisine of Argentina 
 Cuisine of Montevideo 
 Portals :   Uruguay   Food 
 References [ edit ] 
 
 
 ^  a   b   Neves, Salvador (23 December 2022).  "Sorry, Tony"  (in Spanish).  Brecha . Retrieved  28 December  2022 . 
 
 ^   Ferreira, Diego; Larronda, Antonio (23 August 2013).  "Cócteles y mezclas retan a las bebidas tradicionales" .  www.elpais.com.uy  (in Spanish) . Retrieved  13 May  2017 . 
 
 ^   Buster's friend.  "Uruguayan Beef Tongue Vinaigrette (Lengua a La Vinagreta)" .  www.food.com . Retrieved  13 May  2017 . 
 
 ^   "Lengua a la vinagreta" .  www.gastronomia.com.uy  (in Spanish). Montevideo gastronómico . Retrieved  13 May  2017 . 
 
 ^   Drozd, Olga (4 February 2011).  "Uruguay — Pickled Fried Fish — Escabeche De Pescado Frito" .  www.ukrainianclassickitchen.ca . Retrieved  13 May  2017 . 
 
 ^   "Salsa criolla" .  qlinario.blogspot.com.uy  (in Spanish) . Retrieved  13 May  2017 . 
 
 ^   "montevideo gastronomico. Salsa criolla - Montevideo Portal - www.montevideo.com.uy" .  www.montevideo.com.uy  (in Spanish) . Retrieved  2016-02-27 . 
 
 ^   "Top 5: grapas nacionales" .  www.conexionbrando.com  (in Spanish) . Retrieved  13 May  2017 . 
 
 ^   elpais.com.uy.  "Uruguay ocupa el 12° lugar en consumo de vino a nivel mundial" .  elpais.com.uy . Retrieved  2015-09-24 . 
 
 ^   Lanzamiento (4 March 2013).  "La Uvita del Baar Fun-Fun fue lanzada al consumo masivo" .  www.bodegasdeluruguay.com.uy  (in Spanish) . Retrieved  13 May  2017 . 
 
 ^   "Uruguay es el país con mayor consumo de yerba del mundo" .  telefenoticias.com.ar  (in Spanish). 15 June 2015 . Retrieved  13 May  2017 . 
 
 ^   "CABA S.A."   caba.com.uy . Retrieved  13 May  2017 . 
 
 ^   Angelis, Fabrizio De; Perez, Lourdes Medina; Angelis, Fabrizio De; Perez, Lourdes Medina (September 2020).  "Revista de la Secretaría del Tribunal Permanente de Revisión" .  Revista de la Secretaría del Tribunal Permanente de Revisión  (in Spanish).  8  (16): 100–116.  doi : 10.16890/rstpr.a8.n16.p100 .  ISSN   2304-7887 . 
 
 ^   "Caracterización de la grappamiel según la Dirección General Impositiva del Uruguay"  (in Spanish) . Retrieved  2014-07-09 . 
 
 ^   Maglione, Alejandro (15 June 2009).  "Cocina "uruguaya": ¿Existe? (primera parte)" .  www.lanacion.com.ar  (in Spanish) . Retrieved  13 May  2017 . 
 
 ^   "Receta de figazza" .  www.recetasya.com  (in Spanish). 16 July 2010 . Retrieved  13 May  2013 . 
 
 ^   "How to prepare lahmajun, a traditional dish from the Middle East" .  El Observador . 21 October 2022 . Retrieved  8 February  2023 . 
 
 ^   "Products - :: Postre Chajá - Confitería Las Familias:: Postre Chajá" .  www.postrechaja.com  (in Spanish) . Retrieved  13 May  2017 . 
 
 
 External links [ edit ] 
  Media related to  Cuisine of Uruguay  at Wikimedia Commons
 
 v t e Uruguay   articles History 
 Charrúa people 
 Spanish colonization 
 Viceroyalty  (1776–1814) 
 British invasions  (1806–1807) 
 Banda Oriental 
 Liga Federal  (1815–1820) 
 Cisplatina province  (1821–1828) 
 Thirty-Three Orientals 
 Treaty of Montevideo (1828) 
 Civil War  (1839–1851) 
 Uruguayan War  (1864–1865) 
 Paraguayan War  (1864–1870) 
 Revolution of the Lances  (1870–1872) 
 Battle of Masoller  (1904) 
 Batllism 
 Tupamaros 
 Dictatorship  (1973–1985) 
 Expiry Law  (1986) 
 Geography 
 Borders 
 Cities 
 Montevideo 
 Climate 
 Departments 
 Environment 
 Climate change 
 Extreme points 
 Fauna 
 Flora 
 Geology 
 Islands 
 Lighthouses 
 Municipalities 
 National parks 
 Rivers 
 Time 
 DST 
 Politics 
 President 
 Cabinet 
 Political parties 
 Elections 
 Foreign relations 
 General Assembly  (parliament) 
 Legal system 
 Civil Code 
 Constitution 
 Judiciary 
 Law 
 Nationality law 
 Passport 
 Supreme Court 
 Legal issues 
 Abortion 
 Cannabis use 
 Human rights 
 Human trafficking 
 Law enforcement 
 LGBT rights 
 Prostitution 
 Military 
 Army 
 Navy 
 Air Force 
 History 
 Ranks 
 Economy 
 Agriculture 
 Banking 
 Central Bank 
 Currency 
 Energy 
 Science and technology 
 State companies 
 Stockbreeding 
 Taxation 
 Telecommunications 
 Tourism 
 Trade unions 
 Transport 
 Society 
 Anthem 
 Coat of arms 
 Demographics 
 Emigration 
 Ethnic groups 
 Flag 
 Healthcare 
 Immigration 
 LGBT 
 People 
 Public holidays 
 Squatting 
 Water supply and sanitation 
 Women 
 Culture 
 Cinema 
 Cuisine 
 Education 
 Languages 
 Literature 
 Mate 
 Media 
 Museums 
 Music 
 Religion 
 Smoking 
 Sport 
 Outline Index Bibliography 
 Category 
 Portal 
 v t e South American cuisine Sovereign states 
 Argentina 
 Bolivia 
 Brazil 
 Chile 
 Colombia 
 Ecuador 
 Guyana 
 Paraguay 
 Peru 
 Suriname 
 Uruguay 
 Venezuela 
 Dependencies  and other territories 
 Falkland Islands 
 French Guiana 
 South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands 
 
 v t e Cuisines Continental 
 African 
 North 
 West 
 list 
 Americas 
 Caribbean 
 North 
 South 
 list 
 Asian 
 Caucasian 
 Central 
 Indian subcontinent 
 Levantine 
 list 
 European 
 Balkan 
 Central 
 Eastern 
 list 
 Oceanic 
 Intercontinental
 Global 
 Latin American 
 Mediterranean 
 Middle Eastern 
 National  and regional 
 Afghan 
 Albanian 
 Algerian 
 American 
 Californian 
 Floribbean 
 Hawaiian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Lowcountry (South Carolina) 
 New England 
 New Mexico 
 Pacific Northwest 
 Pennsylvania Dutch 
 Puerto Rican 
 Southern US 
 Southwest US 
 Texas 
 Angolan 
 Argentine 
 Armenian 
 Australian 
 Austrian 
 Azerbaijani 
 Bahraini 
 Bangladeshi 
 Barbadian 
 Belarusian 
 Belgian 
 Belizean 
 Beninese 
 Bhutanese 
 Bolivian 
 Bosnian-Herzegovinian 
 Botswana 
 Brazilian 
 British 
 Channel Islands 
 English 
 Gibraltarian 
 Northern Irish 
 Saint Helena 
 Scottish 
 Welsh 
 Bruneian 
 Bulgarian 
 Burkinabé 
 Burmese 
 Burundian 
 Cambodian 
 Cameroonian 
 Canadian 
 Acadian 
 Québécois 
 Central African Republic 
 Chadian 
 Chilean 
 Chinese 
 Cantonese 
 Hong Kong 
 Macanese 
 Tibetan 
 Xinjiang 
 Colombian 
 Congolese 
 Corsican 
 Croatian 
 Cuban 
 Cypriot 
 Czech 
 Danish 
 Faroese 
 Greenlandic 
 Djiboutian 
 Dominican 
 Dominican Republic 
 Dutch 
 East Timorese 
 Ecuadorian 
 Egyptian 
 Emirati 
 Equatorial Guinean 
 Eritrean 
 Estonian 
 Ethiopian 
 Fijian 
 Filipino 
 Finnish 
 French 
 Occitan 
 French Guianan 
 Gabonese 
 Gambian 
 Georgian 
 German 
 Ghanaian 
 Greek 
 Cretan 
 Epirotic 
 Greek Macedonian 
 Heptanesean 
 Guatemalan 
 Guinea-Bissauan 
 Guinean 
 Haitian 
 Honduran 
 Hungarian 
 Icelandic 
 Indian 
 Arunachalese 
 Assamese 
 Bengali 
 Bihari 
 Goan 
 Gujarati 
 Himachal Pradesh 
 Kashmiri 
 Jharkhandi 
 Karnataka 
 Kerala 
 Maharashtrian 
 Manipuri 
 Meghalayan 
 Mizo 
 Naga 
 Odia 
 Punjabi 
 Rajasthani 
 Sikkimese 
 Sindhi 
 Tamil 
 Telangana 
 Telugu 
 Indonesian 
 Acehnese 
 Balinese 
 Banjar 
 Batak 
 Betawi 
 Indo 
 Javanese 
 Madurese 
 Makassar 
 Minahasan 
 Minangkabau 
 Palembangese 
 Sundanese 
 Iranian 
 Iraqi 
 Irish 
 Israeli 
 Italian 
 Abruzzese 
 Ligurian 
 Lombard 
 Lucanian 
 Neapolitan 
 Roman 
 Sardinian 
 Sicilian 
 Venetian 
 Ivorian 
 Jamaican 
 Japanese 
 Okinawan 
 Jordanian 
 Kazakh 
 Kenyan 
 Korean 
 North Korean 
 South Korean 
 Kosovan 
 Kuwaiti 
 Kyrgyz 
 Lao 
 Latvian 
 Lebanese 
 Lesotho 
 Liberian 
 Libyan 
 Liechtensteiner 
 Lithuanian 
 Luxembourg 
 Macedonian 
 Malagasy 
 Malawian 
 Malaysian 
 Sabahan 
 Sarawakian 
 Maldivian 
 Malian 
 Maltese 
 Mauritanian 
 Mauritian 
 Mexican 
 Moldovan 
 Monégasque 
 Mongolian 
 Montenegrin 
 Moroccan 
 Mozambican 
 Namibian 
 Nauruan 
 Nepalese 
 New Zealand 
 Nicaraguan 
 Niger 
 Nigerian 
 Niuean 
 Norwegian 
 Omani 
 Pakistani 
 Palestinian 
 Panamanian 
 Peruvian 
 Polish 
 Portuguese 
 Qatari 
 Romanian  (incl.  Transylvanian Saxon ) 
 Russian 
 Bashkir 
 Chechen 
 Circassian 
 Komi 
 Mordovian 
 Sakha 
 Tatar 
 Udmurt 
 Yamal 
 Rwandan 
 Saint Lucian 
 Salvadoran 
 Sammarinese 
 São Tomé and Príncipe 
 Saudi Arabian 
 Senegalese 
 Serbian 
 Seychellois 
 Sierra Leonean 
 Singaporean 
 Slovak 
 Slovenian 
 Somali 
 South African 
 Spanish 
 Andalusian 
 Asturian 
 Balearic 
 Basque 
 Canarian 
 Cantabrian 
 Catalan 
 Extremaduran 
 Galician 
 Manchegan 
 Valencian 
 Sri Lankan 
 Sudanese 
 Swazi 
 Swedish 
 Swiss 
 Syrian 
 Taiwanese 
 Tajik 
 Tanzanian 
 Zanzibari 
 Thai 
 Togolese 
 Tunisian 
 Turkish 
 Turkmen 
 Trinidadian and Tobagonian 
 Ugandan 
 Ukrainian 
 Uruguayan 
 Uzbek 
 Venezuelan 
 Vietnamese 
 Western Saharan 
 Yemeni 
 Zambian 
 Zimbabwean 
 Ethnic 
 Ainu 
 Arab 
 Indonesian 
 Aromanian 
 Assyrian 
 Balochi 
 Berber 
 Cajun 
 Chinese 
 American 
 Canadian 
 Chifa 
 Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Crimean Tatar 
 Greek American 
 Hazaragi 
 Indian 
 Anglo-Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Indigenous American 
 Inuit 
 Italian American 
 Kurdish 
 Livonian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Malay 
 Ossetian 
 Parsi 
 Pashtun 
 Peranakan 
 Romani 
 Sámi 
 Soul food 
 Sylheti 
 Transylvanian Saxon 
 Yup'ik 
 Religious 
 Buddhist 
 Christian 
 Goan Catholic 
 Mangalorean Catholic 
 Mennonite 
 Hindu 
 Islamic 
 Chinese 
 Ital 
 Jain 
 Jewish 
 American 
 Ashkenazi 
 Bukharan 
 Ethiopian 
 Mizrahi 
 Sephardic 
 Syrian 
 Ritual slaughter 
 Sikh 
 Historical 
 Ancient Egyptian 
 Ancient Greek 
 Ancient Israelite 
 Ancient Roman 
 Antebellum America 
 Aztec 
 Byzantine 
 Early modern European 
 Historical Chinese 
 Historical Indian subcontinent 
 Historical North Indian and Pakistani 
 History of agriculture 
 History of alcoholic drinks 
 History of bread 
 History of seafood 
 History of vegetarianism 
 Historical Argentine 
 Historical Japanese 
 Inca 
 Mayan 
 Muisca 
 Mughal 
 Medieval 
 Ottoman 
 Peasant 
 Soviet 
 Thirteen Colonies 
 Styles 
 Classique 
 Fast food 
 Fusion 
 New American 
 Eurasian 
 Haute 
 Molecular gastronomy 
 Note by Note 
 Nouvelle 
 Lists 
 List of cuisines 
 List of historical cuisines 
 Lists of prepared foods 
 Related 
 Cookbook 
 Cooking 
 Culinary arts 
 Drink 
 Food 
 history 
 Diet 
 Meal preparation 
 
   Food portal 
   Drink portal 
   Category 
   Commons 
   Cookbook 
   WikiProject 
   Outline 
 
 Authority control : National libraries  
 Israel 
 United States 
 
  
NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw2402
Cached time: 20230311004346
Cache expiry: 1814400
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc, no‐toc‐conversion]
CPU time usage: 0.974 seconds
Real time usage: 1.250 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 7450/1000000
Post‐expand include size: 221038/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 15562/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 64/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 108212/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.562/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 18238215/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/400
 
 
Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  927.839      1 -total
 23.22%  215.460      2 Template:Excerpt
 16.86%  156.453      1 Template:Reflist
 13.84%  128.455     17 Template:Cite_web
 12.70%  117.795      1 Template:Uruguay_topics
 12.43%  115.299      1 Template:Country_topics
 10.91%  101.261      2 Template:Lang
  8.49%   78.759      2 Template:Culture_of_Uruguay
  8.26%   76.637      2 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  7.83%   72.639      3 Template:Navbox
 
  Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:idhash:10423540-0!canonical and timestamp 20230311004345 and revision id 1138265536. Rendering was triggered because: api-parse
  
 esi <esi:include src="/esitest-fa8a495983347898/content" />  
 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Uruguayan_cuisine&oldid=1138265536 " 
 Categories :  Uruguayan cuisine South American cuisine Latin American cuisine Hidden categories:  CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2017 All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from September 2015 Articles with excerpts Commons category link is on Wikidata Region topic template using suffix Articles with J9U identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  This page was last edited on 8 February 2023, at 20:14  (UTC) . 
 Text is available under the  Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0 ;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the  Terms of Use  and  Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the  Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. 
 
 
 Privacy policy 
 About Wikipedia 
 Disclaimers 
 Contact Wikipedia 
 Mobile view 
 Developers 
 Statistics 
 Cookie statement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
