
 
 
 Jump to content 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle sidebar 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Create account Log in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Personal tools 
 
 
 
 
   Create account   Log in 
 
 
 
 
		Pages for logged out editors  learn more 
 
 
 Contributions Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Navigation 
 
 
 Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate 
 
 
 
 
 Contribute 
 
 
 Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file 
 
 
 
 
 Tools 
 
 
 What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item 
 
 
 
 
 Print/export 
 
 
 Download as PDF Printable version 
 
 
 
 
 In other projects 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons Wikivoyage 
 
 
 
 
 Languages 
 
 On this Wikipedia the language links are at the top of the page across from the article title.  Go to top . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CentralNotice  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Contents 
 move to sidebar 
 hide 
 
 
 
 
 (Top) 
 
 
 
 
 
 1 Historical influences 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 Regional cuisines 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 Relation to Vietnamese philosophy 
 
 
				Toggle Relation to Vietnamese philosophy subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 3.1 Five-element correspondence 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.2 Yin-yang balance 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4 Food in relation to lifestyle 
 
 
				Toggle Food in relation to lifestyle subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 4.1 Typical Vietnamese family meal 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.2 Feast 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.3 Royal cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5 Cultural importance 
 
 
				Toggle Cultural importance subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 5.1 Proverbs 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6 International popularity 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 7 Cooking techniques 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8 Vietnamese utensils 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 9 Common ingredients 
 
 
				Toggle Common ingredients subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 9.1 Vegetables 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 9.2 Fruits 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 9.3 Herbs ( rau thơm ) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 10 Condiments and sauces 
 
 
				Toggle Condiments and sauces subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 10.1 Condiments 
 
 
 
 
 
 10.1.1 Herbs and spices 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 10.1.2 Pairing 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 10.2 Sauces 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 10.3 Food colourings 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 11 Popular dishes 
 
 
				Toggle Popular dishes subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 11.1 Noodle soups 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 11.2 Soup and  cháo  (congees) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 11.3 Rice dishes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 11.4 Sticky rice dishes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 11.5 Bánh 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 11.6 Wraps and rolls 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 11.7 Sandwiches and pastries 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 11.8 Meat dishes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 11.9 Seafood dishes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 11.10 Salads 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 11.11 Curries 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 11.12 Preserved dishes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 11.13 Mắm 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 11.14 Fermented meat dishes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 11.15 Sausages 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 11.16 Vegetarian dishes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 11.17 Desserts 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 11.18 Mứt 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 11.19 Tofu 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 12 Exotic dishes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 13 Beverages 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 14 See also 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 15 References 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 16 Further reading 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
						Toggle the table of contents
					 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle the table of contents 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Vietnamese cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 40 languages 
 
 
 
 Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা Беларуская Български Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Jawa ქართული Lietuvių Bahasa Melayu 日本語 Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Русский Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 
 Edit links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Article Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 English 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 More 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
 
 
 Culinary traditions of Vietnam 
 Part of  a series  on the Culture of Vietnam 
 History 
 People 
 Languages 
 Traditions 
 Kinship 
 Clothing 
 Marriage 
 Games 
 
 Cuisine 
 Festivals 
 Religion 
 Vietnamese folk religion 
 Confucianism 
 Buddhism 
 Taoism 
 Christianity 
 
 Art 
 Vietnamese martial arts 
 
 Literature 
 Music 
 Media 
 Television 
 Cinema 
 
 Sport 
 Monuments 
 World Heritage Sites 
 
 Symbols 
 Flag 
 Coat of arms 
 National anthem 
 
   Vietnam portal v t e 
 
 
 This article  needs additional citations for  verification .  Please help  improve this article  by  adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources:   "Vietnamese cuisine"  –  news   ·   newspapers   ·   books   ·   scholar   ·   JSTOR   ( January 2013 )  ( Learn how and when to remove this template message ) 
   Phở bò  (beef noodle soup) from the city of  Hội An  – different regions have different recipes for their  phở . 
   Bún chả , a dish of grilled pork and noodle and herbs 
   Bún bò Huế , a spicy, lemongrass rice vermicelli noodle soup served with fresh herbs and vegetables Vietnamese cuisine  encompasses the foods and beverages of  Vietnam . Meals feature a combination of five fundamental tastes ( ngũ vị ): sweet, salty, bitter, sour, and  spicy . The distinctive nature of each dish reflects one or more elements (such as nutrients and colors), which are also based around a  five-pronged philosophy . Vietnamese recipes use ingredients like  lemongrass ,  ginger ,  mint ,  Vietnamese mint ,  long coriander ,  Saigon cinnamon ,  bird's eye chili ,  lime , and  Thai basil  leaves. [1]  Traditional Vietnamese cooking has often been characterised as using fresh ingredients, not using much dairy or oil, having interesting textures, and making use of herbs and vegetables. The cuisine is also low in sugar and is almost always naturally  gluten-free , as many of the dishes are rice-based instead of wheat-based, made with  rice noodles ,  papers  and  flour . [2]  Vietnamese cuisine is strongly influenced not only by the cuisines of neighboring China, Cambodia and Laos, but also by  French cuisine  due to  French colonial rule over the region  from 1887 to 1954. [ citation needed ] 
 Kikkoman , a leading  soy sauce  manufacturer, did market research confirming that  fish sauce  ( nước mắm ) is the predominant  table sauce  in Vietnamese homes, where it captures over 70% of the market, while the share for soy sauce is under 20%. [3] 
 
 
 Historical influences [ edit ] 
 Mì vằn thắn  (wonton noodles soup) influenced by Southern Chinese migrants Bò kho  (beef stew) and  bánh mì  (Vietnamese baguette) influenced by the French Cà ri gà  (chicken curry with coconut milk) influenced by South East Asian cuisine 
 Besides indigenous Vietnamese influences, which are the major core of Vietnamese food, owing to historical contact with China and centuries of  sinicization , some Vietnamese dishes share similarities with Chinese cuisine. In culinary traditions, the Chinese introduced to Vietnam several dishes, including  vằn thắn / hoành thánh  ( wonton ),  xá xíu  ( char siu ),  há cảo  ( har gow ),  hủ tiếu  ( shahe fen ),  mì  (wheat noodles),  bò bía  ( popiah ),  bánh quẩy  ( youtiao ),  mooncake  and  bánh pía  (Suzhou style mooncake),  bánh tổ  ( nian gao ),  sủi dìn  ( tang yuan ),  bánh bò ,  bánh bao  ( baozi ),  cơm chiên Dương Châu  ( Yangzhou fried rice ), and  mì xào  ( chow mein ). The Vietnamese adopted these foods and added their own styles and flavors to the foods. Ethnic minorities in the mountainous region near the China–Vietnam border also adopted some foods from China. Ethnic  Tày  and  Nùng  in Lạng Sơn Province adopted  thịt lợn quay  (roasted pork) and  khâu nhục  (braised pork belly) from China. Some New World vegetables, such as chili peppers and corn (maize), also made their way to Vietnam from the  Ming dynasty .
 The French introduced baguettes to Vietnam, which were combined with Vietnamese stuffing to become a popular fast food in Vietnam called  bánh mì thịt ,  known overseas as "Vietnamese baguettes".  Bánh mì  is just the bread, whereas  thịt  implies meat or stuffing. The French also introduced Vietnam to onions, cauliflower, lettuce, potatoes, tarragon, carrot, artichoke, asparagus, and coffee.
 The western-introduced ingredients often have a name derived from a similar native Vietnamese ingredient, then adding the word  tây  (meaning  western ). Onions are called  hành tây  (literally "western shallots"), asparagus as  măng tây  (western bamboo shoots) and potatoes are called  khoai tây  (western yam) in Vietnamese, which reflects their origin before arriving in Vietnam. French-influenced dishes are numerous and not limited to:  sa lát  (salad),  pâté ,  patê sô  (a Brittany pasty called "pâté chaud"),  bánh sừng trâu/bánh sừng bò  (croissant),  bánh  flan , y a ua  (yogurt),  rôti  (rotisserie),  bơ  (butter),  vịt nấu cam  (duck à l'orange),  ốp lết  (omelette),  ốp la  ( œufs au plat ),  phá xí  (farcies),  bít tết  (beefsteak),  sốt vang  (cooking with wine),  dăm bông  ( jambon ), and  xúc xích  ( saucisse ). Owing to influences from French colonial rule, the French Indochinese countries of Laos, Vietnam, and Cambodia have several shared dishes and beverages, including baguettes and coffee. The French also introduced the use of dairy products in Vietnamese-French fusion dishes.
 Vietnamese cuisine also has influences from Champa, Malaysia and Cambodia. The use of coconut milk and various central dishes such as  bánh khọt  were influenced by Cham cuisine. Spices including curries were also introduced to Vietnam by Malay and Indian traders. [4]  Though not common in the north,  cà ri  is a quite popular dish in central and southern Vietnam. The most common form is chicken curry, and to a lesser extent, goat curry. Chicken curry is an indispensable dish in many social gathering events, such as weddings, funerals, graduations, and the yearly death anniversary of a loved one. Similar to Cambodia, curry in Vietnam is eaten either with bread,  steamed rice , or round rice noodles (rice vermicelli).  Mắm bồ hóc  or  prahok , adopted from ethnic Khmer in Southern Vietnam, is used as a central ingredient of a Vietnamese rice noodle soup called  bún nước lèo  which originated with ethnic Khmers in Vietnam and is not found in Cambodia.
 Owing to contact with previous communist countries from Eastern Europe, the Vietnamese adopted dishes such as stuffed cabbage soup,  sa lát Nga  ( Olivier salad ) and  bia Tiệp  (Czech beer).
 
 Regional cuisines [ edit ] 
   Chả cá Lã Vọng , a specialty of  Hanoi 
   Mì Quảng , a specialty of  Đà Nẵng  and  Quang Nam Province 
   Bún mắm , a specialty of  Soc Trang Province 
 The mainstream culinary traditions in all three regions of  Vietnam  share some fundamental features:
 
 Freshness of food: Most meats are only briefly cooked. Vegetables are eaten fresh; if they are cooked, they are boiled or only briefly stir-fried. 
 Presence of herbs and vegetables: Herbs and vegetables are essential to many Vietnamese dishes and are often abundantly used. 
 Variety and harmony of textures: Crisp with soft, watery with crunchy, delicate with rough. 
 Broths or soup-based dishes are common in all three regions. 
 Presentation: The condiments accompanying Vietnamese meals are usually colorful and arranged in eye-pleasing manners. 
 While sharing some key features, Vietnamese culinary tradition differs from region to region. [5] 
 In  northern Vietnam , a colder climate limits the production and availability of spices. As a result, the foods there are often less spicy than those in other regions. [6]   Black pepper  is used in place of  chilies  as the most popular ingredient to produce spicy flavors. In general, northern Vietnamese cuisine is not bold in any particular taste—sweet, salty, spicy, bitter, or sour. Most northern Vietnamese foods feature light and balanced flavors that result from subtle combinations of many different flavoring ingredients. The use of meats such as pork, beef, and chicken were relatively limited in the past. Freshwater fish,  crustaceans , and  mollusks , such as  prawns ,  squids ,  shrimps ,  crabs ,  clams , and  mussels , are widely used. Many notable dishes of  northern Vietnam  are crab-centered (e.g.,  bún riêu ). Fish sauce,  soy sauce , prawn sauce, and limes are among the main flavoring ingredients. Being the cradle of Vietnamese civilization, [7] [ citation needed ]  northern Vietnam produces many signature dishes of Vietnam, such as  bún riêu  and  bánh cuốn , which were carried to central and southern Vietnam through Vietnamese migration. [8]  Other famous Vietnamese dishes that originated from the north, particularly from  Hanoi  include " bún chả " (rice noodle with grilled marinated pork),  phở gà  (chicken soup with rice noodles),  chả cá Lã Vọng  (rice noodle with grilled fish).
 The abundance of spices produced by  Central Vietnam 's mountainous terrain makes this region's cuisine notable for its spicy food, which sets it apart from the two other regions of Vietnam, where foods are mostly not spicy. Once the capital of the last dynasty of Vietnam,  Huế 's culinary tradition features highly decorative and colorful food, reflecting the influence of ancient Vietnamese royal cuisine. The region's cuisine is also notable for its sophisticated meals consisting of many complex dishes served in small portions. Chili peppers and shrimp sauces are among the frequently used ingredients. Some Vietnamese signature dishes produced in  central Vietnam  are  bún bò Huế  and  bánh khoái .
 The warm weather and fertile soil of  southern Vietnam  create an ideal condition for growing a wide variety of fruits, vegetables, and livestock. As a result, foods in southern Vietnam are often vibrant and flavorful, with liberal uses of garlic,  shallots , and fresh herbs. Sugar is added to food more than in the other regions. [9]  The preference for sweetness in southern Vietnam can also be seen through the widespread use of coconut milk in southern Vietnamese cuisine. Vast shorelines make seafood a natural staple for people in this region. Some signature seafood dishes from southern Vietnam include  bánh khọt  and  bún mắm . [10] [11] 
 The  Mekong Delta  cuisine relies heavily on fresh products which is abundant in the new land with heavy use of palm sugar, fermented fishes, seafoods and wild herbs and flowers. The history of the region being a newly settled area reflects on its cuisine, with  Ẩm thực khẩn hoang  or Settlers cuisine means dishes are prepared fresh from wild and newly-caught ingredients. The cuisine is also influenced by Khmer, Cham and Chinese settlers.
 The cuisine of the Northern and Central Highlands regions is influenced by tribal traditions, with items such as  thắng cố  (Hmong horse stew), dried meats,  cơm lam  and  rượu cần .
 
 Relation to Vietnamese philosophy [ edit ] 
 Vietnamese cuisine always has  five elements  which are known for its balance in each of these features.
 
 Many Vietnamese dishes include five fundamental taste senses ( ngũ vị ): spicy (metal), sour (wood), bitter (fire), salty (water) and sweet (earth), corresponding to five organs ( ngũ tạng ):  gall bladder ,  small intestine ,  large intestine ,  stomach , and  urinary bladder . 
 Vietnamese dishes also include five types of nutrients ( ngũ chất ): powder, water or liquid, mineral elements, protein, and fat. 
 Vietnamese cooks try to have five colours ( ngũ sắc ): white (metal), green (wood), yellow (earth), red (fire) and black (water) in their dishes. 
 Dishes in Vietnam appeal to gastronomes via the five senses ( năm giác quan ): food arrangement attracts eyes, sounds come from crisp ingredients, five spices are detected on the tongue, aromatic ingredients coming mainly from herbs stimulate the nose, and some meals, especially finger food, can be perceived by touching. [12] 
 Five-element correspondence [ edit ] 
   Raw ingredients to make filling of  nem rán  before mixing together. They represent the five-element principle of Vietnamese cuisine. 
 Vietnamese cuisine is influenced by the Asian principle of  five elements  and  Mahābhūta .
 
 
 
 Correspondence
 
 Elements [13] 
 
 
 Wood 
 Fire 
 Earth 
 Metal 
 Water
 
 
 Spices ( ngũ vị ) 
 
 Sour 
 Bitter 
 Sweet 
 Spicy 
 Salty
 
 
 Organs ( ngũ tạng ) 
 
 Gall bladder 
 Small intestine 
 Stomach 
 Large intestine 
 Urinary bladder
 
 
 Colors ( ngũ sắc ) 
 
 Green 
 Red 
 Yellow 
 White 
 Black
 
 
 Senses ( ngũ giác ) 
 
 Visual 
 Taste 
 Touch 
 Smell 
 Sound
 
 
 Nutrients ( ngũ chất ) 
 
 Carbohydrates 
 Fat 
 Protein 
 Minerals 
 Water
 
 Yin-yang balance [ edit ] 
 The principle of  yin and yang  ( Vietnamese :  Âm dương ) is applied in composing a meal in a way that provides a balance that is beneficial for the body. While contrasting texture and flavors are important, the principle primarily concerns the "heating" and "cooling" properties of ingredients. Certain dishes are served in their respective seasons to provide contrasts in temperature and spiciness of the food and environment. [14]  Some examples are: [15] 
 
 Duck meat, considered "cool", is served during the hot summer with ginger  fish sauce , which is "warm". Conversely, chicken, which is "warm", and pork, which is "hot", are eaten in the winter. 
 Seafoods ranging from "cool" to "cold" are suitable to use with  ginger  ("warm"). 
 Spicy foods ("hot") are typically balanced with sourness, which is considered "cool". 
 Balut  ( trứng vịt lộn ), meaning "upside-down egg" ("cold"), must be combined with  Vietnamese mint  ( rau răm ) ("hot"). 
 Food in relation to lifestyle [ edit ] 
   A platter of different boiled pork offal 
   A number of Vietnamese condiments including  nước mắm 
   A variety of Vietnamese fruits 
 Vietnamese cuisine is reflective of the Vietnamese  lifestyle , from the preparation to how the food is served. Going through long phases of war and political conflict, as well as cultural shifts, the vast majority of the Vietnamese people have been living in poverty. Therefore, the ingredients for Vietnamese food are often very inexpensive but nonetheless, the way they are cooked together to create a  yin–yang  balance makes the food simple in appearance but rich in flavor.
 Because of economic conditions, maximizing the use of ingredients to save money has become a tradition in Vietnamese cooking. In earlier decades and even nowadays in rural areas, every part of a cow is used, from the muscle meat to the intestines; nothing is wasted. The higher quality cuts from farmed animals (cows, pigs) would be cooked in stirfry, soup or other dishes, while the secondary cuts would be used in blood sausages or soup. The same goes for vegetables like  scallions : the leafy part is diced into small bits which are used to add flavor to the food while the crunchy stalk and roots are replanted.
 Nước mắm  (fish sauce) is the most commonly used and iconic  condiment  in Vietnamese cooking. It is made from fermented raw fish and is served with most of the Vietnamese dishes. Vietnamese cuisines are not known for ingredients with top quality, but rather for the very inexpensive and simple scraps that are creatively mixed to create dishes with bold flavor. A traditional  southern Vietnamese  meal usually includes  cơm trắng  (plain white rice),  cá kho tộ  ( catfish  in a clay pot),  canh chua cá lóc  ( sour soup  with  snakehead fish ), and it would be incomplete without fish sauce served as a condiment. Dishes are prepared less with an appearance in mind but are served family-style to bring everyone together after a long day of work.
 Despite being a small country in Southeast Asia, the foods from each region in Vietnam carry their distinctive and unique characteristics that reflect the geographical and living conditions of the people there. The traditional southern Vietnamese meal is made up of fresh ingredients that only the fertile  Mekong Delta  could provide, such as  cá lóc , and a wide range of tropical fruit like  mangosteen ,  mango , and  dragon fruit . The southern-style diet is very 'green', with vegetables, fish and tropical fruits as the main ingredients.
 Central Vietnam  is the region in which food is prepared with the strongest, boldest flavors. This region is constantly under harsh weather conditions throughout the year, so people there do not have as many green ingredients as others do in the north and south of Vietnam. Instead, the coastline around the central Vietnam area is known for its salt and fish sauce industries; these two condiments are central to their daily diets.
 Northern Vietnamese  cuisine has a strong Chinese influence, and its iconic dish is  phở . While rice is a staple in the southern Vietnamese diet, the north has a preference for noodles. Owing to the drastic differences in climate and lifestyles throughout the three main regions of Vietnam, the foods vary. Northern Vietnamese cooking is the least bold and spicy in flavor compared to the foods from central and southern Vietnam.
 
 Typical Vietnamese family meal [ edit ] 
   Typical modern Vietnamese family meal served on a round metal tray. Dishes cooked from various native and introduced ingredients which include pork ribs, tofu, potatoes, tomato,  gourd ,  Basella alba  and fish sauce with chilli 
 Daily meals of Vietnamese people are quite different from Vietnamese foods served in restaurants or stalls. A typical meal for the average Vietnamese family would include: [16] 
 
 Cơm trắng : Cooked white rice 
 Món mặn  or main dishes to eat with rice: Fish/seafood, meat, tofu (grilled, boiled, steamed, stewed or stir-fried with vegetables) 
 Rau : Sauteed, boiled or raw fresh green vegetables 
 Canh  (a clear  broth  with vegetables and often meat or seafood) or other kinds of soup 
 Nước chấm : Dipping sauces and condiments depending on the main dishes, such as pure fish sauce, ginger fish sauce, tamarind fish sauce, soy sauce,  muối tiêu chanh  (salt and pepper with lime juice) or  muối ớt  (salt and chili) 
 Small dish of relishes, such as salted eggplant, pickled white cabbage, pickled papaya, pickled garlic or pickled bean sprouts 
 Tráng miệng  or desserts: Fresh fruits, drinks or sweets, such as  chè . 
 Except individual bowls of rice, all dishes are communal and are to be shared in the middle of the table. It is also customary for younger people to ask/wait for the elders to eat first and for the woman who sits directly next to the rice pot to serve rice for other people. People should "invite" the others to enjoy the meal (somehow similar to saying "Enjoy your meal"), in order from the elders to younger people. They also pick up food for each other as an action of care.
 
 Feast [ edit ] 
   A typical feast for one table (6–8 diners) in an engagement ceremony ( Ăn hỏi ) of regional  Northern Vietnam 
 A feast ( Vietnamese :  cỗ ,  tiệc ) is a significant event for families or villages, usually up to 12 people for each table. A feast is prepared for weddings, funerals, and festivals, including the longevity-wishing ceremony. In a feast, ordinary foods are not served, but boiled rice is still used.
 A Vietnamese feast has two courses: the main course ( món mặn —salty dish) and dessert ( món ngọt —sweet dish). All dishes, except for individual bowls of rice, are enjoyed collectively. All main course dishes are served simultaneously rather than one after another. The major dish of the main course is placed in the center of the tables, usually big pots of soup or a hot pot.
 A basic feast ( cỗ một tầng ) consists of 10 dishes: five in bowls ( năm bát ):  bóng  (fried fish belly),  miến  ( cellophane noodles ),  măng  (bamboo shoot),  mọc  ( meatball ),  chim  or  gà tần  (bird or chicken stew dishes) and five on plates ( năm đĩa ):  giò  (Vietnamese sausage),  chả ,  gà  or  vịt luộc  (boiled chicken or duck),  nộm  (Vietnamese salad) and  xào  (stir-fried dishes). This kind of feast is traditional and is organized only in northern Vietnam. Other variations are found in central and southern Vietnam.
 Four dishes essential in the feast of Tết are  chả giò  (spring rolls),  nem  (in northern Vietnam,  nem  refers to a spring roll called  nem cuon  or  nem ran ; in southern Vietnam,  nem  mainly refer to  nem chua , fermented pork rolls),  ninh  (stew dishes) and  mọc  (noodle soup). At this time, the feast for offering ancestors includes sticky rice, boiled chicken, Vietnamese rice wine, and other foods preferred by ancestors. Gifts are given before guests leave the feast.
 
 Royal cuisine [ edit ] 
   Nem công  (peacock spring-rolls) is a well-known royal dish in Huế 
 In the Nguyễn dynasty, the 50 best chefs from all over the kingdom were selected for the  Thượng Thiện  board to serve the king. There were three meals per day—12 dishes at breakfast and 66 dishes for lunch and dinner (including 50 main dishes and 16 sweets). An essential dish was  bird's nest soup  ( tổ yến ). Other dishes included shark fin ( vi cá ),  abalone  ( bào ngư ), deer's tendon ( gân nai ), bears' hands ( tay gấu ), and rhinoceros' skin ( da tê giác ). Water had to come from the  Hàm Long  well, the  Báo Quốc  pagoda, the  Cam Lồ  well (near the base of  Thúy Vân  mountain), or from the source of the  Hương  River. Rice was the  de  variety from the  An Cựu  imperial rice field.  Phước Tích  clay pots for cooking rice were used only a single time before disposal. No one was allowed to have any contact with the cooked dishes except for the cooks and  Thượng Thiện  board members. The dishes were first served to eunuchs, then the king's wives, after which they were offered to the king. The king enjoyed meals ( ngự thiện ) alone in a comfortable, music-filled space. [17] 
 
 Cultural importance [ edit ] 
 Salt  is used as the connection between the worlds of the living and the dead.  Bánh phu thê  is used to remind new couples of perfection and harmony at their weddings. Food is often placed at the ancestral altar as an offering to the dead on special occasions (such as  Lunar New Year ). Cooking and eating play an extremely important role in Vietnamese culture.
 
 Proverbs [ edit ] 
 The word  ăn  (to  eat ) is included in a great number of  proverbs  and has a large range of semantic extensions.
 
 Ăn trông nồi, ngồi trông hướng  ("Checking the status of the rice pot when eating, watch where/what direction you are sitting.") = Be careful of possible faux pas. 
 Ăn theo thuở, ở theo thì  = living in accordance to one's limit and social circumstance 
 Cha ăn mặn, con khát nước  ("The father eats salty food, the children go thirsty.") = Bad actions will later bring bad luck/consequences to descendants. 
 Nhai kĩ no lâu, cày sâu tốt lúa  ("Chewing carefully [makes one] feel full longer, ploughing deep is good for the rice") = Careful execution brings better results than hasty actions. 
 Học ăn, học nói, học gói, học mở  ("Learning how to eat, how to speak, how to wrap, how to open") = Everything needs to be learned, even the simplest, start from "how to eat" politely. 
 Many Vietnamese idioms reflect the  sex-is-eating  mapping:
 
 Ông ăn  chả , bà ăn  nem  ("He eats meatballs, she eats springrolls") = Both husband and wife are having affairs. 
 Chán cơm thèm  phở  ("Tired of rice, craving noodle soup") = A man gets bored of his wife and find another girl. 
 Ăn  bánh  trả tiền  ("You eat snack, you pay money") = Pay before having sex with prostitutes. (Long story short,  bánh  is a metaphor for the prostitute) 
 Ăn vụng không biết chùi mép  ("Eating on the sly without cleaning your mouth") = Committing adultery but left trace 
 International popularity [ edit ] 
 Outside of Vietnam, Vietnamese cuisine is widely available in countries with strong Vietnamese immigrant communities, such as Australia, the United States, Canada, and France. Vietnamese cuisine is also popular in  Japan ,  Korea , the  Czech Republic ,  Slovakia , Germany, United Kingdom, Poland, Philippines and Russia, and in areas with dense Asian populations.
 Television shows featuring Vietnamese food have increased in popularity.  Luke Nguyen  from Australia currently features a television show,  Luke Nguyen's Vietnam , dedicated on showcasing and instructing how to cook Vietnamese dishes.
 On  The Great Food Truck Race , a Vietnamese sandwich truck called Nom Nom Truck received the most money in the first five episodes.
 
Anthony Bourdain wrote: [18]   You don't have to go looking for great food in Vietnam. Great food finds you. It's everywhere. In restaurants, cafes, little storefronts, in the streets; carried in makeshift portable kitchens on yokes borne by women vendors. Your cyclo-driver will invite you to his home; your guide will want to bring you to his favorite place. Strangers will rush up and offer you a taste of something they're proud of and think you should know about. It's a country filled with proud cooks—and passionate eaters. 
 Gordon Ramsay  visited Vietnam in his reality show  Gordon's Great Escape  - S02E02 (2011) and fell in love with the taste of the culinary here. Especially the dish called  Hủ tiếu  Mì by Mrs. Dì Hai, prepped and served on a small boat in Cái Răng floating market, Cần Thơ. He even praised it as "The greatest dish I have ever eaten" when he brought it up as one of the dishes for the elimination challenge for the top 5 finalists of  American MasterChef  season 4 episode 21.
 
 Cooking techniques [ edit ] 
   Cutting dough and  rán   quẩy 
   Xào  (stir-fry) 
   Thịt nướng  (grilled pork) 
   Bánh tẻ  is boiled ( luộc ) after wrapped in a leaf ( gói lá ) 
   Tráng  (spread rice flour on a steamed cloth)  bánh tráng 
 Some common Vietnamese  culinary  terms include:
 
 Rán, chiên  – fried dishes
 Chiên nước mắm  – fried then tossed with fish sauce 
 Chiên bột  – battered then deep-fried 
 Rang  – dry-fried dishes with little to no oil 
 Áp chảo  – pan-fried then sautéed 
 Xào  – stir fry, sautéing
 Xào tỏi  – stir fry with  garlic , very common way of cooking vegetables 
 Xào sả ớt  – sautéed with  lemongrass  and  chili pepper 
 Xào lăn  – pan searing or stir frying quickly to cook raw meat 
 Xáo măng  – braised or sautéed with  bamboo shoots 
 Nhồi thịt  – stuffed with minced meat before cooking 
 Sốt chua ngọt  – fried with sweet and sour sauce 
 Kho  – stew, braised dishes
 Kho khô  – literally dried stew (until the sauce thickens) 
 Kho tiêu/kho gừng/kho riềng  – stewed with  peppercorns / ginger / galangal 
 Nấu  – means cooking, usually in a pot
 Nấu nước dừa  – cooked with  coconut water 
 Hầm/ninh  – slow-cook with spices or other ingredients 
 Canh  – broth-like soup to be served over rice 
 Rim  – simmering 
 Luộc  – boiling with water, usually fresh vegetables and meat 
 Chần  – blanche 
 Hấp  – steamed dishes
 Hấp sả  – steamed with  lemongrass 
 Hấp Hồng Kông  or  hấp xì dầu  – "Hong Kong-style" steamed dish (i.e.: with  scallion , ginger and  soy sauce ) 
 Om  – clay pot cooking of northern style
 Om sữa  – cooked in clay pot with milk 
 Om chuối đậu  – cooked with young banana and  tofu 
 Gỏi  – salad dishes, usually with meat, fish 
 Gói lá  – wrap raw ingredients by a leaf (often banana) to form shape and enhance fragant 
 Nộm  – salads, usually meatless 
 Nướng  – grilled dishes
 Nướng xiên  –  skewered  dishes 
 Nướng ống tre  – cooked in bamboo tubes over fire 
 Nướng mọi/nướng trui/thui  – char-grilled over open fire 
 Nướng đất sét/lá chuối  – cooked in a clay mould or banana leaves wrap, or recently, kitchen foil, hence the method has evolved into  nướng giấy bạc 
 Nướng muối ớt  – marinated with salt and chili pepper before being grilled 
 Nướng tỏi  – marinated with garlic then grilled 
 Nướng mỡ hành  – grilled then topped with melted lard,  peanuts , and chopped  green onions 
 Bằm  – sauteed mix of chopped ingredients 
 Cháo  –  congee  dishes 
 Súp  –  soup  dishes (not  canh  or clear broth soup) 
 Rô ti  – roasting then simmering meat, usually with strong spices 
 Tráng  – spreading ingredient into a thin layer on a steamed/hot surface 
 Cà ri  – curry or curry-like dishes 
 Quay  – roasted dishes 
 Lẩu  –  hot pot  dishes 
 Nhúng dấm  – cooked in a vinegar-based hot pot, some variations include vinegar and coconut water-based hot pot 
 Cuốn  – any dish featuring  rice paper  wraps with  bún  and fresh herbs 
 Bóp thấu / tái chanh  – raw meat or seafood prepared with  lime  or vinegar 
 Vietnamese utensils [ edit ] 
   A traditional set of serving utensils used in Northern Vietnam up to the 20th century include: wooden tray, 'small bottom' bowls ( bát chiết yêu ), stoneware dishes, flat chopsticks (for portioning rice), chopsticks and ladle (for sharing soup) 
 
 
 
 Basket , various kinds ( rổ  or  rá ) 
 Bowl  (small bowl:  bát  in northern Vietnam or  chén  in southern Vietnam; large bowl:  tô ) 
 Chopsticks  ( đũa ) 
 Chõ – a kind of steamer to cook  glutinous rice 
 Clay pot cooking  ( thố đất ) 
 cup  ( cốc  or  ly ) 
 Dipper  ( gáo ) 
 Flat drying basket ( nong  or  nia ) 
 Knife  ( dao ) 
 
 
 Mill  ( cối xay gạo ) 
 Mortar  ( cối giã ) 
 Pestle  ( chày ) 
 Plate  ( dĩa  or  đĩa ) 
 Pot , various kinds ( nồi  and  niêu ) 
 Spoon  ( thìa  in northern Vietnam or  muỗng  in southern Vietnam) 
 Teacup  ( tách  or  chén uống trà ) 
 Teapot  ( ấm pha trà ) 
 Tray , various kinds ( mâm  and  khay ) 
 
 Common ingredients [ edit ] 
 Further information:  List of Vietnamese ingredients 
 Vegetables [ edit ] 
   A vegetable stand in a  Hanoi  market 
 
 
 
 Bitter melon  ( khổ qua or mướp đắng ) (southern & northern Vietnamese dialects) 
 Bok choy  ( cải thìa ) 
 Cabbage  ( bắp cải ) 
 Carrot  ( cà rốt ) 
 Cauliflower  ( bông cải or súp lơ ) 
 Celery  ( cần tây ) 
 Ceylon spinach  ( mồng tơi ) 
 
 
 Chayote  ( su su ) 
 Chili pepper  ( ớt ) 
 Cucumber  ( dưa chuột  or  dưa leo ) 
 Crown daisy  ( cải cúc  or  tần ô ) 
 Radish  ( củ cải trắng ) 
 Eggplant  ( cà tím ) 
 Jicama  ( củ đậu  or  củ sắn ) 
 
 
 Katuk  ( rau ngót ) 
 Tonkin jasmine  ( hoa thiên lý ) 
 Tricolor amaranth  ( rau dền đỏ ) 
 Water celery  ( rau cần (ta) ) 
 Water cress  ( xà lách xoang ) 
 Water spinach  ( rau muống ) 
 
 Fruits [ edit ] 
   A fruit stand in  Da Nang 
 
 
 
 Acerola  ( sơ ri  or  xê-ri ) 
 Buddha's hand  ( phật thủ ) 
 Canistel  ( trái trứng gà ) 
 Cherimoya  ( mãng cầu tây ) 
 Coconut  ( dừa ) 
 Chinese date  ( táo tàu ) 
 Custard apple  ( bình bát  or  mãng cầu ) 
 Durian  ( sầu riêng ) 
 Milk fruit  ( vú sữa ) 
 Guava  ( ổi ) 
 Jackfruit  ( mít ) 
 
 
 Langsat  ( bòn bon ) 
 Longan  ( nhãn ) 
 Lychee  ( vải ) 
 Mango  ( xoài ) 
 Mangosteen  ( măng cụt ) 
 Otaheite gooseberry  ( chùm ruột ) 
 Papaya  ( đu đủ ) 
 Persimmon  ( hồng ) 
 Pitaya  – dragon fruit ( thanh long ) 
 Plum  ( mận ) 
 Pomelo  ( bưởi ) 
 
 
 Rambutan  ( chôm chôm ) 
 Sapodilla  ( hồng xiêm  or  xa-pô-chê ) 
 Spondias  cytherea  ( cóc ) 
 Soursop  ( mãng cầu Xiêm  or  mãng cầu gai ) 
 Star fruit  ( khế ) 
 Sweetsop  ( na  or  mãng cầu ta ) 
 Rose apple  ( roi  in the north,  mận  Đà Lạt  in the south) 
 Tea fruit ( thanh trà ) 
 Tomato ( cà chua ) 
 Water apple  ( roi  in the north,  mận  in the south) 
 Watermelon  ( dưa hấu ) 
 
 Herbs ( rau thơm ) [ edit ] 
   Herbs and vegetables were displayed in  Ben Thanh Market 
 
 
 
 Genus  Allium :
 Using leaf and flower:  Welsh onion  or green onion ( hành lá  or  hành hương  or  hành hoa ),  garlic chives  ( hẹ ) 
 Using bulb: garlic ( tỏi ),  shallot  ( hành tím ), onion ( hành tây ),  Allium chinense  ( củ kiệu ) and  chives  ( củ nén  or  hành tăm ). 
 Welsh onion ( hưng cừ ) and  leek  ( tỏi tây  or  hành boarô ) are not traditionally used. 
 Family  Zingiberaceae : using  ginger  ( gừng ),  galangal  ( riềng )— greater galangal  ( riềng nếp ) is preferred to  lesser galangal  ( riềng thuốc ) because of the stronger flavour,  turmeric  ( nghệ ) and  black cardamom  ( thảo quả ) 
 
 
 Polygonum aviculare  ( rau đắng ) 
 Coriander  leaf (cilantro) ( rau mùi  or  ngò rí ) 
 Lemongrass  ( xả  or  sả ) 
 Dill  ( thì là ) 
 Elsholtzia ciliata  ( kinh giới ) 
 Long coriander /culantro ( ngò gai  or  mùi tàu ) 
 
 
 Rice paddy herb  ( ngò ôm  or  rau ngổ ) 
 Houttuynia  cordata  ( giấp cá  or  diếp cá ) 
 Parsley  ( mùi tây ) 
 Peppermint  ( (húng) bạc hà ) 
 Perilla  ( tía tô ) 
 Spearmint  ( húng dũi ) 
 Thai basil  ( rau quế  or  húng quế ) sometimes substituted with  sweet basil  in the United States 
 Hot mint  ( rau răm ) 
 
 Condiments and sauces [ edit ] 
 Condiments [ edit ] 
 Vietnamese usually use raw vegetables,  rau sống , or  rau ghém  (sliced vegetable) as condiments for their dishes to combine properly with each main dish in flavour. Dishes in which  rau sống  is indispensable are  bánh xèo  and hot pot. The vegetables principally are herbs and wild edible vegetables gathered from forests and family gardens. Leaves and buds are the most common parts of vegetables used. Most of the vegetables have medicinal value. [19] 
 Rau sống  includes lettuce, raw bean sprout, herbs, shredded banana flower, green banana, water spinach, mango bud and guava leaves.
 
 Herbs and spices [ edit ] 
   Vietnamese hot chili peppers are added to most foods, especially in central and southern Vietnam. 
 Coriander  and  green onion  leaves can be found in most Vietnamese dishes. 
 A basic technique of stir-frying vegetable is frying garlic or  shallot  with oil before putting the vegetable into the pan. 
 In northern Vietnam, dishes with fish may be garnished with  dill . 
 In central Vietnam, the mixture of ground lemongrass and chili pepper is frequently used in dishes with beef. 
 In southern Vietnam, coconut water is used in most stew dishes. 
 The pair  culantro  ( ngò gai ) and  rice paddy herb  ( ngò om  or  ngổ ) is indispensable in all kinds of sour soups in the southern Vietnam. 
 Spearmint  is often used with strongly fishy dishes. 
 Perilla  is usually used with crab dishes. 
 Pairing [ edit ] 
 Chicken dishes are combined with  lime  leaves. 
 Crab and seashell dishes are combined with  fishy-smelling herb  and  perilla . 
 Dishes reputed as "cold" or "fishy-smelling", such as catfish, clams, or snails, are combined with ginger or lemongrass. 
 Beef dishes are combined with celeries or pineapples. 
 Sauces [ edit ] 
 Nước chấm 
 Mắm tôm  ( shrimp paste ) 
 Nước mắm  (fish extract) can be used as it is or mixed with lemon juice, garlic, vinegar, sugar, and chili. This mixture is called  nước mắm pha . 
 Tương  is made from fermented soybeans. 
 Soy sauce  mostly is used in marinades and sauces. 
 Hoisin sauce  is used in Southern Vietnam to mix with  phở  while serving. 
 Hot chili sauce. 
 Food colourings [ edit ] 
   Xôi  ngũ sắc  (five colours sticky rice) is coloured with plant-based ingredients 
 Traditionally, the colouring of Vietnamese food comes from natural ingredients, however today there's an increase in the use of artificial food dye agents for food colouring, in Vietnam.
 
 Red – usually from  beetroot  or by frying  annatto  seeds to make oil ( dầu điều ) 
 Orange – usually used for sticky rice, comes from  gac 
 Yellow – from  turmeric 
 Green – from the  pandan  leaf or  katuk 
 Purple – from the  magenta plant  ( lá cẩm ) 
 Black – in  banh gai  is from the  ramie  leaf ( lá gai ) 
 Dark brown – for stew dishes, uses  nước màu  or  nước hàng , which is made by heating sugar to a temperature above that of  caramel  (170 °C). 
 Colourings can be absorbed by mixing ground colourings or colouring liquid or wrapping before boiling to get the extracts. When colouring dishes, the tastes and smells of colourings must also be considered.
 
 Popular dishes [ edit ] 
 For a longer list of popular dishes, see  List of Vietnamese dishes . For a list of popular dishes organized by  province , see  List of Vietnamese culinary specialities . 
 When Vietnamese dishes are referred to in English, it is generally by the Vietnamese name without the  diacritics . Some dishes have gained descriptive English names, as well.
 Popular Vietnamese dishes include:
 
 Noodle soups [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Vietnamese noodles 
   Bánh đa cua  (Crab red noodle soup) 
   Bún mắm  (Mix seafood noodles soup) 
 Vietnamese cuisine boasts a huge variety of noodle soups, each with distinct influences, origins and flavours. A common characteristic of many of these soups is a rich broth. [20] 
 
 
 
 Name
 
 Description
 
 
 Bún bò Huế 
 
 Spicy beef  noodle soup  originated from the royal city of  Huế  in Central Vietnam. Beef bones,  fermented  shrimp paste, lemongrass, and dried  chilies  give the broth its distinctive flavors. Often served with  mint  leaves,  bean sprouts , and  lime  wedges. Pig's feet are also common ingredients at some restaurants. [ clarification needed ] 
 
 
 Bún măng vịt 
 
 Bamboo  shoots and duck noodle soup. [21] 
 
 
 Bún ốc 
 
 Vermicelli with  snails  (freshwater snails with noodles, tomato pork bone broth, tofu and herbs)
 
 
 Bánh canh 
 
 A thick tapioca/rice  noodle  soup with a simple broth, often includes pork, crab, chicken,  shrimp ,  spring onions  and fresh onions sprinkled on top
 
 
 Bún riêu 
 
 A  noodle soup  made of thin rice noodles, topped with crab and shrimp paste, served in a tomato-based broth and garnished with bean sprouts, prawn paste, herb leaves, tamarind/lime, tofu,  water spinach , and chunks of tomato
 
 
 Mì  (súp mì) 
 
 A Chinese-influenced wheat (egg) noodle soup.
 
 
 Phở 
 
 A noodle soup with a rich, clear broth made from a long boiling of meat and spices, its many varieties are made with different meats (most commonly beef or chicken) along with beef meatballs.  Phở  is typically served in bowls with spring onion, (in  phở tái ) slices of semi-cooked beef (to be cooked by the boiling hot broth), and broth. In the south, bean sprouts and various herbs are also added. [20] 
 
 
 Phở satế 
 
 Spicy noodle soup with thinly sliced rare beef steak, satế hot chili sauce, sliced cucumber, tomatoes, and peanut
 
 
 Mì vịt tiềm 
 
 Yellow noodle soup with roasted duck and Chinese broccoli
 
 
 Bún chả cá 
 
 Rice vermicelli soup with fried fishcake
 
 
 Hủ tiếu 
 
 A noodle soup with many varied styles, including a 'dry' (not soup, but with sauce) version, which was brought to Vietnam by way of Chinese ( Teochew ) immigrants from  Cambodia . The noodles are usually  egg noodles  or  rice noodles , but many other types may be used. The soup base is made of pork bones.
 
 Soup and  cháo  (congees) [ edit ] 
   Canh chua , sour soup 
 
 
 Name
 
 Description
 
 
 Súp măng cua 
 
 Asparagus and crab soup typically served as the first dish at banquets
 
 
 Lẩu  (Vietnamese  hot pot )
 
 A spicy variation of the Vietnamese sour soup with assorted vegetables, meats, seafood, and spicy herbs
 
 
 Cháo 
 
 A variation of  congee , it uses a variety of different broths and meats, including duck,  offal , fish, etc. When chicken is used, it is called  cháo gà .
 
 
 Cháo lòng 
 
 Rice porridge with pork intestine, liver, gizzard, heart, and kidney
 
 
 Bò kho 
 
 Beef stew with carrots, usually served with toasted bread or rice noodles
 
 
 Nhúng dấm 
 
 Fire pot with a combination of sliced rare beef and seafood cooked in sour broth, served with thin rice vermicelli noodles, fresh vegetables, rice spring roll wrapper, and dipping sauce
 
 
 Canh chua 
 
 Vietnamese sour soup – typically includes fish,  pineapples , tomatoes, herbs, beansprouts,  tamarind , and various kinds of vegetables
 
 Rice dishes [ edit ] 
   Cơm tấm 
 
 
 Name
 
 Description
 
 
 Cơm chiên Dương Châu 
 
 A Chinese fried rice dish, named after the  Yangzhou  region in China, it is a well-known dish in Vietnam.
 
 
 Cơm gà rau thơm  (chicken and rice with mint)
 
 This dish is rice cooked in chicken stock and topped with fried then shredded chicken, with mint and other herbs. The rice has a unique texture and taste that the fried mint garnish enhances. It is served with a special herb sauce on the side.
 
 
 Cơm hến 
 
 Rice with clams – a popular, inexpensive dish in the city of  Huế  and its vicinity
 
 
 Cơm chiên cá mặn 
 
 Fried rice with salty fermented fish and chopped snow pea and chicken
 
 
 Cá/thịt kho 
 
 A traditional family dish of fish or pork braised in a clay pot and served with sweet and sour soup ( canh chua )
 
 
 Gà xào gừng 
 
 Chicken sauteed with ginger and fish sauce
 
 
 Bò lúc lắc 
 
 Cubed beef sauteed with cucumber, tomatoes, onion, pepper, and soy sauce
 
 
 Cơm lam 
 
 Rice (often glutinous rice) cooked in a bamboo tube either boiled or steamed
 
 
 Cơm tấm 
 
 In general, grilled pork (either ribs or shredded) is mixed with  bì  (thinly shredded pork mixed with cooked and thinly shredded pork skin and fried ground rice) over  com tam  ("broken rice") and is served with  sweet and sour  fish sauce. Other types of meat, prepared in various ways, may be served with the broken rice.  Barbecued  beef, pork, or chicken are common choices and are served with the broken rice. The rice and meat are accompanied by various greens and pickled vegetables, along with a prawn paste cake ( chả tôm ), steamed egg ( trứng hấp ) and grilled prawns.
 
 Sticky rice dishes [ edit ] 
   Bánh chưng 
 
 
 Name
 
 Description
 
 
 Bánh chưng 
 
 Sticky rice  wrapped in banana leaves and stuffed with  mung bean  paste, lean pork and black pepper, it is traditionally eaten during the Lunar New Year( Tết ).  Bánh chưng  is popular in the North, while the similar  bánh tét  is more popular in the South.  Bánh tét  has the same content, except it is cylindrical in shape, and lean pork is substituted with fatty pork.
 
 
 Xôi 
 
 Sticky rice with  coconut  milk, cooked the same way as one cooks rice, or steamed for a firmer texture and more flavorful taste, in a number of varieties
 
 Bánh [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Bánh 
 See also:  Bánh lá 
 The Vietnamese name for pastries is  bánh . Many of the pastries are wrapped in various leaves (bamboo, banana,  dong ,  gai ) and boiled or steamed. One of the historic dishes, dating to the mythical founding of the Vietnamese state is  bánh chưng . As it is a savory dish and thus not a true pastry,  bánh chưng  and the accompanying  bánh dày  are laden with heaven and earth symbolism. These dishes are associated with offerings around the Vietnamese New Year ( Tết ). Additionally, as a legacy of French colonial rule and influence,  bûche de Noël  is a popular dessert served during the Christmas season. [ citation needed ] 
 
   Bánh bèo 
   Bánh xèo 
 
 
 Name
 
 
 
 
 Bánh bao 
 
 A steamed bun  dumpling  that can be stuffed with onion,  mushrooms , or vegetables,  bánh bao  is an adaptation from the Chinese  baozi  to fit Vietnamese taste. Vegetarian  banh bao  is popular in Buddhist temples. Typical stuffings include slices of  marinated  barbecued pork from Chinese cooking, tiny boiled  quail  eggs, and pork.
 
 
 Bánh bèo 
 
 A central Vietnamese dish, it consists of tiny, round, rice flour pancakes, each served in a similarly shaped dish. They are topped with  minced  shrimp and other ingredients, such as  chives , fried  shallots , and pork rinds, eaten with  nước chấm .
 
 
 Bánh bột chiên  (fried rice flour dish)
 
 A Chinese-influenced pastry, it exists in many versions all over Asia; the Vietnamese version features a special tangy soy sauce on the side, rice flour cubes with fried eggs (either duck or chicken), and some vegetables. This is a popular after-school snack for young students in southern Vietnam.
 
 
 Bánh bột lọc 
 
 A  Huế  food, it consists of tiny rice dumplings made in a clear rice-flour  batter , often in a small, flattish, tube shape, stuffed with shrimp and ground pork. It is wrapped and cooked inside a banana leaf, served often as Vietnamese  hors d'œuvres  at more casual  buffet -type parties.
 
 
 Bánh xèo 
 
 A flat pan-fried dish made of rice flour with  turmeric , shrimp with shells on, slivers of fatty pork, sliced onions, and sometimes  button mushrooms , fried in oil, usually  coconut  oil, which is the most popular oil used in Vietnam. It is eaten with lettuce and various local herbs and dipped in  nước chấm  or sweet fermented  peanut butter  sauce.  Rice papers  are sometimes used as wrappers to contain  banh xeo  and the accompanying vegetables.
 
 
 Bánh nậm 
 
 A  Huế  food, it is a flat steamed rice dumpling made of rice flour, shallots, shrimp, and seasoned with pepper. It is wrapped and cooked in banana leaves and served with fish sauce. [22] 
 
 Wraps and rolls [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Món cuốn 
   Gỏi cuốn  (rice paper roll or summer roll) 
 
 
 Name
 
 Description
 
 
 Bánh cuốn 
 
 Rice flour rolls stuffed with ground pork, prawns, and  wood ear  mushroom, they are eaten in a variety of ways with many side dishes, including  chả  (sausage).
 
 
 Bì cuốn 
 
 Rice paper rolls with the  bì  mixture of thinly shredded pork and thinly shredded pork skin tossed with powdered  toasted  rice, among other ingredients, along with  salad ; it is similar to  summer rolls .
 
 
 Bò bía  (Vietnamese-style  popiah )
 
 Stir-fried  jicama  and carrots are mixed with Chinese  sausage  and shredded scrambled eggs, all wrapped in a rice paper roll, dipped into a spicy peanut sauce (with freshly roasted and ground peanuts). It is of Chinese ( Hokkien / Chaozhou ) origin, having been brought over by the immigrants. In Saigon (particularly in  Chợ Lớn ), it is common to see old Teochew men or women selling  bò bía  at their roadside stands. The name  bò bía  phonetically resembles its original name  popiah  in the  Teochew language .
 
 
 Chả giò  or  nem rán  (northern)
 
 A kind of  spring roll  (sometimes referred to as  egg roll ), it is deep-fried flour rolls filled with pork,  yam , crab, shrimp, rice vermicelli, mushrooms ("wood ear") and other ingredients. The spring roll goes by many names – as many people actually use (falsely) the word "spring roll" while referring to the fresh transparent rice paper rolls (discussed below as "summer rolls"), where the rice paper is dipped into water to soften, and then rolled up with various ingredients. Traditionally, these rolls are made with a rice-paper wrapper, but in recent years, Vietnamese chefs outside of Vietnam have changed the recipe to use a wheat-flour wrapper.
 
 
 Gỏi cuốn 
 
 Also known as Vietnamese fresh rolls,  salad rolls , or  summer rolls , they are rice-paper rolls that often include shrimp, herbs, pork, rice vermicelli, and other ingredients wrapped up and dipped in  nước chấm  or peanut sauce. Spring rolls almost constitute an entire category of Vietnamese foods, as the many different kinds of spring rolls have different ingredients in them.
 
 Bánh tráng  can be understood as either of the following:
 
 Bánh tráng cuốn 
 Thin rice flour sheet dried into what is commonly called "rice paper", used in making  spring roll  ( chả giò ), and  summer rolls  ( gỏi cuốn ) by applying some water to soften the texture 
 Bánh tráng nướng  (in the south), or  bánh đa  in the north 
 These are large, round, flat rice  crackers , which, when heated, enlarge into round, easily shattered pieces. They can be eaten separately, although they are most commonly added into the  vermicelli  noodle dishes like  cao lầu  and  mì quảng . Many types of  bánh tráng  exist, including the clear  sesame  seed ones, prawn-like cracker with dried spring onions, and sweet milk. 
 Sandwiches and pastries [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Bánh mì 
 
 
 Name
 
 Description
 
 
 Bánh mì  kẹp thịt 
 
 Vietnamese  baguette  or French bread is traditionally filled with  pâté , Vietnamese  mayonnaise , cold cuts, jalapeños, pickled white  radish ,  pickled carrot , and  cucumber  slices. While traditional cold cuts include  ham ,  head cheese , and Vietnamese  bologna , varieties of stuffing such as eggs, canned sardines, shredded pork, fried tofu, and grilled meats are common. Sandwiches are often  garnished  with coriander leaves and black pepper.
 
 
 Bánh  Pâté chaud 
 
 A French-inspired meat-filled pastry, it is characterized by flaky crust and either pork or chicken as the filling.
 
 
 Bánh mì ốp la [23] 
 
 Vietnamese-style fried egg sandwich.  "Ốp la"  means "sunny-side up".
 
 Meat dishes [ edit ] 
   A platter of pork dishes 
   Sliced  chả lụa  served over  bánh cuốn , and garnished with fried shallots 
 
 
 Name
 
 Description
 
 
 Bò kho  (meat soup)
 
 A beef and vegetable stew, it is often cooked with warm, spicy herbs and served very hot with French baguettes for dipping. In northern Vietnam, it is known as  bò sốt vang .
 
 
 Bò lá lốt 
 
 A dish of spiced beef rolled in a betel leaf ( lá lốt ) and grilled
 
 
 Bò lúc lắc  (shaking beef)
 
 French-influenced dish of beef cut into cubes and marinated, served over greens (usually  watercress ), and sautéed onions and tomatoes, eaten with rice
 
 
 Bò 7 món  (seven courses of beef)
 
 Multi-course meal consisting of seven beef dishes. Developed during the French colonial era when beef became more widely consumed.
 
 
 Cá 7 món  (seven courses of fish)
 
 Similar course arrangement as  Bò 7 món  substituting beef with fish. Less popular than the original variant.
 
 
 Chả lụa  or giò lụa 
 
 A sausage made with ground lean pork and  potato starch , it is also available fried; known as  chả chiên . Various kinds of  chả  (sausage) are made of ground chicken ( chả gà ), ground beef ( chả bò ), fish ( chả cá ), or tofu ( chả chay , or vegetarian sausage).
 
 
 Gà nướng sả 
 
 Grilled chicken with  lemon grass (sả), lemongrass grilled beef and other meats are also popular variations.
 
 
 Giò thủ 
 
 Giò thủ is a brawn made of fresh bacon, pig's ears, garlic, scallions, onions, black fungus, fish sauce and cracked black pepper.
 
 
 Nem nướng 
 
 Grilled  meatballs, usually made of seasoned pork, they are often colored reddish with  food coloring  and with a distinct taste, grilled on  skewers  like  shish kebabs . Ingredients in the marinade include fish sauce.
 
 
 Nem nguội 
 
 A Huế dish and a variation of the  Nem nướng   meatballs , these also come from central Vietnam. They are chilled, small and rectangular in shape, and stuffed with vermicelli. The reddish meat is covered with peppers and typically a chili pepper. Very spicy, they are eaten almost exclusively as a cocktail snack.
 
 Seafood dishes [ edit ] 
   Wok-tossed crabs with tamarind sauce 
 
 
 Name
 
 Description
 
 
 Bánh Tôm 
 
 Prawn and sweet potato fritter [24] 
 
 
 Cá cuốn ho 
 
 A roll with fish and spring onions
 
 
 Cá kho tộ 
 
 Caramelized fish in clay pot
 
 
 Chạo tôm 
 
 Prawn paste/cake on sugarcane
 
 
 Cua rang muối/me 
 
 Wok-tossed crab with salt and pepper/ tamarind 
 
 Salads [ edit ] 
   Nộm tôm xoài  (Vietnamese mango salad with shrimp) 
 Nộm  (Northern dialects) or  Gỏi  (Southern dialects) is Vietnamese salad; of the many varieties, the most popular include:
 
 
 
 Name
 
 Description
 
 
 Gỏi đu đủ 
 
 Vietnamese  papaya  salad typically with shredded papaya, herbs, various meats such as shrimp, slices of pork,  liver , or  jerky , herbs, and with a more  vinegar -based rendition of  nước chấm 
 
 
 Gỏi Huế rau muống 
 
 A salad dish originating from Huế (Central Vietnam), including  water spinach  ( rau muống )
 
 
 Nộm ngó sen 
 
 Lotus  stem salad, with shrimp and pork or chicken
 
 
 Gỏi đậu hủ 
 
 Tofu salad with shredded cabbage, mint, and soy dressing
 
 
 Gỏi nhệch 
 
 Rice paddy eel salad with shredded vegetables
 
 
 Nộm sứa 
 
 Jellyfish salad with carrot, cucumber, and sesame dressing
 
 
 Gỏi chân vịt 
 
 Duck feet salad with shredded cabbage and sweet and sour fish sauce
 
 
 Bò tái chanh 
 
 Shredded salad with thinly sliced rare beef, fresh lemon, onion, fried onions, and fish sauce
 
 
 Gỏi gà bắp cải 
 
 Chicken and cabbage salad
 
 
 Gỏi mít 
 
 Young  jackfruit  salad with peanuts, mint, and fish sauce
 
 Curries [ edit ] 
 Vietnamese  curry  is also popular, especially in the center and south, owing to the cultural influence of Indian, Khmer and Malay traders. 
 Another type of well-known Vietnamese curry is beef  brisket  curry or  oxtail  curry. The beef curries are often served with French bread for dipping, or with rice. 
  Cà ri gà  is a popular Vietnamese curry made with chicken, carrots, sweet potatoes, and peas in a  coconut curry  sauce. It is also served with rice or baguette. 
 Preserved dishes [ edit ] 
 Muối  (literally means  salting ) and  chua  (literally means  sour  or  fermenting ) are Vietnamese term for preserved dishes. Monsoon tropical climate with abundant rainfall gives the Vietnamese a generous year-round supply of vegetables.  Animal husbandry  never occurred in large scale in Vietnamese history, therefore, preserved dishes are mainly plant-based pickled dishes. Seafood is often made into a fermented form called  mắm  like  fish sauce . 
 
   Dưa chua  (Pickled mustard greens and onion) 
 
 
 Name
 
 Description
 
 
 Bắp cải muối xổi 
 
 Quick-Pickled shredded cabbage
 
 
 Dưa chua, Dưa cải muối chua 
 
 Made from a kind of mustard green
 
 
 Cà pháo muối 
 
 Made from  Vietnamese eggplant 
 
 
 Dấm tỏi 
 
 Pickled garlic cloves in vinegar
 
 
 Dưa kiệu 
 
 Made from  Allium chinense , this is a dish of the  Tết  holiday.
 
 
 Dưa hành 
 
 Made from spring onion bulbs or shallot
 
 
 Dưa món 
 
 Made from carrot, white radish, or green papaya
 
 
 Măng muối 
 
 Made from sliced bamboo shoot with chilies
 
 
 Ớt ngâm 
 
 Pickled chilies in rice vinegar
 
 
 Rau cần muối xổi 
 
 Quick-Pickled  water celery 
 
 
 Tôm chua 
 
 Sweet and spiced pickled shrimp
 
 Mắm [ edit ] 
 Mắm  is a Vietnamese term for fermented fish, shrimp or other aquatic ingredients. It is used as main course, as an ingredient or as condiment. The types of fish most commonly used to make  mắm  are  anchovies ,  catfish ,  snakeheads , and  mackerels . The fish flesh remains intact (this is how it is different from  nước mắm ), and can be eaten cooked or uncooked, with or without vegetables and condiments.  Fish sauce  is literally called "mắm water" in Vietnamese and is the distilled liquid from the process of fermentation of mắm.
 
   Mắm tôm  (purple colour) and  nước mắm  (amber colour) in two dipping bowls 
 
 
 Name
 
 Description
 
 
 Mắm tôm 
 
 Fermented shrimp paste
 
 
 Mắm cáy 
 
 Made from  Sesarmidae  (family of crabs), in north central coast of Vietnam
 
 
 Mắm cá thu 
 
 Made from mackerel fish, usually in  Bình Định province 
 
 
 Mắm nêm 
 
 Usually made from  round scad  fish, in central Vietnam
 
 
 Mắm ruốc 
 
 Made from krill, from central Vietnam
 
 
 Mắm cá linh 
 
 Made from a kind of fish that immigrates to the Mekong Delta every flood season from  Tonlé Sap , Cambodia
 
 
 Nước mắm  or  mắm mặn 
 
 General name for all fish sauces but usually refer to pure extracted anchovy fish sauce
 
 Fermented meat dishes [ edit ] 
   Nem chua , a sweet, sour, salty and spicy fermented pork or beef sausage, usually served with a slice of garlic,  bird's eye chili  and  Vietnamese coriander 
 Nem  chua , a Vietnamese  fermented meat  served as is or fried, is made from pork meat, coated by fried rice ( thính gạo ), mixed with pork skin and then wrapped in  country gooseberry  leaves ( lá chùm ruột ) or  Erythrina orientalis  leaves ( lá vông nem ). [25]  The preservation process takes about three to five days.
 
 Sausages [ edit ] 
 See also:  Giò lụa 
 Vietnamese sausage,  giò , is usually made from fresh ground pork and beef. Sausage makers may use the meat, skin or ear. Fish sauce is added before banana leaves are used to wrap the mixture. The last step is boiling. For common sausage, 1 kg of meat is boiled for an hour. For  chả quế , the boiled meat mixture will then be roasted with  cinnamon .
 
 Vegetarian dishes [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Buddhist cuisine 
   Vegetarian dishes at a Buddhist restaurant in Ho Chi Minh city 
 Vegetarian dishes in Vietnam often have the same names as their meat equivalents, e.g.  phở bò,  but with  chay  (vegetarian) sign in front, those dishes are served with tofu instead of meat. Nearly every soup, sandwich and street food has its vegetarian correspondent. Sometimes you can also see notations like  "phở chay" ,  "bánh mì chay"  (vegetarian sandwich) or  "cơm chay"  (vegetarian rice). Vegetarian food in comparison the normal dishes are almost always cheaper, often half of the normal price. Vegetarian restaurants are mostly frequented by religious Vietnamese people and are rarely found in touristic areas. Vegetarian food is also eaten to earn luck during special holiday and festival, especially during Lunar New Year where Vietnamese culture serve vegetarian food regardless of their religion. [26] 
 
 Desserts [ edit ] 
   A street stall selling  chè  and desserts in  Huế 
   Vietnamese-style donuts 
 
 
 Name
 
 Description
 
 
 Chè 
 
 A sweet dessert beverage or pudding, it is usually made from beans and sticky rice. Many varieties of  chè  are available, each with different fruits,  beans  (for example,  mung beans  or  kidney beans ), and other ingredients.  Chè  can be served hot or cold and often with coconut milk.
 
 
 Rau câu 
 
 This popular  dessert  is made with a type of red algae called  Gracilaria  and is flavored with coconut milk,  pandan  or other flavors. It is eaten cold by itself or added to drinks and  Chè .
 
 
 Chuối chiên 
 
 Banana deep-fried in a batter, often served hot with cold  ice cream , usually  vanilla  or coconut
 
 
 Bánh flan 
 
 Influenced by French cuisine and served with caramel or coffee sauce
 
 
 Sinh tố 
 
 A  fruit smoothie  made with just a few teaspoons of  sweetened condensed milk , crushed ice and fresh, local fruits. The smoothies' many varieties include  custard apple ,  sugar apple ,  avocado ,  jackfruit ,  soursop ,  durian ,  strawberry ,  passionfruit ,  dragonfruit ,  lychee ,  mango , and banana.
 
 
 Sữa chua 
 
 Local variant of yogurt, which was brought to Vietnam by French colonists. Made with  condensed milk , it has a sweet, tart flavor. It can be eaten in its cool, soft form, or frozen, in which form it is often sold in small, clear bags.
 
 
 Bánh bò 
 
 A sweet and airy sponge cake flavored with coconut milk, made from rice flour, water, sugar, and yeast.
 
 
 Bánh da lợn 
 
 A sweet, soft, steamed layer cake made with rice flour, mung bean, coconut milk, water, and sugar with alternating layers of starch and flavored filling. Taro or durian are typically used for the layers of filling.
 
 
 Bánh rán 
 
 A deep-fried glutinous rice ball dish.
 
 Mứt [ edit ] 
   A variety of  mứt  on display in a shop 
 Vietnamese use fruits in season. When the season is passing, they make candied fruit, called  ô mai , and  fruit preserves , called  mứt . The original taste of  ô mai  is sour, sweet, salty, and spicy. The most famous kind of  ô mai  is  ô mai mơ , made from  apricots  harvested from the forest around  Perfume Pagoda  ( Chùa Hương ),  Hà Tây  Province. This  ô mai  consists of apricot covered by ginger, sugar, and  liquorice  root slivers.
 
 Tofu [ edit ] 
 Tofu  ( đậu phụ ) is widely used in Vietnamese cuisine. It is boiled, fried (sprinkled with ground shrimp or oil-dipped minced  spring onion ) or used as an ingredient in a variety of dishes.
 Other  soybean  products range from  soy sauce  ( nước tương ; usually light soy sauce),  fermented bean paste  ( tương ), and  fermented bean curd  ( đậu phụ nhự  or  chao ) to douhua (soft tofu sweet soup;  tàu hũ nước đường  or  tào phớ ).
 
 Exotic dishes [ edit ] 
   Snake is one of Vietnamese varieties of  rượu thuốc . The bottle on the left is a cobra wine ( rượu rắn ). 
   Thịt chó  (boiled dog meat) 
   Tiết canh  (blood pudding with cubed meat and herbs) is curing 
 The use of ingredients typically uncommon or taboo in most countries is one of the quintessential attributes that make Vietnamese cuisine unique. While unusual ingredients can only be found in exotic restaurants in many countries, Vietnamese cuisine is deemed atypical in that the usage of these ingredients can play a customary role in daily family dishes regardless of social class. [ citation needed ] 
 A common and inexpensive breakfast dish that can be found in any wet market,  balut  ( hột vịt lộn ) is a fertilized duck egg with a nearly developed  embryo  inside, which is boiled and eaten in the shell. It is typically served with fresh herbs:  rau răm , salt, and black pepper;  lime juice  is another popular additive, when available. A more unusual version of balut dish—fetus quail ( trứng cút lộn ) is a snack favored by many Vietnamese students.  Paddy crab  and paddy snail are the main ingredients in  bún riêu ốc —a popular noodle dish—and in some everyday soup dishes ( canh ) and braised food ( món bung ). Family meals with  silkworms  ( nhộng ), banana flowers ( hoa chuối ), sparrows, doves, fermented fish and shrimp ( mắm cá ,  mắm tôm ,  mắm tép ) are not rare sights. Seasonal favorites include  ragworms  ( rươi ), which are made into many dishes such as fried  rươi  omelet ( chả rươi ), fermented  rươi  sauce ( mắm rươi),  steamed  rươi (rươi hấp),  stir-fried  rươi  with radish or bamboo shoot  ( rươi xào củ niễng   măng tươi  hay  củ cải ).  Three striped crab  ( ba khía)  is popular in several southern provinces, including  Cà Mau ,  Sóc Trăng  and  Bạc Liêu ; it is eaten fermented, stir-fried or steamed . [27] 
 Northern Vietnamese cuisine is also notable for its wide range of meat choices. Exotic meats such as  dog meat ,  cat meat , [28]   rat meat , [29] [ deprecated source ]  snake, [30]   soft-shell turtle , deer, and domestic goat are sold in street-side restaurants and generally paired with alcoholic beverages. A taboo in many Western countries and in southern Vietnam, consumption of dog meat and cat meat is common throughout the northern part of the country and is believed to raise the libido in men. Television chef  Andrew Zimmern  visited northern Vietnam in the 12th episode of his popular show  Bizarre Foods with Andrew Zimmern . [31] [32]   Cobra  beating heart and dried bones, silkworms, and  bull penis  are some of the dishes he sampled. He also tried  porcupine . [33] 
 Paddy  mouse  meat—barbecued, braised, stir- or deep-fried—is a delicacy dish that can be found in Southern Vietnamese rural areas or even high-end city restaurants.
 Crocodiles  were eaten by Vietnamese while they were taboo and off limits for Chinese. [34] 
 Shark fins  are imported in massive amounts by Vietnam. [35] 
 Anthony Bourdain , the host chef of  Travel Channel 's  Anthony Bourdain: No Reservations , wrote in April 2005: "...everything is used—and nothing wasted in Vietnam." [18]  Animal parts that are often disposed of in many Western countries are used fully in Vietnamese cooking. Organs, including lungs, livers, hearts, intestines and bladders of pigs, cattle, and chickens are sold at even higher prices than their meat. Chicken  testicles  and undeveloped eggs are stir-fried with vegetables and served as an everyday dish.
 Many of the traditional northern Lunar New Year dishes such as  thịt đông  [ vi ] ,  giò thủ ,  and  canh măng móng giò  involve the use of pig heads, tongues, throats and feet. [36]  Pig and beef tails, as well as chicken heads, necks and feet, are Vietnamese favorite beer dishes.  Bóng bì , used as an ingredient in  canh bóng —a kind of soup, is pig skin baked until popped. Steamed pig brains can be found almost everywhere. Also in the northern part of Vietnam, different kinds of animal blood can be made into a dish called  tiết canh  by whisking the blood with fish sauce and cold water in a shallow dish along with finely chopped, cooked duck innards (such as gizzards), sprinkled with crushed peanuts and chopped herbs such as Vietnamese coriander, mint, etc. It is then cooled until the blood coagulates into a soft, jelly-like mixture and served raw.
 Coconut worms, or  đuông dừa , is a delicacy found widely in the  Trà Vinh  Province  of Vietnam. They are the larvae form of the  palm weevil  and are eaten live within a salty fish sauce with chili peppers. [37] 
 
 Beverages [ edit ] 
   Cà phê phin  (Brewed filtered coffee) 
   Vietnamese wine 
 
 
 Name
 
 Description
 
 
 Jasmine tea 
 
 A local tea beverage of Vietnam
 
 
 Bia hơi 
 
 A Vietnamese specialty draft beer produced locally in small batches
 
 
 Cà phê sữa đá 
 
 Strong dark roast iced coffee, served with  sweetened condensed milk  at the bottom of the cup to be stirred in, is very popular among the Vietnamese.
 
 
 Cà phê trứng 
 
 This beverage translated as Vietnamese egg coffee. This coffee uses egg yolk, whipping cream, condensed milk, and, of course, espresso. Some may use vanilla extract or sugar as a sugar substitute.
 
 
 Nước mía 
 
 Sugar cane  juice extracted from squeezing sugar cane plant (sometimes with kumquats to add a hint of citrus flavour), served with ice.
 
 
 Rau má 
 
 Pennywort  juice made from blending fresh pennywort leaves with water and sugar until dissolved is a near-transparent green color and served over ice.
 
 
 Sữa đậu nành  
 
 A soybean drink served either hot or cold, sweetened or unsweetened. This beverage is very popular is all Asian countries. In Vietnam, however, the difference between other Asian countries' soy milk and Vietnam's soy milk is the use of pandan leaves. While the use of pandan leaves is very popular with this drink, other countries use a different source of sweetness.
 
 
 Rượu đế 
 
 A distilled liquor made of rice
 
 
 Trà đá 
 
 A kind of iced tea popular for its cheap price, it has a faint lime-yellow color and usually does not have much taste.
 
 
 Trà đá chanh 
 
 Lemon iced tea
 
 
 Chanh muối 
 
 Sweet and sour salty lime drink
 
 
 Soda  xí muội 
 
 Sweet and salty plum soda
 
 
 Soda  hột gà 
 
 Egg soda
 
 
 Sinh tố 
 
 Vietnamese fruit smoothie with green bean, red bean, avocado, pineapple, strawberry, jackfruit, durian, sapota, or mango with sweet condensed milk
 
 
 Nước sắn dây hoa bưởi 
 
 Made of  kudzu  and  pomelo  flower extract
 
 See also [ edit ] 
 
 List of Vietnamese dishes 
 List of Vietnamese culinary specialities 
 List of Vietnamese ingredients 
 Vietnamese noodles 
 Vietnamese wine 
 Rượu đế  rice wine 
 Basa (fish) 
 Southeast Asian cuisine 
 
 Portals :   Society   Food   Vietnam 
 References [ edit ] 
 
 
 ^   "Vietnamese Ingredients" .  WokMe . 2011 . Retrieved  2 December  2011 . 
 
 ^   "Healthy Eating: Seven Reasons Why You Should Start Eating Vietnamese Food" .  HuffPost . 23 April 2014. 
 
 ^   Fututame, Nami.  "Soy Sauces of Asia [ Soy Sauce Usage in the Philippines, Thailand, and Vietnam ]"   (PDF) .  Kikkoman Cop . 
 
 ^   "Food in Vietnam - Vietnamese Food, Vietnamese Cuisine - traditional, popular, dishes, recipe, diet, history, common, meals, rice" . Retrieved  26 June  2016 . 
 
 ^   "Typical Vietnamese Foods" .  ActiveTravelVIetnam.com . Retrieved  3 December  2011 . 
 
 ^   "Hanoi Food Guide - The City Lane" . 14 July 2013 . Retrieved  26 June  2016 . 
 
 ^   Kiernan, Ben (2017).  Việt Nam: A History from Earliest Times to the Present . United Kingdom: Oxford University Press. p. 23.  ISBN   9780195160765 . 
 
 ^   Andrea Nguyen (13 March 2011).  "Heaven in a Bowl: The Original Pho" . Retrieved  28 December  2011 . 
 
 ^   "Ho Chi Minh City Food Guide - The City Lane" . 16 June 2013 . Retrieved  26 June  2016 . 
 
 ^   Huyền Trần (15 September 2015).  "Thăm phố biển Vũng Tàu đừng quên ăn bánh khọt"  [When going to Vũng Tàu, don't forget to eat bánh khọt].  Tuoi Tre News . Archived from  the original  on 4 October 2017 . Retrieved  4 October  2017 . 
 
 ^   Võ Mạnh Lân (4 August 2015).  "Hướng dẫn nấu bún mắm đậm đà hương vị miền Tây"  [How to cook Mekong Delta-style bún mắm].  Thanh Nien News . Retrieved  4 October  2017 . 
 
 ^   "Gastronomic Tourism" .  Vietnam Online . Retrieved  2 December  2011 . 
 
 ^   "Philosophy of Vietnamese Cuisine" . Archived from  the original  on 22 November 2013 . Retrieved  17 November  2013 . 
 
 ^   "Vietnamese food" .  Vietnam Travel . Retrieved  3 December  2011 . 
 
 ^   "Yin – Yang in Vietnamese culinary art" .  Viet Nam mon pays natal . Archived from  the original  on 5 April 2012 . Retrieved  3 December  2011 . 
 
 ^   Nguyen Vu Hanh Dung and Phan Dieu Linh.  "The Food of Vietnam – Vietnamese Food" .  GuideVietnam.com . Retrieved  3 December  2011 . 
 
 ^   "Vietnam Food Tour" .  vietnamfoodtour.com . Vietnam Tour Company. 
 
 ^  a   b   Anthony Bourdain (18 March 2005).  "Hungry for more of Vietnam" .  Financial Times . Retrieved  27 October  2016 . 
 
 ^   "Medicinal plants in Viet Nam" .  apps.who.int . Archived from  the original  on 27 September 2009 . Retrieved  5 February  2017 . 
 
 ^  a   b   "What is Pho: A Brief History and How to Eat it" .  spoonuniversity.com . 10 September 2018 . Retrieved  10 April  2022 . 
 
 ^   Dang, Vinh.  "Bún 101" .  Vietnam Talking Points . One Vietnam Network. Archived from  the original  on 30 August 2011 . Retrieved  16 September  2010 . 
 
 ^   Annette, Loan Aka (25 February 2015).  "The Spices of Life . . .: Bánh Nậm (Flat Steamed Rice Dumpling)" .  The Spices of Life . .  . Retrieved  5 February  2017 . 
 
 ^   "Banh Mi Op La - Vietnamese Fried Egg Sandwich - VietnaMenu" . Retrieved  26 June  2016 . 
 
 ^   "The Ravenous Couple » Banh Tom (Sweet Potato Shrimp Fritters)" .  theravenouscouple.com . 24 June 2009 . Retrieved  5 February  2017 . 
 
 ^   "The Ravenous Couple » Nem Chua Recipe Vietnamese Fermented/Cured Pork" .  theravenouscouple.com . 23 January 2010 . Retrieved  5 February  2017 . 
 
 ^   Stauch, Cameron (28 March 2018).  "What It's Like to be Vegetarian in Vietnam" .  Food Republic . 
 
 ^   VIETNAM.COM.  "A Tribute to Ba Khia" .  VIETNAM.COM . Retrieved  11 October  2021 . 
 
 ^   "9 Countries That Eat Cats and Dogs (Slideshow)" .  The Daily Meal . 11 April 2014 . Retrieved  22 November  2015 . "9 Countries That Eat Cats and Dogs" .  The Daily Meal . Archived from  the original  on 23 November 2015 . Retrieved  22 November  2015 . "Cat Meat" .  Vietnam Coracle . Archived from  the original  on 23 November 2015 . Retrieved  22 November  2015 . "The Truth About Cats & Dogs in Vietnam - The Dropout Diaries" .  The Dropout Diaries . Archived from  the original  on 23 November 2015 . Retrieved  22 November  2015 . "Where cat sits happily on the menu" .  Stuff . 25 July 2011 . Retrieved  22 November  2015 . The Christian Science Monitor (22 July 2010).  "Why do Vietnamese keep cats on a leash? (Hint: What's for dinner?)" .  The Christian Science Monitor . Retrieved  22 November  2015 . 
 
 ^   "Rats Back on the Menu in Vietnam" .  Abcnews.go.com . 6 January 2006 . Retrieved  10 January  2016 . "Vietnamese eat rats and are aggressive, Stanford professor says in article, triggering online uproar" .  Mercurynews.com . February 2013 . Retrieved  10 January  2016 . Sou Vuthy (12 September 2012).  "Rat meat on the menu at the Vietnam border, Lifestyle, Phnom Penh Post" .  Phnompenhpost.com . Retrieved  10 January  2016 . 
 
 ^   "The Last Days of the Mekong Snake Hunters" . 9 August 2016. 
 
 ^   Zimmern, Andrew.  "Would You Ever Eat a Rat?" .  Travel Channel . 
 
 ^   Zimmern, Andrew.  "Ho Chi Minh City: Rat Hearts & Porcupine Parts" .  Travel Channel . 
 
 ^   "Ho Chi Minh City: Rat Hearts & Porcupine Parts" . IMDb. 1 June 2015. 
 
 ^   Erica J. Peters (2012).  Appetites and Aspirations in Vietnam: Food and Drink in the Long Nineteenth Century . Rowman Altamira. pp. 142–.  ISBN   978-0-7591-2075-4 . 
 
 ^   Beachy, Ben (7 December 2015).  "Sharks, Tigers, and Elephants: New Analysis Reveals TPP Threats to Endangered Species" .  Sierra Club . 
 
 ^   "Vietnamese new year food - some traditional food for new year days" .  Vina.com represents all things about Vietnam . Retrieved  5 February  2017 . 
 
 ^   vietnamnet.vn.  "Coconut worms, specialties of Southwest region - News VietNamNet" .  english.vietnamnet.vn . Retrieved  29 August  2017 . 
 
 
 Further reading [ edit ] 
 
 
 
 Wikivoyage has a travel guide for  Vietnamese cuisine . 
 
 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons has media related to  Cuisine of Vietnam . 
 
 Nguyen, Andrea Quynhgiao; Cost, Bruce (FRW); Beisch, Leigh. (2006)  Into the Vietnamese kitchen: treasured foodways, modern flavors .  Ten Speed Press ,  ISBN   1-58008-665-9 
 Le, Ann; Fay, Julie. (2006)  The Little Saigon Cookbook: Vietnamese Cuisine and Culture in Southern California's Little Saigon , Globe Pequot,  ISBN   0-7627-3831-6 
 Thị Chơi Triệu, Marcel Isaak, (1998)  The Food of Vietnam: Authentic Recipes from the Heart of Indochina , Tuttle Publishing,  ISBN   962-593-394-8 
 recette de  cuisine vietnamienne 
 McDermott, Nancie; Alpert, Caren (2005)  Quick & Easy Vietnamese: 75 Everyday Recipes  Chronicle Books,  ISBN   0-8118-4434-X 
 Chi Nguyen; Judy Monroe, (2002)  Cooking the Vietnamese way: revised and expanded to include new low-fat and vegetarian recipes  Twenty-First Century Books,  ISBN   0-8225-4125-4 
 Pauline Nguyen; Luke Nguyen; Mark Jensen (2007),  Secrets of the Red Lantern: Stories and Vietnamese Recipes from the Heart  Murdoch Books,  ISBN   1-74045-904-0 
 Thị Chơi Triệu, Marcel Isaak, Heinz Von Holzen (2005),  Authentic Recipes from Vietnam  Tuttle Publishing,  ISBN   0-7946-0327-0 
 Hoyer, Daniel. (2009)  Culinary Vietnam . Gibbs Smith,  ISBN   1-4236-0320-6 
 v t e   Vietnamese cuisine Rice/ sticky rice  dishes 
 Bánh chưng 
 Bánh tét 
 Cháo 
 Cơm bụi 
 Cơm cháy Ninh Bình 
 Cơm hến 
 Cơm gà Quảng Nam 
 Cơm lam 
 Cơm nắm 
 Cơm tấm 
 Xôi 
 Noodles 
 Bánh canh 
 Bánh ướt 
 Bánh đa cua 
 Bún bò Huế 
 Bún cá 
 Bún chả 
 Bún chả cá 
 Bún đậu mắm tôm 
 Bún mắm 
 Bún mắm cua 
 Bún mọc 
 Bún ốc 
 Bún riêu 
 Bún thang 
 Bún thịt nướng 
 Cao lầu 
 Hủ tiếu 
 Mì 
 Mì Quảng 
 Miến 
 Phở 
 Phở khô Gia Lai 
 Staples 
 Cá kho 
 Cá khô 
 Canh chua 
 Chả 
 Chả trứng 
 Dồi 
 Dưa muối 
 Giò lụa 
 Giò thủ 
 Rau muống xào tỏi 
 Ruốc 
 Thịt kho tàu 
 Salads/rolls/rice paper 
 Bánh cuốn 
 Bánh ướt 
 Bò bía 
 Bò nướng lá lốt 
 Gỏi cuốn 
 Nem chua 
 Nộm  (Nộm hoa chuối · Nộm sứa) 
 Beverages 
 Bia hơi 
 Chanh muối 
 Cơm rượu 
 Egg soda 
 Rượu cần 
 Rượu đế 
 Rượu nếp 
 Rượu rắn 
 Rượu thuốc 
 Sugarcane juice 
 Vietnamese egg coffee 
 Vietnamese iced coffee 
 Condiments/sauces 
 Basil 
 Crispy fried shallot 
 Fig leaves 
 Kinh giới 
 Mắm nêm 
 Mắm ruốc 
 Mắm tép 
 Mắm tôm 
 Mẻ 
 Nước mắm 
 Rau răm 
 Rice paddy herb 
 Scallion 
 Tía tô 
 Tương đen 
 Xì dầu 
 Bánh  (cakes/breads) 
 Bánh bao bánh vạc 
 Bánh bèo 
 Bánh bò 
 Bánh bột chiên 
 Bánh bột lọc 
 Bánh cáy 
 Bánh căn 
 Bánh chay 
 Bánh chuối 
 Bánh chưng 
 Bánh cốm 
 Bánh dày 
 Bánh da lợn 
 Bánh đa nướng 
 Bánh đa kê 
 Bánh đậu xanh 
 Bánh đúc 
 Bánh ép 
 Bánh gai 
 Bánh giầy 
 Bánh gio 
 Bánh giò 
 Bánh gối 
 Bánh hỏi 
 Bánh in 
 Bánh ít  ( Bánh ít trần ) 
 Bánh khảo 
 Bánh khoai mì 
 Bánh khọt 
 Bánh khúc 
 Bánh lá 
 Bánh lọt 
 Bánh mật 
 Bánh mì 
 Bánh nậm 
 Pâté chaud 
 Bánh pía 
 Bánh phu thê 
 Bánh quai vạc 
 Bánh rán 
 Bánh tằm khoai mì 
 Bánh tẻ 
 Bánh tôm Hồ Tây 
 Bánh tráng 
 Bánh tráng nướng 
 Bánh trôi 
 Bánh xèo 
 Desserts/snacks 
 Beef jerky 
 Chè bà ba 
 Chè đậu trắng 
 Chè đậu xanh 
 Chè hạt sen 
 Chè trôi nước 
 Kẹo cu đơ 
 Ô mai 
 Pumpkin seeds 
 Sunflower seeds 
 Watermelon seeds 
 Street food 
 Bánh mì 
 Bánh rế 
 Bánh tráng trộn 
 Chuối nếp nướng 
 Nem nướng 
 Snail 
 Trứng vịt lộn 
 Phá lấu 
 Ethnic minorities'   food & drinks 
 Rượu Tà-vạt  ( Katu people ) 
 Bánh sừng trâu  ( Katu people ) 
 Ò sui  ( Yao people ) 
 Khâu nhục  ( Tay people ) 
 Bánh gừng  ( Cham people ) 
 Pa pỉnh tộp  ( Thái people ) 
 Nặm pịa  ( Thái people ) 
 Thắng cố  ( Hmong people ) 
 Others 
 Bird's nest soup 
 Bò 7 món 
 Bột sắn 
 Chả giò 
 Chạo tôm 
 Chả cá Lã Vọng 
 Dog meat 
 Fishcake 
 Gạch 
 Gỏi lá Kon Tum 
 Gỏi nhệch 
 Tiết canh 
 Quẩy 
 Cooking appliances 
 Lò trấu 
 Hoàng Cầm stove 
 Niêu đất 
 Chõ 
   Vietnam portal 
   Food portal 
 
   Category: Vietnamese cuisine 
 v t e Cuisine of Southeast Asia 
 Brunei 
 Cambodia 
 Christmas Island 
 Cocos (Keeling) Islands 
 East Timor 
 Indonesia 
 Laos 
 Malaysia 
 Myanmar 
 Philippines 
 Singapore 
 Thailand 
 Vietnam 
 
 v t e Asian cuisine Sovereign states 
 Afghanistan 
 Armenia 
 Azerbaijan 
 Bahrain 
 Bangladesh 
 Bhutan 
 Brunei 
 Burma (Myanmar) 
 Cambodia 
 China 
 Cyprus 
 East Timor (Timor-Leste) 
 Egypt 
 Georgia 
 India 
 Indonesia 
 Iran 
 Iraq 
 Israel 
 Japan 
 Jordan 
 Kazakhstan 
 North Korea 
 South Korea 
 Kuwait 
 Kyrgyzstan 
 Laos 
 Lebanon 
 Malaysia 
 Maldives 
 Mongolia 
 Nepal 
 Oman 
 Pakistan 
 Philippines 
 Qatar 
 Russia 
 Saudi Arabia 
 Singapore 
 Sri Lanka 
 Syria 
 Tajikistan 
 Thailand 
 Turkey 
 Turkmenistan 
 United Arab Emirates 
 Uzbekistan 
 Vietnam 
 Yemen 
 States with limited recognition 
 Abkhazia 
 Artsakh 
 Northern Cyprus 
 Palestine 
 South Ossetia 
 Taiwan 
 Dependencies and other territories 
 British Indian Ocean Territory 
 Christmas Island 
 Cocos (Keeling) Islands 
 Hong Kong 
 Macau 
 
 v t e Cuisines Continental 
 African 
 North 
 West 
 list 
 Americas 
 Caribbean 
 North 
 South 
 list 
 Asian 
 Caucasian 
 Central 
 Indian subcontinent 
 Levantine 
 list 
 European 
 Balkan 
 Central 
 Eastern 
 list 
 Oceanic 
 Intercontinental
 Global 
 Latin American 
 Mediterranean 
 Middle Eastern 
 National  and regional 
 Afghan 
 Albanian 
 Algerian 
 American 
 Californian 
 Floribbean 
 Hawaiian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Lowcountry (South Carolina) 
 New England 
 New Mexico 
 Pacific Northwest 
 Pennsylvania Dutch 
 Puerto Rican 
 Southern US 
 Southwest US 
 Texas 
 Angolan 
 Argentine 
 Armenian 
 Australian 
 Austrian 
 Azerbaijani 
 Bahraini 
 Bangladeshi 
 Barbadian 
 Belarusian 
 Belgian 
 Belizean 
 Beninese 
 Bhutanese 
 Bolivian 
 Bosnian-Herzegovinian 
 Botswana 
 Brazilian 
 British 
 Channel Islands 
 English 
 Gibraltarian 
 Northern Irish 
 Saint Helena 
 Scottish 
 Welsh 
 Bruneian 
 Bulgarian 
 Burkinabé 
 Burmese 
 Burundian 
 Cambodian 
 Cameroonian 
 Canadian 
 Acadian 
 Québécois 
 Central African Republic 
 Chadian 
 Chilean 
 Chinese 
 Cantonese 
 Hong Kong 
 Macanese 
 Tibetan 
 Xinjiang 
 Colombian 
 Congolese 
 Corsican 
 Croatian 
 Cuban 
 Cypriot 
 Czech 
 Danish 
 Faroese 
 Greenlandic 
 Djiboutian 
 Dominican 
 Dominican Republic 
 Dutch 
 East Timorese 
 Ecuadorian 
 Egyptian 
 Emirati 
 Equatorial Guinean 
 Eritrean 
 Estonian 
 Ethiopian 
 Fijian 
 Filipino 
 Finnish 
 French 
 Occitan 
 French Guianan 
 Gabonese 
 Gambian 
 Georgian 
 German 
 Ghanaian 
 Greek 
 Cretan 
 Epirotic 
 Greek Macedonian 
 Heptanesean 
 Guatemalan 
 Guinea-Bissauan 
 Guinean 
 Haitian 
 Honduran 
 Hungarian 
 Icelandic 
 Indian 
 Arunachalese 
 Assamese 
 Bengali 
 Bihari 
 Goan 
 Gujarati 
 Himachal Pradesh 
 Kashmiri 
 Jharkhandi 
 Karnataka 
 Kerala 
 Maharashtrian 
 Manipuri 
 Meghalayan 
 Mizo 
 Naga 
 Odia 
 Punjabi 
 Rajasthani 
 Sikkimese 
 Sindhi 
 Tamil 
 Telangana 
 Telugu 
 Indonesian 
 Acehnese 
 Balinese 
 Banjar 
 Batak 
 Betawi 
 Indo 
 Javanese 
 Madurese 
 Makassar 
 Minahasan 
 Minangkabau 
 Palembangese 
 Sundanese 
 Iranian 
 Iraqi 
 Irish 
 Israeli 
 Italian 
 Abruzzese 
 Ligurian 
 Lombard 
 Lucanian 
 Neapolitan 
 Roman 
 Sardinian 
 Sicilian 
 Venetian 
 Ivorian 
 Jamaican 
 Japanese 
 Okinawan 
 Jordanian 
 Kazakh 
 Kenyan 
 Korean 
 North Korean 
 South Korean 
 Kosovan 
 Kuwaiti 
 Kyrgyz 
 Lao 
 Latvian 
 Lebanese 
 Lesotho 
 Liberian 
 Libyan 
 Liechtensteiner 
 Lithuanian 
 Luxembourg 
 Macedonian 
 Malagasy 
 Malawian 
 Malaysian 
 Sabahan 
 Sarawakian 
 Maldivian 
 Malian 
 Maltese 
 Mauritanian 
 Mauritian 
 Mexican 
 Moldovan 
 Monégasque 
 Mongolian 
 Montenegrin 
 Moroccan 
 Mozambican 
 Namibian 
 Nauruan 
 Nepalese 
 New Zealand 
 Nicaraguan 
 Niger 
 Nigerian 
 Niuean 
 Norwegian 
 Omani 
 Pakistani 
 Palestinian 
 Panamanian 
 Peruvian 
 Polish 
 Portuguese 
 Qatari 
 Romanian  (incl.  Transylvanian Saxon ) 
 Russian 
 Bashkir 
 Chechen 
 Circassian 
 Komi 
 Mordovian 
 Sakha 
 Tatar 
 Udmurt 
 Yamal 
 Rwandan 
 Saint Lucian 
 Salvadoran 
 Sammarinese 
 São Tomé and Príncipe 
 Saudi Arabian 
 Senegalese 
 Serbian 
 Seychellois 
 Sierra Leonean 
 Singaporean 
 Slovak 
 Slovenian 
 Somali 
 South African 
 Spanish 
 Andalusian 
 Asturian 
 Balearic 
 Basque 
 Canarian 
 Cantabrian 
 Catalan 
 Extremaduran 
 Galician 
 Manchegan 
 Valencian 
 Sri Lankan 
 Sudanese 
 Swazi 
 Swedish 
 Swiss 
 Syrian 
 Taiwanese 
 Tajik 
 Tanzanian 
 Zanzibari 
 Thai 
 Togolese 
 Tunisian 
 Turkish 
 Turkmen 
 Trinidadian and Tobagonian 
 Ugandan 
 Ukrainian 
 Uruguayan 
 Uzbek 
 Venezuelan 
 Vietnamese 
 Western Saharan 
 Yemeni 
 Zambian 
 Zimbabwean 
 Ethnic 
 Ainu 
 Arab 
 Indonesian 
 Aromanian 
 Assyrian 
 Balochi 
 Berber 
 Cajun 
 Chinese 
 American 
 Canadian 
 Chifa 
 Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Crimean Tatar 
 Greek American 
 Hazaragi 
 Indian 
 Anglo-Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Indigenous American 
 Inuit 
 Italian American 
 Kurdish 
 Livonian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Malay 
 Ossetian 
 Parsi 
 Pashtun 
 Peranakan 
 Romani 
 Sámi 
 Soul food 
 Sylheti 
 Transylvanian Saxon 
 Yup'ik 
 Religious 
 Buddhist 
 Christian 
 Goan Catholic 
 Mangalorean Catholic 
 Mennonite 
 Hindu 
 Islamic 
 Chinese 
 Ital 
 Jain 
 Jewish 
 American 
 Ashkenazi 
 Bukharan 
 Ethiopian 
 Mizrahi 
 Sephardic 
 Syrian 
 Ritual slaughter 
 Sikh 
 Historical 
 Ancient Egyptian 
 Ancient Greek 
 Ancient Israelite 
 Ancient Roman 
 Antebellum America 
 Aztec 
 Byzantine 
 Early modern European 
 Historical Chinese 
 Historical Indian subcontinent 
 Historical North Indian and Pakistani 
 History of agriculture 
 History of alcoholic drinks 
 History of bread 
 History of seafood 
 History of vegetarianism 
 Historical Argentine 
 Historical Japanese 
 Inca 
 Mayan 
 Muisca 
 Mughal 
 Medieval 
 Ottoman 
 Peasant 
 Soviet 
 Thirteen Colonies 
 Styles 
 Classique 
 Fast food 
 Fusion 
 New American 
 Eurasian 
 Haute 
 Molecular gastronomy 
 Note by Note 
 Nouvelle 
 Lists 
 List of cuisines 
 List of historical cuisines 
 Lists of prepared foods 
 Related 
 Cookbook 
 Cooking 
 Culinary arts 
 Drink 
 Food 
 history 
 Diet 
 Meal preparation 
 
   Food portal 
   Drink portal 
   Category 
   Commons 
   Cookbook 
   WikiProject 
   Outline 
 
 v t e Vietnam   articles History 
 Capitals 
 Dynasties 
 Economic 
 Military 
 Monarchs 
 Names 
 Naval 
 Timeline 
 Prehistoric 
 Ancient 
 Chinese dominated 
 Monarchical 
 French colonial 
 Republic 
 North Vietnam 
 South Vietnam 
 
 Geography 
 Borders 
 Climate 
 Climate change 
 Ecoregions 
 Environmental issues 
 Protected areas 
 National parks 
 Wildlife 
 Mammals 
 Birds 
 Molluscs 
 Endangered species 
 World Heritage Sites 
 Divisions 
 Provinces 
 Municipalities 
 Cities 
 District-level 
 Commune-level 
 Electoral units 
 Regions 
 Northern 
 Hong (Red) River Delta 
 Northeast 
 Northwest 
 Central 
 North Central 
 South Central 
 Central Highlands 
 Southern 
 Southeast 
 Mekong Delta 
 
 Politics 
 Constitution 
 Fatherland Front 
 Foreign relations 
 Human rights 
 LGBT 
 Law 
 Communist Party 
 Central Committee 
 General Secretary 
 Permanent Member of the Secretariat 
 History of central officeholders 
 National Congress 
 Politburo 
 Secretariat 
 Central Inspection Commission 
 Central Military Commission 
 Executive 
 President 
 Vice President 
 Government 
 Prime Minister 
 Deputy Prime Ministers 
 Ministers 
 Legislative 
 National Assembly 
 Standing Committee 
 Chairman 
 Elections 
 Judiciary 
 Supreme People's Court 
 Chief Justice 
 Supreme People's Procuracy 
 Procurator-General 
 Military Courts 
 
 Military 
 Central Military Commission 
 Council for National Defense and Security 
 Armed forces 
 Army 
 Ground Force 
 Border Guard 
 Navy 
 Air Force 
 Coast Guard 
 Public Security    and  Militia 
 Police 
 Security 
 Self-Defence Militia 
 
 Economy 
 Agriculture 
 Banking 
 Doi Moi   ("Renovation") 
 Đồng  (currency) 
 Energy 
 Renewable energy 
 Nuclear power 
 Power stations 
 Foreign aid 
 Foreign trade 
 Five-Year Plans 
 Manufacturing 
 Standards 
 Automotive 
 Poverty 
 Science and Technology 
 Traditional medicine 
 Measurement 
 Inventions 
 Telecommunications 
 Internet 
 Censorship 
 Tourism 
 Visa policy 
 Transport 
 Expressways 
 Railways 
 Airports 
 Water supply 
 Society 
 Education 
 Universities 
 Health 
 Crime 
 Gambling 
 Prostitution 
 Sex trafficking 
 Human trafficking 
 Corruption 
 Public holidays 
 Time 
 Women 
 Demographics 
 People 
 Eunuchs 
 Overseas community 
 Language 
 Alphabet 
 Phonology 
 Language and computers 
 Ethnic groups 
 Name 
 Racism 
 Religion 
 Folk religions 
 Buddhism 
 Taoism 
 Christianity 
 Islam 
 Culture 
 Anthem 
 Architecture 
 Art 
 Awards 
 Cinema 
 Animation 
 Clothing 
 Cuisine 
 Dishes 
 Ingredients 
 Dance 
 Emblem 
 Festivals 
 Flag 
 Literature 
 Poetry 
 Mass media 
 Television 
 News Agency 
 Voice 
 Newspapers 
 Music 
 V-pop 
 Traditional musical instruments 
 Philosophy 
 Anarchism 
 Communism 
 Nationalism 
 Socialism 
 Trotskyism 
 Ho Chi Minh Thought 
 Person Dignity Theory 
 Sports 
 Traditional games 
 Martial arts 
 Symbols 
 Theater 
 Vietnamese studies 
 
 Outline Index 
 Category 
 Portal 
 Authority control   National libraries 
 France 
 BnF data 
 Israel 
 United States 
 Japan 
 Other 
 IdRef 
 
  
NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw2400
Cached time: 20230311074015
Cache expiry: 1814400
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc, no‐toc‐conversion]
CPU time usage: 1.593 seconds
Real time usage: 2.051 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 25417/1000000
Post‐expand include size: 363180/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 44172/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 71/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 193547/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.789/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 24713521/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/400
 
 
Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1523.494      1 -total
 18.24%  277.872      1 Template:Reflist
 17.11%  260.635      9 Template:Navbox
 14.11%  215.035     81 Template:Lang
 13.91%  211.972     39 Template:Cite_web
 11.04%  168.119      1 Template:Asian_topic
  8.33%  126.880      1 Template:Culture_of_Vietnam
  8.19%  124.750      1 Template:Culture_of_region
  8.03%  122.358      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  6.98%  106.401     52 Template:Iso2country
 
  Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:idhash:32546-0!canonical and timestamp 20230311074013 and revision id 1143652081. Rendering was triggered because: api-parse
  
 esi <esi:include src="/esitest-fa8a495983347898/content" />  
 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Vietnamese_cuisine&oldid=1143652081 " 
 Categories :  Vietnamese cuisine Buddhist cuisine Southeast Asian cuisine Hidden categories:  Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from February 2021 Articles needing additional references from January 2013 All articles needing additional references Articles containing Vietnamese-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2023 Articles with unsourced statements from May 2013 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from September 2009 Articles with unsourced statements from October 2021 All articles with deprecated sources Articles with deprecated sources from October 2019 Commons category link from Wikidata Region topic template using suffix Articles with BNF identifiers Articles with J9U identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers Articles with NDL identifiers Articles with SUDOC identifiers Articles containing video clips 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  This page was last edited on 9 March 2023, at 01:57  (UTC) . 
 Text is available under the  Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0 ;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the  Terms of Use  and  Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the  Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. 
 
 
 Privacy policy 
 About Wikipedia 
 Disclaimers 
 Contact Wikipedia 
 Mobile view 
 Developers 
 Statistics 
 Cookie statement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
