
 
 
 Jump to content 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle sidebar 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Create account Log in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Personal tools 
 
 
 
 
   Create account   Log in 
 
 
 
 
		Pages for logged out editors  learn more 
 
 
 Contributions Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Navigation 
 
 
 Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate 
 
 
 
 
 Contribute 
 
 
 Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file 
 
 
 
 
 Tools 
 
 
 What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item 
 
 
 
 
 Print/export 
 
 
 Download as PDF Printable version 
 
 
 
 
 In other projects 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons 
 
 
 
 
 Languages 
 
 On this Wikipedia the language links are at the top of the page across from the article title.  Go to top . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CentralNotice  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Contents 
 move to sidebar 
 hide 
 
 
 
 
 (Top) 
 
 
 
 
 
 1 History 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 Ingredients 
 
 
				Toggle Ingredients subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 2.1 Seasonings 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.2 Vegetables 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.3 Meat 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 Representative dishes 
 
 
				Toggle Representative dishes subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 3.1 Fufu 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.2 Groundnut stew 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.3 Jollof rice 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4 List of other West African dishes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5 Beverages 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6 Etiquette 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 7 By country 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8 See also 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 9 Notes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 10 References 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 11 Further reading 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
						Toggle the table of contents
					 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle the table of contents 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 West African cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 9 languages 
 
 
 
 Deutsch Español Français 한국어 Jawa Lietuvių Русский Suomi Українська 
 Edit links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Article Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 English 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 More 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
 
 
 Overview of the cuisine of West Africa 
   Senegalese  yassa poulet , a tangy-spicy dish enjoyed throughout the West African region, made with  Dijon mustard , onions, lemon juice, olives and  Scotch bonnet peppers 
 West African cuisine  encompasses a diverse range of foods that are split between its 16 countries. In  West Africa , many families grow and raise their own food, and within each there is a division of labor. Indigenous foods consist of a number of plant species and animals, and are important to those whose lifestyle depends on farming and  hunting .
 The  history of West Africa  also plays a large role in their cuisine and recipes, as interactions with different cultures (particularly the Arab world and later Europeans) over the centuries have introduced many ingredients that went on to become key components of the various national cuisines today.
 
 
 History [ edit ] 
 During the  early modern period , European explorers and slave traders influenced regional cuisines in West Africa, but only to a limited extent. However, it was European merchant and  slave ships  which brought  chili peppers ,  corn  and  tomatoes  from the  New World , and both have become ubiquitous components of West African cuisines, along with  peanuts ,  cassava , and  plantains . In turn, these slave ships carried African ingredients to the New World, including  black-eyed peas  and  okra .
 Around the time of the  colonial period , particularly during the  Scramble for Africa , European settlers defined colonial borders without regard to pre-existing borders, territories or cultural differences. This bisected tribes and created colonies with varying culinary styles. As a result, it is difficult to sharply define, for example, Senegalese cuisine.
 Although the European colonists brought many new ingredients to the African continent, they had relatively little effect on the way people cook in West Africa.
 
 Ingredients [ edit ] 
   Klouikloui , rings of fried peanut butter as served in  Benin 
 Though there are obvious differences among the local cuisines in West Africa, there are also many commonalities, mainly in the ingredients used.
 Many dishes are enriched with a base of  tomatoes ,  onions  and  chili peppers . [1]  Considered an essential and even "sacred" cooking technique in the region, the combination of these three ingredients sauteed in oil is analogous to similar concepts such as the  holy trinity  of  Cajun  and  Creole cooking  in the  United States ,  sofrito  used in the  Spanish-speaking world ,  soffritto  in  Italy , and the  mirepoix  of  France .
 The most prevalent cooking oil is  palm nut oil , traditionally associated with the coastal regions and contributing a distinctive colour, flavour and texture to food, while  shea butter  is more commonly used in  the Sahel . Called  karité  in French, which comes from the Arabic word  ghartī , it is prized for the rich mouthfeel it imparts.
 There are certain ingredients that go with certain countries as well. In  Ghana , the most commonly used ingredients are hot pepper,  ginger , and  maize . Ghanaians use hot pepper because they believe the hot peppers will cool the body and cleanse/purify it. (Salm, 106–108).  In  Senegal , the main ingredients are among many others hot pepper,  rice ,  millet ,  peanut , ginger,  tamarind  leaves, and  baobab fruit , and cooking oil (Ross, 75). Those are the few that have a slight difference of what they commonly use for their dishes.
 For an overall view of West Africa, according to Fran Osseo-Asare, the common ingredients for the West African region are the leaves from a baobab tree, cereal grains:  sorghum ,  millet , and  fonio ,  cola nuts ,  egusi  seeds,  guinea fowl ,  melegueta pepper ,  oil palm ,  okra , and rice.  Other ingredients used are okra (thickener) as basis for soups and stews,  black-eyed peas , and  sesame  according to  Jessica B. Harris  in  High on the Hog . [ page needed ] 
 
 Seasonings [ edit ] 
 Spices  play a relatively less prominent role in West African cooking compared to say,  North African cuisine . Cooks use spices and herbs like ginger, coriander, and thyme sparingly but knowingly.
 Chilli peppers , however, are loved in West Africa, in fresh, dried and powdered form, particularly in the more hot and humid lands of the region. Introduced to Africa sometime after  Christopher Columbus  sailed to America by European sailors, it is said that the sweating induced by the spicy heat of chilli helps to cool the skin. More than in other regions of Africa, West Africans utilize  Scotch bonnet  chilli peppers with a liberal hand in many of their sauces and stews. The bite and fire of these extremely hot peppers ( Scoville  rating 200,000-300,000) add a unique flavor as well as heat. The chilli is also supposed to help preserve food, as well as adding flavour to relatively bland tropical staples like root vegetables.
 The seeds of Guinea pepper ( Aframomum melegueta ; also called  grains of paradise  or melegueta pepper), a plant indigenous to West Africa, are also widely used. This native spice tastes and looks somewhat like a peppercorn, but has  cardamom  and  coriander seed  flavor notes. Grains of paradise was once a prized commodity reaching Europe through North African middlemen during the  Middle Ages .
 Sumbala  or  soumbala  is a flavouring used widely across West Africa, used in a manner not unlike a  bouillon cube . It is usually prepared by women over the course of several days, traditionally from  néré  ( Parkia biglobosa ) seeds. It can be made from other kinds of seeds, and the use of  soybeans  for this purpose is increasing due mainly to inadequate supply of  néré  seeds.
 The fabrication process involves boiling, cleaning and then packing away to ferment—the  fermentation  process giving it a pungent smell and at the same time a rich, deep  umami  or savory flavour is developed. Salt can be added to the finished product to facilitate storage life. This condiment is traditionally sold in balls or patties that can be kept for several months at a time in the case of the best quality.
 It is a traditional cooking ingredient used across West Africa, although the less traditional bouillon cube, specifically the  Maggi  brand, rivals it in popularity.
 African potash (potassium carbonate) is a native salt used for flavoring and to expedite the cooking time for some foods by cooks, it is made from wood-fire ashes in an ancient process that was once used by pioneer settlers in North America.
 
 Vegetables [ edit ] 
 Vegetables  are a part of any West African meal. Some commonly eaten vegetables include  black-eyed peas ,  eggplant ,  pumpkin  and other squashes,  okra , as well as an extensive variety of both farmed and foraged  green leafy vegetables , little known or used outside of the African continent.
 Baobab  leaves, pumpkin leaves, rosella leaves, sweet potato leaves, and  cassava  leaves (which contain cyanide in their raw state, and are always blanched with boiling water before use to remove the toxins) are just some of the greens that are commonplace in a West African kitchen. Black-eyed peas form the basis for a popular fried snack, the well-loved  akara  fritter.
 Starchy tubers and  root vegetables  are used as staple food, to be served with their meat and vegetable dishes, often as a foil to the hotness of the peppers.  Cassava ,  cocoyams ,  sweet potatoes ,  plantains , and  yams  are ubiquitous in the local diet, and they are usually boiled and then pounded with a pestle and mortar into a thick starchy paste called  fufu .
 Other starch staples eaten throughout West Africa besides root vegetables and tubers include  fonio ,  rice ,  millet ,  sorghum , and  maize .
 
 Meat [ edit ] 
 Although West Africans ate far more vegetables and much less  meat  in the past, today their diet is heavier in meats, salt, and fats.  Seafood  is especially popular along the coast and many dishes combine both fish and meat. Seafood is one of the most common protein sources in West Africa.
 Seafood is so prevalent in this region that this industry even accounts for a quarter of the workforce. [2]  Dried and smoked fish flavor a number of sauces, stews, and other dishes, including condiments, in much the same way that anchovies and bacon flavour food in a number of other cuisines. It is often flaked and fried in oil, and sometimes cooked in sauce made with the base of hot peppers, onions and tomatoes, various spices (such as  soumbala ) and water to produce an incredible combination of subtle flavors.
 Chicken  is eaten nearly everywhere and chicken eggs are a common food and source of protein.  Guinea fowl  eggs also popular. In some inland areas,  beef ,  pork  and  mutton  are preferred, with goat meat being the dominant red meat.
 Suya , a popular grilled spicy meat kebab flavored with peanuts and other spices, is sold by street vendors as a tasty snack or evening meal and is typically made with beef or chicken.
 
 Representative dishes [ edit ] 
 Some dishes are a prevalent feature in most West African societies, but bearing different names in different locales.
 
 Fufu [ edit ] 
   A plate of  fufu  accompanied with  peanut soup 
 As above,  fufu  is usually made from cassava, yams, and sometimes combined with  cocoyam ,  plantains ,  cornmeal , or  oatmeal . [3]  In Ghana,  fufu  is mostly made from boiled cassava and unripe plantain beaten together, as well as from cocoyam. Currently, these products have been made into powder/flour and can be mixed with hot water to obtain the final product  eliminating the task of beating it in a mortar with a pestle until a desired consistency is reached.
 Fufu  can also be made from semolina, rice, or even instant potato flakes. Often, the dish is still made by traditional methods: pounding and the base substance in a mortar with a wooden spoon. In contexts where poverty is not an issue, or where modern appliances are readily available, a food processor may also be used.
 In Western and Central Africa, the more common method is to serve a mound of  fufu  along with a soup ( ọbẹ ). After washing hands, the diner pinches off a small ball of  fufu  and makes an indentation with the thumb. This reservoir is then filled with soup, and the ball is eaten.
 In  Nigeria and Ghana, the ball is often not chewed but swallowed whole—in fact, chewing  fufu  is considered a  faux pas . Therefore,  fufu  not only serves as a food but also as a utensil.  [3] 
 One of the low points of  fufu  was the smell which lingers on long after the meal; however, new and improved species of cassava and improved cassava processing have eliminated the smell of   fufu , making it more accepted as a meal.
 A selection of soups that could be served with  fufu  includes light (tomato) soup,  palm nut soup ,  groundnut soup ,  peppersoup , [4]  and other types of soups with vegetables such as okra,  nkontomire  (cocoyam leaves). Soups are often made with different kinds of meat and fish, fresh or smoked.
 
 Groundnut stew [ edit ] 
   Maafe , prepared by a Senegalese cook. 
 Groundnut stew ( maafe ), (var.  mafé ,  maffé ,  maff ,  sauce d'arachide ,   tigadèguèna  or  tigadene ), is a  peanut -based  stew  common to much of West Africa, and very popular in  Senegal ,  the Gambia ,  Mali ,  Guinea  and  Cote d'Ivoire . Variants of  maafe  appear in the cuisine of nations throughout West Africa and  Central Africa .  With the significant expansion of groundnut cultivation during the  colonial period ,  maafe  has become a popular dish across West Africa, and as far east as  Cameroon .
 Recipes for the stew vary widely, but groundnut stew at its core is cooked with a sauce based on groundnuts ( peanuts ), [5]  the West African  trinity  of tomatoes, onion and chillies, and common protein components are  mutton , beef or chicken. In the coastal regions of  Senegal ,  maafe  is frequently made with  fish .  Maafe  is traditionally served with white  rice  (in Senegambia),  couscous  (as West Africa meets the Sahara) or  fufu  and  sweet potatoes  in the more tropical areas. [6] 
 
 Jollof rice [ edit ] 
   Jollof rice 
 Jollof rice , also called  benachin,  is a popular dish all over West Africa.  It originated in  Senegal  but has since spread to the whole of West Africa, especially Nigeria and Ghana amongst members of the Wolof ethnic group, from whom the word "jollof" originated.
 There are many variations of jollof rice. The most common basic ingredients are rice, tomatoes and tomato paste, onion, salt, and red pepper. Beyond that, nearly any kind of meat, vegetable, or spice can be added.
 The  Senegalese  version of jollof rice is a bit different and is called  ceebu jen ,  the national dish of Senegal. A variation,  thiebou yapp , or "rice meat" is made with beef, mutton or other red meat.
 
 List of other West African dishes [ edit ] 
 
 Akara 
 Aloko 
 Cachupa 
 Chin chin 
 Couscous 
 Draw soup 
 Ẹbà 
 Egusi  soup 
 Frejon 
 Fried plantain  or  alloco —a popular version made in Ghana is called  kelewele , or hot plantain chips. 
 Futari [ clarification needed ] 
 Garri  (ground cassava) 
 Jollof rice 
 Fried fish 
 Fufu 
 Kedjenou 
 Kenkey 
 Koko 
 Kokoro 
 Meat pie 
 Moin moin 
 Ndolé 
 Ngome 
 Ogbono soup 
 Ogi 
 Palaver sauce 
 Peanut soup 
 Pounded yam 
 Puff-puff 
 Sauce aux feuilles de patates douces 
 Suya 
 Palm nut soup 
 Red Red 
 Tapalapa bread 
 Wagasi 
 Yassa au poulet 
 
 Beverages [ edit ] 
   Local distillation of palm wine in  Ghana 
 Malt drinks  such as  Supermalt  and fresh  coconut water  are popular beverages in West Africa. As for alcoholic drinks,  palm wine  is a common beverage made from the fermented sap of various types of palm trees and is usually sold in sweet (less-fermented, retaining more of the sap's sugar) or sour (fermented longer, making it stronger and less sweet) varieties.  Beer  from millet is also common.
 
 Etiquette [ edit ] 
 Dining is communal; diners use their fingers to eat. Water has a very strong ritual significance in many West African nations (particularly in dry areas), and water is often the first thing an African host will offer a guest. [3] [7] 
 
 By country [ edit ] 
 For more specific styles, refer to the articles on each national or regional cuisines:
 
 Benin cuisine 
 Cuisine of Burkina Faso 
 Cape Verdean cuisine 
 Gambian cuisine 
 Ghanaian cuisine 
 Cuisine of Guinea 
 Guinea-Bissauan cuisine 
 Ivorian cuisine  (cuisine of Côte d'Ivoire) 
 Liberian cuisine 
 Malian cuisine 
 Mauritanian cuisine 
 Cuisine of Niger 
 Nigerian cuisine 
 Cuisine of Saint Helena 
 Senegalese cuisine 
 Cuisine of Sierra Leone 
 Togolese cuisine 
 See also [ edit ] 
 
 Africa portal Food portal 
 List of African cuisines 
 List of African dishes 
 Notes [ edit ] 
 
 
 ^   "West African cuisine" . Retrieved  2010-03-18 . 
 
 ^   Brashares, J. S. (2004-11-12). "Bushmeat Hunting, Wildlife Declines, and Fish Supply in West Africa".  Science .  306  (5699): 1180–1183.  Bibcode : 2004Sci...306.1180B .  doi : 10.1126/science.1102425 .  ISSN   0036-8075 .  PMID   15539602 .  S2CID   34213295 . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   "Fufu: How to make, eat, and what to pair with the West African staple" .  KCRW . Retrieved  2022-11-23 . 
 
 ^   McWilliams, J.E. (2005).  A Revolution in Eating: How the Quest for Food Shaped America . Arts and Traditions of the Table: Perspectives on Culinary History Series. Columbia University Press. p. 33.  ISBN   978-0-231-12992-3 . 
 
 ^   Dorinda Hafner.  "Maafe – Chicken And Peanut Stew – Mali" .  Chef2Chef culinary portal . Retrieved  2007-03-03 . 
 
 ^   Um'bido (greens & Peanuts) Recipe  Ghanaian Maafe: My Changing Memories of Mafe 
 
 ^   Ukegbu, Kavachi Michelle (2021).  The art of fufu : a guide to the culture and flavors of a West African tradition . Grubido. Austin, Texas.  ISBN   978-1-62634-596-6 .  OCLC   1241244901 . 
 
 
 References [ edit ] 
 "West African cuisine" . Retrieved  2010-03-22 . 
 Further reading [ edit ] 
 Massaquoi, Rachel C. J. (2011).  Foods of Sierra Leone and Other West African Countries: A Cookbook . AuthorHouse.  ISBN   978-1-4490-8154-6 . Retrieved  October 15,  2012 . 
 N'Dour, Youssou (2004).  Sénégal, - La cuisine de ma mère . Geneva: Editions Minerve. 
 N'Dour, Youssou (2006).  Senegal, - Die Küche meiner Mutter . Munich:  Christian Verlag .  ISBN   3-88472-636-6 . 
 v t e African cuisine National cuisines 
 Algeria 
 Angola 
 Benin 
 Botswana 
 Burkina Faso 
 Burundi 
 Cameroon 
 Cape Verde 
 Central African Republic 
 Chad 
 Comoros 
 Democratic Republic of the Congo 
 Djibouti 
 Egypt 
 Equatorial Guinea 
 Eritrea 
 Eswatini (Swaziland) 
 Ethiopia 
 Gabon 
 Gambia 
 Ghana 
 Guinea 
 Guinea-Bissau 
 Ivory Coast 
 Kenya 
 Lesotho 
 Liberia 
 Libya 
 Madagascar 
 Malawi 
 Mali 
 Mauritania 
 Mauritius 
 Morocco 
 Mozambique 
 Namibia 
 Niger 
 Nigeria 
 Republic of the Congo 
 Rwanda 
 Saint Helena 
 São Tomé and Príncipe 
 Senegal 
 Seychelles 
 Sierra Leone 
 Somalia 
 South Africa 
 South Sudan 
 Sudan 
 Tanzania 
 Togo 
 Tunisia 
 Uganda 
 Western Sahara 
 Zambia 
 Zimbabwe 
 Ethnic and regional cuisines 
 Arab 
 Berber 
 Jewish 
 Ethiopian 
 Mizrahi 
 Sephardi 
 Mediterranean 
 North African 
 West African 
 Zanzibar 
 Lists 
 List of African cuisines 
 List of African dishes 
 
   Category 
 
 v t e Cuisines Continental 
 African 
 North 
 West 
 list 
 Americas 
 Caribbean 
 North 
 South 
 list 
 Asian 
 Caucasian 
 Central 
 Indian subcontinent 
 Levantine 
 list 
 European 
 Balkan 
 Central 
 Eastern 
 list 
 Oceanic 
 Intercontinental
 Global 
 Latin American 
 Mediterranean 
 Middle Eastern 
 National  and regional 
 Afghan 
 Albanian 
 Algerian 
 American 
 Californian 
 Floribbean 
 Hawaiian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Lowcountry (South Carolina) 
 New England 
 New Mexico 
 Pacific Northwest 
 Pennsylvania Dutch 
 Puerto Rican 
 Southern US 
 Southwest US 
 Texas 
 Angolan 
 Argentine 
 Armenian 
 Australian 
 Austrian 
 Azerbaijani 
 Bahraini 
 Bangladeshi 
 Barbadian 
 Belarusian 
 Belgian 
 Belizean 
 Beninese 
 Bhutanese 
 Bolivian 
 Bosnian-Herzegovinian 
 Botswana 
 Brazilian 
 British 
 Channel Islands 
 English 
 Gibraltarian 
 Northern Irish 
 Saint Helena 
 Scottish 
 Welsh 
 Bruneian 
 Bulgarian 
 Burkinabé 
 Burmese 
 Burundian 
 Cambodian 
 Cameroonian 
 Canadian 
 Acadian 
 Québécois 
 Central African Republic 
 Chadian 
 Chilean 
 Chinese 
 Cantonese 
 Hong Kong 
 Macanese 
 Tibetan 
 Xinjiang 
 Colombian 
 Congolese 
 Corsican 
 Croatian 
 Cuban 
 Cypriot 
 Czech 
 Danish 
 Faroese 
 Greenlandic 
 Djiboutian 
 Dominican 
 Dominican Republic 
 Dutch 
 East Timorese 
 Ecuadorian 
 Egyptian 
 Emirati 
 Equatorial Guinean 
 Eritrean 
 Estonian 
 Ethiopian 
 Fijian 
 Filipino 
 Finnish 
 French 
 Occitan 
 French Guianan 
 Gabonese 
 Gambian 
 Georgian 
 German 
 Ghanaian 
 Greek 
 Cretan 
 Epirotic 
 Greek Macedonian 
 Heptanesean 
 Guatemalan 
 Guinea-Bissauan 
 Guinean 
 Haitian 
 Honduran 
 Hungarian 
 Icelandic 
 Indian 
 Arunachalese 
 Assamese 
 Bengali 
 Bihari 
 Goan 
 Gujarati 
 Himachal Pradesh 
 Kashmiri 
 Jharkhandi 
 Karnataka 
 Kerala 
 Maharashtrian 
 Manipuri 
 Meghalayan 
 Mizo 
 Naga 
 Odia 
 Punjabi 
 Rajasthani 
 Sikkimese 
 Sindhi 
 Tamil 
 Telangana 
 Telugu 
 Indonesian 
 Acehnese 
 Balinese 
 Banjar 
 Batak 
 Betawi 
 Indo 
 Javanese 
 Madurese 
 Makassar 
 Minahasan 
 Minangkabau 
 Palembangese 
 Sundanese 
 Iranian 
 Iraqi 
 Irish 
 Israeli 
 Italian 
 Abruzzese 
 Ligurian 
 Lombard 
 Lucanian 
 Neapolitan 
 Roman 
 Sardinian 
 Sicilian 
 Venetian 
 Ivorian 
 Jamaican 
 Japanese 
 Okinawan 
 Jordanian 
 Kazakh 
 Kenyan 
 Korean 
 North Korean 
 South Korean 
 Kosovan 
 Kuwaiti 
 Kyrgyz 
 Lao 
 Latvian 
 Lebanese 
 Lesotho 
 Liberian 
 Libyan 
 Liechtensteiner 
 Lithuanian 
 Luxembourg 
 Macedonian 
 Malagasy 
 Malawian 
 Malaysian 
 Sabahan 
 Sarawakian 
 Maldivian 
 Malian 
 Maltese 
 Mauritanian 
 Mauritian 
 Mexican 
 Moldovan 
 Monégasque 
 Mongolian 
 Montenegrin 
 Moroccan 
 Mozambican 
 Namibian 
 Nauruan 
 Nepalese 
 New Zealand 
 Nicaraguan 
 Niger 
 Nigerian 
 Niuean 
 Norwegian 
 Omani 
 Pakistani 
 Palestinian 
 Panamanian 
 Peruvian 
 Polish 
 Portuguese 
 Qatari 
 Romanian  (incl.  Transylvanian Saxon ) 
 Russian 
 Bashkir 
 Chechen 
 Circassian 
 Komi 
 Mordovian 
 Sakha 
 Tatar 
 Udmurt 
 Yamal 
 Rwandan 
 Saint Lucian 
 Salvadoran 
 Sammarinese 
 São Tomé and Príncipe 
 Saudi Arabian 
 Senegalese 
 Serbian 
 Seychellois 
 Sierra Leonean 
 Singaporean 
 Slovak 
 Slovenian 
 Somali 
 South African 
 Spanish 
 Andalusian 
 Asturian 
 Balearic 
 Basque 
 Canarian 
 Cantabrian 
 Catalan 
 Extremaduran 
 Galician 
 Manchegan 
 Valencian 
 Sri Lankan 
 Sudanese 
 Swazi 
 Swedish 
 Swiss 
 Syrian 
 Taiwanese 
 Tajik 
 Tanzanian 
 Zanzibari 
 Thai 
 Togolese 
 Tunisian 
 Turkish 
 Turkmen 
 Trinidadian and Tobagonian 
 Ugandan 
 Ukrainian 
 Uruguayan 
 Uzbek 
 Venezuelan 
 Vietnamese 
 Western Saharan 
 Yemeni 
 Zambian 
 Zimbabwean 
 Ethnic 
 Ainu 
 Arab 
 Indonesian 
 Aromanian 
 Assyrian 
 Balochi 
 Berber 
 Cajun 
 Chinese 
 American 
 Canadian 
 Chifa 
 Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Crimean Tatar 
 Greek American 
 Hazaragi 
 Indian 
 Anglo-Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Indigenous American 
 Inuit 
 Italian American 
 Kurdish 
 Livonian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Malay 
 Ossetian 
 Parsi 
 Pashtun 
 Peranakan 
 Romani 
 Sámi 
 Soul food 
 Sylheti 
 Transylvanian Saxon 
 Yup'ik 
 Religious 
 Buddhist 
 Christian 
 Goan Catholic 
 Mangalorean Catholic 
 Mennonite 
 Hindu 
 Islamic 
 Chinese 
 Ital 
 Jain 
 Jewish 
 American 
 Ashkenazi 
 Bukharan 
 Ethiopian 
 Mizrahi 
 Sephardic 
 Syrian 
 Ritual slaughter 
 Sikh 
 Historical 
 Ancient Egyptian 
 Ancient Greek 
 Ancient Israelite 
 Ancient Roman 
 Antebellum America 
 Aztec 
 Byzantine 
 Early modern European 
 Historical Chinese 
 Historical Indian subcontinent 
 Historical North Indian and Pakistani 
 History of agriculture 
 History of alcoholic drinks 
 History of bread 
 History of seafood 
 History of vegetarianism 
 Historical Argentine 
 Historical Japanese 
 Inca 
 Mayan 
 Muisca 
 Mughal 
 Medieval 
 Ottoman 
 Peasant 
 Soviet 
 Thirteen Colonies 
 Styles 
 Classique 
 Fast food 
 Fusion 
 New American 
 Eurasian 
 Haute 
 Molecular gastronomy 
 Note by Note 
 Nouvelle 
 Lists 
 List of cuisines 
 List of historical cuisines 
 Lists of prepared foods 
 Related 
 Cookbook 
 Cooking 
 Culinary arts 
 Drink 
 Food 
 history 
 Diet 
 Meal preparation 
 
   Food portal 
   Drink portal 
   Category 
   Commons 
   Cookbook 
   WikiProject 
   Outline 
 
 Authority control : National libraries  
 Israel 
 United States 
 
  
NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw2385
Cached time: 20230310194130
Cache expiry: 1814400
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc, no‐toc‐conversion]
CPU time usage: 0.531 seconds
Real time usage: 0.677 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1544/1000000
Post‐expand include size: 96079/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1620/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 7/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 46952/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.321/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 18906311/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/400
 
 
Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  520.136      1 -total
 22.18%  115.388      1 Template:Reflist
 19.46%  101.201      2 Template:Navbox
 17.98%   93.527      7 Template:Transl
 16.56%   86.116      1 Template:African_cuisine
 15.80%   82.194      4 Template:Cite_web
  9.56%   49.747      1 Template:Short_description
  7.79%   40.498      1 Template:Pageneeded
  6.40%   33.312      1 Template:Fix
  6.24%   32.457      5 Template:Cite_book
 
  Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:idhash:12890526-0!canonical and timestamp 20230310194129 and revision id 1128811957. Rendering was triggered because: page-view
  
 esi <esi:include src="/esitest-fa8a495983347898/content" />  
 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=West_African_cuisine&oldid=1128811957 " 
 Categories :  West African cuisine African cuisine Beninese cuisine Burkinabé cuisine Cape Verdean cuisine Gambian cuisine Ghanaian cuisine Guinean cuisine Ivorian cuisine Liberian cuisine Malian cuisine Mauritanian cuisine Nigerian cuisine Nigerien cuisine Saint Helenian cuisine Senegalese cuisine Sierra Leonean cuisine Togolese cuisine Hidden categories:  Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from September 2022 Articles containing French-language text Wikipedia articles needing clarification from March 2021 Articles with J9U identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  This page was last edited on 22 December 2022, at 03:22  (UTC) . 
 Text is available under the  Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0 ;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the  Terms of Use  and  Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the  Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. 
 
 
 Privacy policy 
 About Wikipedia 
 Disclaimers 
 Contact Wikipedia 
 Mobile view 
 Developers 
 Statistics 
 Cookie statement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
