
 
 
 Jump to content 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle sidebar 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Create account Log in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Personal tools 
 
 
 
 
   Create account   Log in 
 
 
 
 
		Pages for logged out editors  learn more 
 
 
 Contributions Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Navigation 
 
 
 Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate 
 
 
 
 
 Contribute 
 
 
 Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file 
 
 
 
 
 Tools 
 
 
 What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item 
 
 
 
 
 Print/export 
 
 
 Download as PDF Printable version 
 
 
 
 
 In other projects 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons 
 
 
 
 
 Languages 
 
 On this Wikipedia the language links are at the top of the page across from the article title.  Go to top . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CentralNotice  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Contents 
 move to sidebar 
 hide 
 
 
 
 
 (Top) 
 
 
 
 
 
 1 Yupik Cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 What meals the Yupik eat 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 Food preservation and preparations 
 
 
				Toggle Food preservation and preparations subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 3.1 Fish in the food industry 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.1.1 Uncooked 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.1.2 Cooked 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.2 Mammals as food 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.3 Birds as food 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.4 Plants as food 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4 Pastry 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5 Drinks 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6 Nutrition 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 7 Tools 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8 Food storage 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 9 Dog food 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 10 Food sources 
 
 
				Toggle Food sources subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 10.1 Fish 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 10.2 Sea mammals 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 10.3 Land mammals 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 10.4 Birds 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 10.5 Plants 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 11 See also 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 12 References 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 13 External links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
						Toggle the table of contents
					 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle the table of contents 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Yup'ik cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 2 languages 
 
 
 
 العربية Jawa 
 Edit links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Article Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 English 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 More 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
 
 
 Cuisine of the Yup'ik people 
 This article or section should  specify the language  of its non-English content, using {{ lang }}, {{ transliteration }} for transliterated languages, and {{ IPA }} for phonetic transcriptions, with an appropriate  ISO 639 code . Wikipedia's  multilingual support templates  may also be used.   See why .   ( October 2021 ) 
   Smoked chum salmon 
   Alaskan economical salmonoid  fish  ( neqa ) species ( Oncorhynchus ) are main  food  ( neqa ) for the Yup'ik:  Sockeye or Red salmon  ( sayak ),  Chum or Dog salmon  ( kangitneq ),  Chinook or King salmon  ( taryaqvak ),  Coho or Silver salmon  ( qakiiyaq ),  Pink or Humpback salmon  ( amaqaayak ). 
   Alaska wild berries from the  Innoko National Wildlife Refuge , a mixture of  true berries  (blue  Vaccinium uliginosum  and red  Vaccinium vitis-idaea ) and  aggregate fruits  (red  Rubus arcticus ) 
 Yup'ik cuisine  ( Yupiit neqait  in  Yup'ik language , literally "Yup'iks' foods" or "Yup'iks' fishes") refers to the  Eskimo  style traditional  subsistence   food  and  cuisine  of the  Yup'ik  people from the western and southwestern  Alaska . Also known as  Cup'ik cuisine  for the  Chevak Cup'ik  dialect speaking Eskimos of  Chevak  and  Cup'ig cuisine  for the  Nunivak Cup'ig  dialect speaking Eskimos of  Nunivak Island . This cuisine is traditionally based on  meat  from  fish ,  birds ,  sea  and land  mammals , and normally contains high levels of  protein . Subsistence foods are generally considered by many to be nutritionally superior  superfoods . Yup’ik diet is different from Alaskan  Inupiat , Canadian  Inuit , and  Greenlandic  diets.  Fish as food  (especially  Salmonidae  species, such as  salmon  and  whitefish ) are primary food for Yup'ik Eskimos. Both food and fish called  neqa  in Yup'ik.  Food preparation  techniques are  fermentation  and cooking, also uncooked  raw .  Cooking  methods are  baking ,  roasting ,  barbecuing ,  frying ,  smoking ,  boiling , and  steaming .  Food preservation  methods are mostly  drying  and less often  frozen .  Dried fish  is usually eaten with  seal oil . The  ulu  or fan-shaped knife used for cutting up fish, meat, food, and such.
 The Yup'ik, like other  Eskimo  groups, were  semi-nomadic   hunter-fisher-gatherers  who moved seasonally throughout the year within a reasonably well-defined territory to harvest fish, bird, sea and land mammal, berry and other renewable resources. Yup'ik  cuisine  is based on traditional  subsistence  food harvests (hunting, fishing and berry gathering) supplemented by seasonal subsistence activities. The Yup'ik region is rich with waterfowl, fish, and sea and land mammals. The coastal settlements rely more heavily on sea mammals ( seals ,  walrusses ,  beluga whales ), many species of fish ( Pacific salmon ,  herring ,  halibut ,  flounder ,  trout ,  burbot ,  Alaska blackfish ),  shellfish ,  crabs , and  seaweed . The inland settlements rely more heavily on Pacific salmon and  freshwater whitefish , land mammals ( moose ,  caribou ), migratory waterfowl, bird eggs, berries, greens, and roots help sustain people throughout the region.
 The  akutaq  (Eskimo ice cream), tepa (stinkheads),  mangtak  (muktuk) some of the most well-known traditional Yup'ik  delicacies .
 Traditional subsistence foods are mixed with what is commercially available. Today about half the food is supplied by subsistence activities (subsistence foods), the other half is purchased from the  commercial stores  (market foods, store-bought foods).
 
 
 Yupik Cuisine [ edit ] 
 Both the Yup'ik (and  Siberian Yupik ) and  Iñupiaq  cuisines are also known as  Eskimo cuisine  in Alaska. The oldest, most stable cuisine in North America is found above the  Arctic Circle in Alaska . Long overlooked and pitifully misunderstood, the cuisine's roots lie buried in  Eastern Asia , whence Iñupiaq and  Yupik  ancestors ventured to Siberia, across  Beringia , and on to Alaska during the  last ice age , 50,000 to 15,000 years ago. The remoteness of the Inupiat and Yupik cultures accounts for their rich and intact food history. [1]  The Yupik-Inupiaq split probably occurred about one thousand years ago. [2]  The Arctic cuisine is composed of a high-protein diet without grains, supplemented with wild greens, roots, and berries. Fortunately,  dietitians  consider the diet nutritious and balanced with abundant vitamins, minerals, proteins and valuable unsaturated fats derived from a vast array of sea and land mammals, fish, fowl, wild plants and berries. [3] 
 Yup’ik cuisine is different from Alaskan  Iñupiaq , Canadian  Inuit , and  Greenlandic  diets. Yup'ik communities varied widely in what foods were available to them, but everyone used similar  food processing  and  food preservation  methods, including air  drying  and  smoking ,  food storage  in cold water and oil,  fermentation , and  freezing . Some foods were eaten  raw . [4] 
 Prehistoric Yup'ik Eskimos probably relied upon a mix of  anadromous fish  ( salmon  and  char ), terrestrial mammals ( caribou ), and marine mammals ( seal  and  walrus ) for subsistence foods. [5] 
 
 What meals the Yupik eat [ edit ] 
 The type of  meal  ( neruciq ) eaten at any given time varies by custom and location.
 
 Breakfast  ( unuakutaq ) is eaten within an hour or two after a person wakes in the morning. 
 Lunch  or dinner ( apiataq  from  Russian  обе́д  obéd ) [6]  is eaten around mid-day. 
 Supper  or dinner ( atakutaq ) is eaten in the evening. 
 Seven-klaagmi unuakutalartukut, twelve-klaagmi-llu apiatarluta, tua-i-llu six-klaagmi atakutarluta.   "We eat breakfast at seven o'clock, lunch at twelve o'clock and dinner at six o'clock." —  Yuut Qanemciit (Tennant and Bitar eds. 1995 [1981]),  [6] 
 The Nunivak Eskimos ( Nuniwarmiut  in Cup'ig,  Nunivaarmiut  in Yup'ik and Cup'ik) eat frequently in the course of a 24-hour period. They go to bed at sundown or early evening in the spring and fall, and well before sundown in summer, but arise early, often at 3:00 or 4:00 a.m. and regularly at 5:00 or 5:30. The time of rising depended on the sea tide and the time when tomcod or other fish are running. The first meal of the day is eaten at this time and another about 11:00 a.m., with snacks once or twice in between depending on the work schedule and the availability of food. The evening meal is usually at 4:30 or 5:00 p.m. with additional snacks between the main meals. In winter the entire meal schedule is likely to be moved forward, with the first meal of the day being eaten at 10:00 or 10:30 a.m. The most common food is dried or frozen fish dipped in seal oil. The evening or late afternoon meal, the hot meal of the day, frequently consisted of boiled fish or other boiled food and tea. [7] 
 
 Food preservation and preparations [ edit ] 
 Food preparation  techniques are uncooked  raw  ( Cassar-  "to eat raw flesh or meat",  arepa-  "to eat raw food"),  fermentation , and  cooking  ( keir- ). In the past, the Yup'ik nourishment consisted of raw meat, including its  blood , and sometimes the meat was cooked. [8] 
 Food preservation 
 Meat  or  Flesh  ( kemek  in Yup'ik and Cup'ik,  kemeg  in Cup'ig) is primary main food.
 
 Fish in the food industry [ edit ] 
   Native Alaskan husband and wife clean the catch of the day in Alaska in June 1975.  Neq'liurtuk  = he and she are working on fish;  neq'liur-  = to work on fish (cleaning them, preparing them for storage, etc.);  carrir-  = to clean;  ciqret  pl  ciqeq  sg = offal from cleaning fish. 
   Nunivak Cup’ig women filleting salmon, Mekoryuk (Mikuryaq), Nunivak. 07-03-1972 
   Salmon drying.  Sugpiaq ~ Alutiiq  village,  Old Harbor, Alaska , 1889 
 Fish as food , especially  Pacific salmon  of the subfamily Salmoninae in the family  Salmonidae  or in some places, non-salmon species, such as  freshwater whitefish  of the subfamily Coregoninae in the family Salmonidae, are primary main subsistence food for Yup'ik Eskimos. Both  food  and  fish  (and salmon) called  neqa   sg   neqet   pl  in Yup'ik. [6] [9]  Also for salmon called  neqpik ~ neqpiaq   sg   neqpiit ~ neqpiat   pl  in Yup'ik, means literally “real, genuine food”. But, main food for  Iñupiaq  Eskimos is  meat  of whale and caribou (both food and meat called  niqi  in Iñupiaq, also for meat called  niqipiaq  “real, genuine food”).
 Salmon as food ,  herring as food , smelt, halibut, flounder,  tomcod , pike, and capelin were gutted and air dried or smoked. [4]  The  fish heads  they made into  qamiqurrluk  (cut and dried fish heads), and some they made into  tepa  (aged fish heads). [6]   Fish eggs  (roe) were dried and stored. [4] 
 
 Uncooked [ edit ] 
 Qassaq  or  Qassaulria  is  raw food , raw flesh or  raw meat . [6] 
 Quaq  (in the  Inuit languages :  Iñupiaq   quaq , Nunavut  Inuktitut  and Nunavik Inuttitut ᖁᐊᖅ  quaq , South Baffin Kingarmiut  xuaq , Labrador  Inuttitut   ĸuak ,  Greenlandic   quaq ) is meat or fish to be eaten raw and frozen [6] 
 Nutaqaq  is frozen raw fish. [6] 
 Qassayaaq  or  Qassayagaq  (lit. «baby raw fish») frozen raw whitefish aged (fermented) before freezing and served frozen. [6] 
 Kumlaciq  (in Yup'ik,  kumlacir  in Cup'ig) is frozen meat (of frozen fish, blackfish, and others as well) to be eaten in that state.  Frozen food  is a method for preserving fish or meat.
 Kumlaneq  (in Yup'ik,  kumlanaq  in Hooper Bay-Chevak Cup'ik; but,  kumlaner  in Nunivak Cup'ig means "cold water, cold spring water; permafrost, frozen soil") is frozen fish to be eaten in that state. [6]  Freezing of chinook and particularly coho salmon was relatively common. Chinook salmon were usually cut up into smaller pieces before being placed into plastic  Ziploc  bags. Smaller species, such as chum, sockeye, coho, and pink salmon were frequently frozen uncut and whole. [10] 
 Kumlivirluuki  is stored in  freezer  ( kumlivik ). [11] 
 Qercuqaq  is hard frozen fish (blackfish or the like). [6] 
 Fermented fish  is a traditional preparation of fish as  fermented food .
 Ciss'uq  ( Ciss'ur  in Nunivak Cup'ig) is fermented herring or capelin that have been buried underground for two weeks.
 Tepcuaraq  ( tepcuar(aq) [6]  or  tepcuaraq kumlaneq [11] ) is fish that has been frozen after being allowed to age slightly, eaten uncooked and frozen. [6]   Kumlaneq  is aged spawned out salmon. [12]   Tepcuaraq kumlaneq  is aged and frozen fish. The whole fish can be either cleaned of their entrails or left intact, then buried under ground in a pit lined with grass and left for about a week depending on the temperature. If the fish are caught in the late fall, they are stored in a wooden or cardboard box until they are aged, and then frozen. Tepcuaraq kumlaneq are eaten frozen with seal oil. [11] 
 Tepngayaaq  is fermented a little frozen fish.
 Tepa  ( sg   Tepet   pl ; lit. « odor , smell, aroma, scent») is aged or  fermented  salmon  fish head . Known as  aged fish head  or  fermented fish head , commonly called as  stinkheads, stink heads, stinky heads . Tepas were considered a traditional special Yup'ik delicacy, but really the dish is something favored mostly by older Alaska Natives. 
Traditionally, most people continued to make tepa in the summer. [5]  Heads ( pakegvissaaq  is head of fish including pectoral fins) of chinook (king), sokeye (red), chum (dog), and occasionally, coho (silver) salmon were prepared by burying them in the ground and allowed them to ferment before eating. [10]  The traditional way to prepare tepa was to bury the heads in the ground along with most of the fish guts in a wooden barrel covered with burlap material. [13] [5]  Earthen pits lined with grass were used for this process. Salmon milt and eggs were added to the heads which were then covered with another layer of grass before being covered over with earth. [5]  The fermenting process took from one to two weeks depending on temperature of the ground. [10] [5]  One salmon production unit prepared four pits of tepa. [10]  The pits measured approximately 18 inches deep and 2 feet square and contained approximately 75 salmon heads each. The heads of 1,000 chinook, 726 sockeye, 1,246 chum, and 41 coho salmon were prepared as tepa by Kwethluk households during 1986. [10]  One resident told the researchers, "to the Native it's like candy or bubblegum, sweet and sour, in between the two." [5]  However, with the introduction of plastic buckets, the danger of  botulism  has surfaced and informants stressed the importance of avoiding these types of modern containers since the "oldfashioned" methods allowed oxygen to circulate and prevented the growth of bacteria which causes botulism. [5]  Heads stored underground in plastic bags are more likely to develop botulism than fish stored in grasses. It was soon discovered that the traditional method of preparing the tepas was safer than the modern way. [14] 
 
 tepturraarlua unatenka qanganaruanek perrillruanka.   "after eating aged fish heads, I wiped my hands with  wormwood  ( qanganaruaq )." —  Lower Kuskokwim,  [6] 
   Salmon filets hanging on a rack by a river in Alaska. July 2009 
 Arumaarrluk  ( arumarrluk [15] ) or  arumaarrluaq  is poke fish or poked fish slightly smoked and stored in seal oil. [6] 
 Uqumaarrluk  is poke fish slightly aged and stored in seal oil. [6] 
 Uqumelnguq  (in Yup'ik,  uqumelzngur  in Cup'ig) is smoked fish soaked in seal oil. [6] 
 Most of the salmon that was dried and smoked was eaten without any further preparation. Dried salmon sometimes eaten with seal oil. [10] 
 Niinamayak  (in Yup'ik,  nin'amayuk  in Canineq Yup'ik,  nin'amayag  in Nunivak Cup'ig) is partially (half) dried aged (fermented) herring. [6] 
 Cin'aq  (Yukon, Hooper Bay and Chevak, Lake Iliamna, and Nunivak) is cheese-like fish aged in a pit. [6]  This fish is usually  dog  (chum) or  king  (chinook) salmon. The salmon whole (except the guts) aged through the process of burying them into the marshy, muddy lowland ( maraq ). The hole is dug until the permafrost is exposed. The bottom of the hole is then covered with dry grass, moss, and cardboard. Then several salmon are placed in. The top of the salmon is again covered with grass, moss and or cardboard, then the remaining dug up groung is placed back into the hole, tightly covering the contents. The aged salmon fish are usually dug out during the early winter, and eaten as a delicacy. [15] 
 
   Herring spawn-on-kelp, Alaska 
 Melucuaq  (lit. «small roe») or  Elquaq  (lit. «seaweed») is herring roe-on-kelp, herring spawn-on-kelp, or herring eggs on kelp. This is the  fertilized  eggs or  roe  ( qaarsat, meluk, imlauk ) of the  Pacific herring  attached to  eelgrass , seaweed or other submerged vegetation. Herring spawn-on-kelp is a favored food among the majority of households in  Togiak ,  Manokotak , and  Aleknagik . Additional households in  Twin Hills ,  Dillingham , and other communities in Bristol Bay and elsewhere also eat spawn-on-kelp. Harvests of spawn-on-kelp took place between late April and early June. Spawn-on-kelp for subsistence use is generally picked by hand, though rakes are occasionally used. Today, freezing and salting are the most common methods of preservation. In the past, spawn-on-kelp was preserved by drying and storage in open-weave grass baskets ( kuusqun, kuusqulluk ). As in the past, people today prefer to eat spawn-on-kelp dipped in seal oil. The product of the harvest is commonly shared with relatives and friends in the harvesters' home community during feats celebrating birthdays or holidays. [16]  In all four  Nelson Island  communities ( Tununak ,  Newtok ,  Toksook Bay , and  Nightmute ), much of the roe-on-kelp is consumed soon after it is harvested, but a portion of the harvest is preserved in seal-skin pokes filled with seal oil. [17] 
 Imlaucuaq  (in Yup'ik of Nelson Island,  Imlaucuar  in Nunivak Cup'ig; lit. «small roe») is herring sac roe. The sac-roe (imlacuaq) is dried into product resembling golden chips. The dried roe is placed in containers and stored in the cache. It is soaked in water prior to eating but is also eaten dried. All sac-roe from subsistence caught herring was processed in all four Nelson Island communities. [17] 
 puyuqer (Cıp'ig) puyuqaq (Yup'ik) = smoked fish
 
 
 
 Number of salmon processed for subsistence use by  Kwethluk  households during 1986 [10] 
 
 
 Species 
 Harvested 
 Cooked (keniraq) 
 Smoked strips  (palak’aaq) 
 Smoked "dry fish"  (neqerrluk) 
 Frozen  (kumlaneq) 
 Salted  (sulunaq) 
 Canned  (paankaraq) 
 Stinkhead  (tepa) 
 Dog food  (qimugcin)
 
 
 King or Chinook 
 5,824 
 417 
 654 
 4,292 
 129 
 142 
 12 
 1,000 
 2
 
 
 Red or Sockeye 
 5,423 
 276 
 136 
 3,153 
 5 
 0 
 0 
 726 
 1,790
 
 
 Dog or Chum 
 9,738 
 77 
 0 
 8,031 
 84 
 0 
 0 
 1,246 
 1,543
 
 
 Silver or Coho 
 3,545 
 94 
 30 
 1,084 
 330 
 157 
 12 
 41 
 902
 
 
 Humpback or Pink 
 619 
 16 
 0 
 84 
 5 
 0 
 0 
 0 
 484
 
 
 Total salmon 
 25,149 
 880 
 820 
 17,546 
 544 
 299 
 24 
 4,721
 
 
 Cooked [ edit ] 
 Cooking  ( kenir- ) is the process of preparing food for consumption with the use of heat. There are very many methods of cooking. These include  roasting  ( maniar- ),  barbecuing ,  baking  ( uute- ),  frying  ( assali-, asgir- ),  smoking  ( puyurte-, aruvarqi-, aruvir- ),  boiling  ( ega- ), and  steaming  ( puyiar(ar)- ).
 Keniraq  (lit. «cooked thing») is fresh  cooked  fish or other food (also  stew ). [6] 
 Ugka  is cooked fish or other food. [6] 
 Uuqnarliq  (Kuskokwim),  uuqnarniq  (Yukon),  uqnarliq  (Hooper Bay and Chevak) is cooked blackfish. [6] 
 Allemaaq  (Hooper Bay and Chevak) is cooked blackfish fry. [6] 
 Maniaq  (lit. «roasted thing» [6] ) is  roasted  (barbecued) over an open fire fish. All parts of the fish except the  guts  are used. Over an open fire, a green branch or drift wood is used by inserting the stick in the mouth of the fish, then pushing the stick though the fish along the backbone until the stick emerges at the base of the tail. the stick is then propped up near the open fire to begin roasting. a modern alternative is to wrap the fish in foil and piece it in the camp fire. [11] 
 Teggsiq'er  (in Nunivak Cup'ig) half dried herring (specifically made for cooking). [9] 
 Uutaq  (lit. «baked thing») is baked fish (also, hard candy or other hard-baked food; bread [6] )
 Salkuuyaq  or  Sal'kuuyaq  (Yup'ik),  Cal'kuuyaq  (Cup'ik) (also,  casserole  of meat or fish with potatoes, onions, etc.) is fresh fish baked whole or filleted after the entrails are removed. The meat of fish baked whole is slit in the middle lengthwise on the other side. Fish are placed in a baking dish, seasoned, oiled, and baked. Younger people seem to prefer this over the plainer boiled fish. It is often eaten with boiled rice. [11]  It is derived from Russian  Жарко́е  [ ru ]  (zharkóe) ‘roast’. [6] 
 Assaliaq  ( assaliq ; [11]  lit. «fried thing»; also, pancake; other fried food; fry bread [6] ) is fresh fried fish. All parts of the fish except the entrails are used to prepare this dish, although often the heads are removed as well. The fish is filleted, dipped in seasoned flour, or just seasoned with salt, and fried in oil. If households enjoy picking and sucking backbones or only a few fish are available, the backbone will be fried along with the filleted pieces. Heads are sometimes fried for the same reasons. Boiled rice is the favorite side dish with this meal. Middle aged and younger people enjoy this meal for the flavor. [11]  The verb  assali-  (to fry; to make pancakes or griddlecakes) is derived from Russian жа́рить (zhárit’) ‘to roast, fry, broil, grill’. [6] 
 Egaaq  (lit. «boiled thing») is boiled fish or other food (also, by extension, any cooked fish or other food). [6] 
 Egamaarrluk  ( egamaarruk [11]  or  egamaaq ) is partially dried (not smoked) fish boiled for eating. The partially dried and boiled fish is only partially cooked. [6]  The half-dried salmon ( egamaarrluk ) which was cooked after being partially dried. [10]   Egamaarruk  is split and half dried fish. these are prepared much like  neqerrluk , but are not fully dried and may not be smoked. The half dried fish are boiled and eaten with seal oil. [11]  The  egamaarrluk  involved a similar process but the fish were kept as fillets rather than sliced into strips. [5] 
 Qamangatak  (Egegik) is half-dried, boiled fish. [6] 
 Umlikaaq  (or  Umlikaq  ~  Umlikqaq ) [11]  or  Ungllekaq [6]  ( ungllik'ar  in Nunivak Cup'ig [9] ) is fresh boiled fish. All parts of the fish except for the entrails are used to prepare umlikqaq. Fresh fish that have been dead for less than a day make the best umlikqaq because the meat is still firm. If a freshwater fish is caught with a hook, it is best to kill the fish by hitting its head soon after capture so the meat will stay firm for cooking. The main ingredients of umlikqaq are cut-up fish, water, and salt which are boiled for about 29 minutes. This is a preferred food for elders because it easy to make and is not strongly seasoned. First heads are good prepared as umlikqaq. [11]  Also,  Ungelkaaq  is fish steak cut transversely. [6] 
 Qageq  ( sg   Qagret   pl ) is day-old cooked blackfish. Blackfish that has been boiled and allowed to set in its cooled, jelled broth.
 Aagciuk  is fish meatball made of the soft meat and bones of spawned-out fish, cooked by dropping in boiling water. [6] 
 
 Mammals as food [ edit ] 
   Strips of seal meat hang on a rack to dry at a summer subsistence camp. The dark meat is rich in oil to fuel hard work and keep people warm in the arctic.  Cape Krusenstern National Monument  in northwestern Alaska, June 2008. 
   Muktuk drying at  Point Lay, Alaska . June 24, 2007 
 Marine mammals as food  are only seals and beluga whale. Seals were the primary marine mammal hunted. [10] 
 Seal oil  ( uquq ) was used by most households. [10]  Seal oil is a source of  eicosapentaenoic acid  (EPA),  docosapentaenoic acid  (DPA), and  docosahexaenoic acid  (DHA).  Dried fish  is usually eaten with seal oil.
 tangviaq  (Y),  tangviarrluk  (K, BB, HBC);  tangviarrluggaq  (NI, CAN)  tangevkayak ~ tangevkayagaq  (NI)  tangeq  (Y, NUN, NS) seal cracklings (strip of seal blubber from which oil has been rendered)
 Civanraq  ( sg   civanrat   pl ) is fibrous leftover piece when seal oil has been obtained by heating diced seal blubber in a pan; crackling. [6] 
 Cuakayak  is cooked seal lung. [6] 
 Uqiquq  Passing out of bearded seal oil- The stripped long blubber for girls in the family and square cut blubber for men in the household. [15] 
 uqiqur- to distribute seal blubber and meat and gifts when someone has caught a seal; to give a “seal party” [6] 
 Beluga  whale meat 
 Muktuk  ( mangtak  in Yukon, Unaliq-Pastuliq, Chevak,  mangengtak  in Bristol Bay) is the traditional Eskimo meal of frozen raw beluga whale skin (dark  epidermis ) with attached subcutaneous fat ( blubber ).
 Aaqassaaq  (Kotlik) is skin to be chewed to soften it; beluga blubber for eating. [6] 
 Taaqassaaq  is skin for chewing. [6]  The hide and flippers from fresh walrus may be fermented to make taaqassaaq. [18] 
 Tamukassaaq  is aged beluga skin. [19]  (also, skin to chew on such as dried fish skin [6] )
 Kinengyak  ( sg   kinengyiit   pl ) is dried meat (caribou, moose)
 Dry moose meat was a favorite food among  Chuathbaluk  and  Sleetmute  inhabitants. [20] 
 Qemitaq  (lit. «strangled thing») is muskrat or squirrel that has been hung by the neck to dry after being skinned. [6] 
 
 Birds as food [ edit ] 
 The flesh of virtually all waterfowl in the environment was eaten, either fresh or dried, usually with oil or a sourdock leaf soup. Even cormorants were considered edible and the meat of these fishy-tasting birds was dried or boiled when freshly killed. The eggs of waterfowl were sometimes sucked raw, but were usually boiled. Unlike Eskimos of the adjacent mainland, the Nunivaarmiut did not boil eggs hard and pack them in pokes for use during the winter. Instead, if there were more eggs than could be consumed at the time of collecting, they were hard-boiled and, still in their shells, placed in wooden dishes of seal oil to be kept for a short while. [7] 
 
 Plants as food [ edit ] 
 Akutaq  (in Yup'ik and Cup'ik,  akutar  in Cup'ig,  akutuq  in  Iñupiaq ) or  Eskimo ice cream , also known as  Yup'ik ice-cream ,  Yupik ice-cream ,  Inupiaq ice-cream ,  Inupiat ice-cream ,  Alutiiq ice cream  is a mixture of berries, sugar, seal oil, shortening, flaked fish flesh, snow, etc. Akutaq is most common Eskimo delicacy in Alaska, and only  dessert  in Eskimo cuisine.  Both Eskimo ice cream and  Indian ice cream  are also known as  native ice cream  or  Alaskan ice cream  in Alaska. There are different types of akutaq.
 Akutaq is served on all special occasions. Like  Yup'ik dance , akutaq is not an everyday dish. It is a special treat, an honor to receive and a responsibility to give. [21]  "Mouse akutak" is made from roots found in mouse holes. Only a portion of the mouse's stored roots is taken, and some people replace the roots with something else the mouse can eat.
 The  mousefood  or mouse food ( ugnaraat neqait ) consists of the roots of various tundra plants which are cached by  voles  in burrows. Mousefood are grains gathered by a mouse and buried in shallow tunnels that sprout in the fall or spring rains. The tender green sprouts are often one of the first fresh foods available. Mousefood is eaten much like one would eat a small salad or fresh greens.
 
 Pastry [ edit ] 
 Bread  ( kelipaq  Yukon, Kuskokwim, Hooper Bay and Chevak, Nelson Island, Canineq, Bristol Bay, Nushagak River, Lake Iliamna, Egegik,  kelipar  in Cup'ig from Russian хлеб  khleb ;  qaqiaq  bread in Yukon, Unaliq-Pastuliq from Iñupiaq  qaqqiaq ;  qaq'uq  in Yukon, Unaliq-Pastuliq from Iñupiaq  qaqquq ;  kuv'aq  in Yukon;  tevurkaq  in Unaliq-Pastuliq,  tuurkaq  in Lower Yukon from English  dough ) The  uutaq  is hard candy or other hard-baked food; bread [6] 
 Flour  ( mukaaq  in Yup'ik and Cup'ik,  mukaar, muk'ar  in Cup'ig from Russian мукá  muká ) [6] 
 Fried bread  ( uqulek  Hooper Bay and Chevak,  uqurpag  in Cup'ig;  alatiq  in Bristol Bay,  alaciq  in Egegik from Russian  Оладьи  [ ru ]   alad’i ) [6]  The  maniaq  (Yup'ik and Cup'ik),  maniar  (Cup'ig) is pancake; fried bread; roasted thing [6] 
 Frybread  or fry bread ( uqup'alek  in Kuskokwim) is the characteristic widespread Native American homemade deep-fried biscuit, sometimes called “Eskimo doughnut” locally, known as “ bannock ” in Canada. [6]  Both frybread and  pancake  are also known as  asgiq  or  assaliaq  (Unaliq-Pastuliq). The verb  assali-  "to fry; to make pancakes or griddlecakes" from Russian жа́рить  zhárit’  The  Eskimo doughnut  is a deep-fried biscuit, a little like fry bread in  doughnut  form or fried bannock. Iñupiaq style Eskimo doughnut (aka "mukparuks";  muqpauraq  or  uqsrukuaqtaq ~ uqsripkauqtaq  in Iñupiaq) is  pretzel -like Eskimo doughnut and basically a mixture of seal oil, flour, and water, baked and fried in seal oil. [22] 
 Pilot bread  or  cracker  ( cugg'aliq  ~  sugg'aliq  from Russian  Сухари  [ ru ]   sukhari’ ;  qaq'ulektaaq  in Yukon, Unasliq-Pastuliq) specifically means the manufactured, substantial unsalted crackers known as “pilot bread” (or “hardtack”) common in the North but not elsewhere. [6] 
 Cookie  (cugg'alinguaq in Egegik) [6] 
 Easter bread  (kulic'aaq from Russian  Кулич  [ ru ]  kulích) Russian Orthodox Easter bread. [6] 
 
 Drinks [ edit ] 
 Naklegnaqluteng yuullrullinilriit yuurqayuunateng, caayurtusuunateng, kuuvviartusuunateng-llu neqekarrlainarnek tau͡gaam ner’aqluteng.   "Poor things; they lived their lives without having hot beverages — no tea, no coffee; they just ate fish." —  Martha Teeluk-aam Qulirat Avullri Erinairissuutekun Agnes Hootch-aamek (1960s),  [6] 
 Tea  ( caayuq  in Yukon, Unaliq-Pastuliq, Hooper Bay and Chevak, Nelson Island, Upper Kuskokwim, Nushagak River, Lake Iliamna, Egegik,  saayuq  Lower Kuskokwim, Canineq, Bristol Bay,  caayu  Nunivak Cup'ig; from Russian чай  chay )
 Coffee  ( kuuvviaq  in Yup'ik and Cup'ik,  kuupiaq  in Unaliq,  kuuvviar  in Cup'ig; from Russian ко́фе  kófe ). The  kuuvviapik  ~  kuuvviapiaq  is real coffee (in contrast to  alqunaq  or  instant coffee ,  decaffeinated coffee , or  ersatz coffee )
 
 Nutrition [ edit ] 
 Nutrition  is the selection of  foods  and  preparation of foods , and their ingestion to be  assimilated  by the body.  Human nutrition  is the provision to obtain the essential nutrients necessary to support life and health.
 Alaska subsistence communities are noted to obtain up to 97% of the  omega-3 fatty acids  through a subsistence diet. [23]  The cardiovascular risk of this diet is so severe that the addition of a more  standard American diet  has reduced the incidence of mortality in the native population. [24]  Still, many market (store-bought) foods are high in fats, carbohydrates, and sodium; and these may lead to increased  weight gain ,  high cholesterol  (hypercholesterolaemia),  high blood pressure  (hypertension), and  chronic diseases . [23]  Increasing EPA and DHA intakes to amounts well consumed by the general US population may have strong beneficial effects on  chronic disease  risk. [25]  Yup’ik Eskimos have a prevalence of  type 2 diabetes  of %3.3, versus %7.7 in the U.S. overall, even though the Yup’ik Eskimos have  overweight / obesity  levels similar to the rest of the U.S. [26]  In a preliminary study initiated by the Center for Alaska Native Health Research (CANHR) at the  University of Alaska Fairbanks , elders were significantly enriched in  δ 15 N , but depleted in  δ 13 C , relative to younger participants. [27] 
 
 Tools [ edit ] 
   Tumnaq used to make  Eskimo ice cream , circa 1910 
 Food storage [ edit ] 
   Elevated cache ( qulvarvik, qulrarvik, neqivik, enekvak, mayurpik, mayurrvik, ellivik, elliwig ) was used to store food where it would be safe from animals. Hooper Bay, Alaska, 1929. 
 Food storage 
 Dried and smoked salmon were usually stored in smokehouses, freezers, or caches belonging to the head of the salmon production unit. Salted fish were kept in buckets or wooden barrels and were stored in the house, entryway, cache, or smokehouse. Frozen salmon were kept in household freezers. Whole frozen coho salmon, used for dog food, were sometimes stored outside in pits. [10] 
 Elevated cache or raised log cache, also raised cache or log storehouse ( qulvarvik   sg   qulvarviit   pl  [Yukon, Kuskokwim, Bristol Bay, Nushagak River, Lake Iliamna],  qulrarvik  [Egegik],  qaivarrvik ,  neqivik  [Hooper Bay-Chevak, Yukon, Nelson Island],  enekvak  [Hooper Bay-Chevak],  mayurpik  [Hooper Bay-Chevak],  mayurrvik  [Nelson Island],  ellivik  [Kuskokwim],  elliwig  [Nunivak]) is a  bear cache -like safe  food storage  place designed to store food outdoors and prevent animals from accessing it. Elevated cache types include log or plank cache, open racks, platform caches, and tree caches. The high cabin-on-post cache was probably not an indigenous form among either Eskimos or  Alaskan Athabaskans . Cabin-on-post caches are thought to have appeared in the 1870s. The cabin-on-post form may thus have been introduced by early traders, miners, or missionaries, who would have brought with them memories of the domestic and storage structures constructed in their homelands. [28] 
 
 Dog food [ edit ] 
 For thousands of years,  dogs  ( qimugta   sg   qimugtek   dual   qimugtet   pl  in Yup'ik and Cup'ik,  qimugta   sg   qimugteg   dual   qimugtet   pl  in Cup'ig) as  sled dogs , have been tightly interwoven in the Yup'ik way of life, for transportation and companionship. Except for dogs, there were no important domesticated animals in aboriginal times.
 Dog food  ( qimugcin, qimugcitkaq, qimugcessuun ) refers to food for the dogs.  Alunga  is homemade dog food (a boiled mixture of fish and meat products) and  Alungun  is dog-feeding  trough . [6]  Salmon is the best food to feed ( nerqe- ) dogs. Chum, coho, and pink salmon were the species most frequently processed for dog food. In addition to dried salmon processed for dog food, whole uncut salmon and the heads, entrails, and backbones, not preserved or prepared for dog food, were also used as dog food. Chum salmon harvested during August for use as dog food were usually dried. Between late August and early October, coho salmon harvested for dog food were preserved by burying whole in earthen pits. [10] 
 Beluga (especially late fall hunting) are used for feeding dogs in the Bristol Bay areas. [19] 
 
 Food sources [ edit ] 
 The Yup'ik, like other  Eskimo  groups, were  semi-nomadic   hunter-fisher-gatherers  who moved seasonally throughout the year within a reasonably well-defined territory to harvest fish, bird, sea and land mammal, berry and other renewable resources.  Subsistence  is the practice of  hunting ,  fishing , or gathering food to live on (not to resell), and is practiced by almost all the Yup'ik. In the inland, fishing for red salmon and gathering berries in the summer as well as hunting caribou or moose in the fall and winter constitute the primary seasonal subsistence activities of the inland Yup'ik villages.
 The Yup'ik region is rich with waterfowl, fish, and sea and land mammals. The coastal settlements rely more heavily on sea mammals ( seals ,  walrusses ,  beluga whales ), many species of fish ( Pacific salmon ,  herring ,  halibut ,  flounder ,  trout ,  burbot ,  Alaska blackfish ),  shellfish ,  crabs , and  seaweed . The inland settlements rely more heavily on Pacific salmon and  freshwater whitefish , land mammals ( moose ,  caribou ), migratory waterfowl, bird eggs, berries, greens, and roots help sustain people throughout the region.
 Subsistence foods are generally considered by many to be nutritionally superior  superfoods . Wild salmon, game meat, and berries harvested by Alaska Natives are world class fare compared to processed, canned, high priced items they find at their local mercantiles. Lonner (1986) compares the generally high carbohydrate foods of local grocery stores with “vital proteins and fats” in subsistence foods. In addition, the hunting and gathering of subsistence foods are favored activities among many rural Alaskans if not spiritually and culturally necessary. [29] 
 The primary subsistence food in the Bristol Bay region and in most of rural Alaska is salmon, followed closely by big game hunting of caribou and moose in the more inland areas, and marine mammal hunting in the coastal areas. [29] 
 The  Alaska Department of Fish and Game  (ADF&G) is the State of Alaska's regulatory agency for the management of fish and wildlife resources. [29] 
 The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service's mission is similar to that of the Alaska Department of Fish
and Game in its goals to “protect, conserve, and enhance” fish and wildlife resources—however,
for the good of the nation at large. [29] 
 
 Fish [ edit ] 
   Fresh-caught smelt (probably  rainbow smelt ),  Kuskokwim River , Alaska, May 2008 
 Fish  ( neqa   sg   neqek   dual   neqet   pl  in Yup'ik and Cup'ik  neqa  or  iqallug  in Cup'ig) is one of the most common Yup'ik foods.
 
 Pacific salmons   Oncorhynchus  ( neqpik  in Yup'ik, literally "real fish") are  anadromous fish  as they  spawn  in freshwater ( salmon run ) and spend at least a part of their lives in the ocean. Salmon is a staple of the native Alaskan diet and natives have traditionally used all parts of the fish. 
 Red salmon  or sockeye salmon  Oncorhynchus nerka  ( sayak  in Yup'ik,  cayak  in Cup'ik,  cayag  in Cup'ig) 
 King salmon  or Chinook salmon  Oncorhynchus tschawytscha  ( taryaqvak, tarsarpak, kiagtaq  in Yup'ik,  taryaqvak  in Cup'ik,  taryaqvag  in Cup'ig) 
 Silver salmon  or coho salmon  Oncorhynchus kisutch  ( qakiiyaq, uqurliq, caayuryaq  in Yup'ik,  qavlunaq  in Cup'ik,  ciayuryar  in Cup'ig) 
 Dog salmon  or chum salmon  Oncorhynchus keta  ( iqalluk, aluyak, kangitneq, mac'utaq  in Yup'ik,  qavlunaq, neqpik  in Cup'ik,  mac'utar  in Cup'ig) is second-largest of the Alaskan salmonids. In Alaska, chum salmon often called  dog salmon  due to their fierce  dentition  exhibited during spawning as well as the males tendency to bite and nip at each other. Salmon snobs of Alaska will often turn up their noses at chum salmons because they are thought to be only fit for  dog food . 
 Humpback salmon  or pink salmon  Oncorhynchus gorbuscha  ( amaqaayak, amaqsuq, luqaanak, terteq  in Yup'ik,  cuqpeq  in Cup'ik) 
 Rainbow trout  or steelhead  Oncorhynchus mykiss  ( talaariq  in Yup'ik,  kangitner  in Cup'ik) were usually cooked fresh and dried. [10] 
 Trout (charr)  or Dolly Varden  Salvelinus malma  ( iqallugpik  [Kuskokwim, Yukon],  yugyaq  [Bristol Bay] in Yup'ik,  iqalluyagar  in Cup'ig) were usually cooked fresh and dried. [10] 
 Lake trout   Salvelinus namaycush  ( cikignaq ) were usually cooked fresh and dried. [10] 
 Sheefish  or inconnu  Stenodus nelma  ( ciiq ) were preserved by drying, smoking, and freezing. Sheefish were also eaten fresh; cooking methods included boiling and baking. [10] 
 Grayling   Thymallus arcticus  ( culugpauk, culugpaugaq, nakrullugpak, nakrutvalek  in Yup'ik,  culugpaugar  in Cup'ig) were usually cooked fresh and dried. [10] 
 Pike   Esox lucius  ( cuukvak, cukvak, ciulek, keggsuli, qalru, luqruuyak, eluqruuyak ) were normally preserved by drying and were usually eaten without any further praparation. Pike were sometimes cooked and eaten while fresh. [10] 
 Blackfish  or Alaska blackfish  Dallia pectoralis  ( can'giiq, imangaq  in Yup'ik,  can'gir, taqikar  in Cup'ig) were cooked by pouring boiling water intermittently into a pot containing the fish and letting them steam for several minutes. They were one of few species of the fish that were usually not dried. [10] 
 Lush  or burbot  Lota lota  ( manignaq, aninirpak, tengugpalek, kanayurnaq ) were preserved by drying and freezing. Cooking methods included boiling and baking. [10] 
 Herring   Clupea pallasii  ( iqalluarpak, iqallugpak, neqalluarpak  in Yup'ik,  iqalluarpag  in Cup'ig) prefer spawning ( qurre- ) locations in sheltered bays and estuaries. One of the largest spawning concentrations of herring in Alaska occurs in the Togiak district of Bristol Bay in the eastern Bering Sea. Herring and herring spawn-on-kelp have been harvested for subsistence use by residents of this coastal area as long as people can recall. Commercial fishing for herring in the togiak district began in 1967 and expanded dramatically after 1977. Prior to 1983, subsistence harvests of herring and spawn-on-kelp were not regulated. [16] 
 Smelt  or rainbow smelt  Osmerus mordax  subsp.  dentex  ( qusuuq, iqalluaq, cimigliq, cimerliq, cimerliaq, cimirliq, cemerliq, elquarniq, uqtaqngaq, qimaruaq  in Yup'ik,  quyuuq, cemerliq  in Cup'ik,  quss'ur  in Cup'ig) were cooked by frying and roasting when eaten fresh. Some fishermen who harvested smelt consider these fish as "emergency food," to be kept in the smokehouse or cache and used if supplies of dried salmon ran out or if food shortages occurred. [10] 
   Commercial fishing (before 1927): manignaalleryak (Yup'ik) atgiaq (Bristol Bay) atgiiyar (Cup'ig) = Pacific cod ( Gadus macrocephalus ) and naternarpak (Yup'ik ~ Cup'ik) cagiq (Cup'ik) cagir (Cup'ig) = halibut ( Hippoglossus stenolepis ). 
 Sea mammals [ edit ] 
 Marine mammals  or sea mammals ( imarpigmiutaq   sg   imarpigmiutaat   pl  in Yup'ik and Cup'ik,  imarpillar  in Cup'ig) are only fin-footed species, such as  seals  and  walruses . There are four species of seals in Alaska that are referred to as  ice seals  (or  ice associated seals ) because they use  sea ice  for some important life history events such as pupping, nursing, molting, and resting. This ice seals (ringed, bearded, spotted, and ribbon seals) are all used for subsistence by coastal Alaska Natives for food, oil, materials, clothing, and handicrafts. [30] 
 
 Bearded seal   Erignathus barbatus  ( maklak   sg   makliik   dual   makliit   pl  in Yup'ik and Cup'ik,  maklag  in Cup'ig) is the best-known species of the seals living in the all Eskimo (Yupik and Inuit) regions. For Yup'ik hunters, bearded seals were the seal of choice. Bearded seals were widely considered the best seal for meat. The blubber was rendered into oil. [31] 
 Ringed seal   Pusa hispida  or hair seal ( nayiq   sg   nayiik   dual   nayiit   pl  in Yup'ik and Cup'ik,  nayir  in Cup'ig), known as "winter seal" or "regular seal", is the only seals generally available throughout the region all winter. In terms of meat, ringed seals were generally second in preference to bearded seals. However, ringed seals were the first choice of many hunters for oil. [31] 
 Spotted seal   Phoca largha, Phoca vitulina largha  and/or  Harbor seal   Phoca vitulina  ( issuriq   sg   issurik   dual   issurit   pl  in Yup'ik and Cup'ik,  issuri  in Cup'ig) ... [31] 
 Ribbon seal   Histriophoca fasciata  ( qasruliq  in Yup'ik and Cup'ik,  qasruleg  in Cup'ig) was hunted only occasionally. Their meat is rich in blood and not a favored food, but some hunters liked the oil. [31] 
 Steller's sea lion   Eumetopias jubatus  ( uginaq   sg   uginak   dual   uginat   pl  in Yup'ik and Cup'ik,  apakcug  in Cup'ig) was not hunted or hunted only occasionally (at the present time). Sea lions are most common near the  St. Lawrence Island  Siberian Yupik communities of  Gambell  and  Savoonga . [31] 
 Walrus  or Pacific walrus  Odobenus rosmarus divergens  ( asveq   sg   asverek ~ asevrek   dual   asveret ~ asevret   pl  in Yup'ik  kaugpak  in Cup'ik,  kaugpag  in Cup'ig). Hunting of walrus and other marine mammals in western  Bristol Bay , including Round Island (Yup'ik  Qayaciq  literally "place to go in a kayak") as part of the  Walrus Islands State Game Sanctuary , by the native people (Yup’ik-speaking Tuyuryarmiut) of the  Togiak  area over the last 2,500 years is documented by archaeological and ethnohistorical evidence. Much of the walrus was used for food, including the hide, fat, muscle, tissue, flippers, head (including the brains) and various internal organs such as the heart, liver, kidneys, and lungs. [18] 
 Beluga whale  or white whale  Delphinapterus leucas  ( cetuaq, assigarnaq, qecip'atuli  in Yup'ik  cituaq  in Cup'ik,  cetuar  in Cup'ig) is used for human and dog food. Beluga harvested in spring are used primarily for human food, although some are used for dog food. Beluga harvests in the fall usually are lower than in spring. The late fall beluga hunts were used to produce food for the dogs. Parts of the beluga used for human food include the skin, fat, backstrap, and intestines. Backstrap meat is sometimes dried, and beluga skin is sometimes pickled. Beluga products are prepared a number of ways, such as boiling skin and meat (eaten hot or cold); flouring and frying or barbecuing backstraps; and processing fat into oil for use with dried fish and meat. Ways of preserving and using beluga products show local differences between communities and families. [19] 
 Land mammals [ edit ] 
 Terrestrial mammals  or land mammals ( nunarmiutaq   sg   nunarmiutaat   pl  in Yup'ik) are game animals and furbearers.
 
 Game animals  ( pitarkaq   sg   pitarkat   pl  in Yup'ik and Cup'ik,  pitarkar   sg   pitarkat   pl  in Cup'ig). Caribou, moose and "bears" are included in the definition of the word  pitarkat . 
 Caribou  or wild caribou  Rangifer tarandus granti  ( tuntu ,  tuntupik  or  tuntupiaq  in Yup'ik and Cup'ik,  tuntupig  in Cup'ig). Prior to European contact, caribou were important not only for their meat but for the skins which were an important item used in clothing. The Russians encouraged the Eskimos to adopt Western-style dress in order to release more furs for trading. [5]  The second most commonly received resources for Manokotak residents were caribou (%64.8 of households). Caribou meat was often made into jerky. The stomach contents such as sedges and other greens, were eaten. Virtually all of the edible parts of the animal was utilized. [10]  Caribou have been absent from Nunivak Island for at least 100 years, but many of the procedures for preparing the flesh of this animal also apply to the domestic reindeer. In earlier times, however, caribou livers were placed in the animal's stomach to ferment; this is no longer done. The lining of a reindeer stomach was cut up and eaten with dried fish or by itself. Lungs and kidneys were given to the dogs, but the heart was eaten. Neither caribou meat nor fish were ever pounded as a method of preservation. [7] 
 Reindeer  or (semi)domestic caribou  Rangifer tarandus tarandus  ( qusngiq  in Yup'ik and Cup'ik,  qusngir  in Cup'ig). The word  qusngiq  which is derived from the  Chukchee   qoraŋe  (ӄораӈы) or  Koryak   qoyaŋa  (ӄойаӈа). [6]  In Europe, use the terms "caribou" and "reindeer" synonymously, but in Alaska and Canada "reindeer" refers exclusively to semi-domesticated forms. [32]  Only in North America are wild  Rangifer  referred to as "caribou". In Eurasia, "reindeer" are classified as either domesticated or wild. [33]  Domestic reindeer ( Rangifer tarandus tarandus ) were introduced into Alaska 100 years ago and have been maintained as semidomestic livestock. They have had contact with wild caribou ( R. t. granti ) herds, including deliberate crossbreeding and mixing in the wild. Reindeer have considerable potential as a domestic animal for meat or velvet antler production, and wild caribou are important to subsistence and sport hunters. [34]  The  Bureau of Indian Affairs  (BIA) managed reindeer operations on the  Nunivak Island  beginning in 1940. The Nunivak herd is composed of about 4,000 reindeer. The southern half of Nunivak is a designated Wilderness area, which presents challenges in summertime herding, since use of motorized recreational vehicles is forbidden within the Wilderness area without adequate snow cover. [35] 
 Moose  or Alaska moose  Alces alces gigas  ( tuntuvak  in Yup'ik and Cup'ik,  tuntuwag  in Cup'ig, literally "big caribou"). The most commonly received resources for Manokotak residents were moose (%79.6 of households). Moose were not usually seen in the lower Kuskokwim River drainages until the early 1940s. [10]  Moose meat ( tuntuviim kemga ) was preserved by freezing and drying. Rarely was moose meat preserved by smoking or caning. Hunters who harvested moose at spring camps in the mountains preserved meat by cutting it into strips and hanging it on racks or bushes to dry in the sun, making  jerky . This jerky was eaten without further preparation, or it was boiled. Virtually all of the moose was used. Bones were cracked and the marrow was removed. Fat from the back and rump was cut into small pieces and eaten uncooked along with meals at home and when in the field. Part of the stomach was cleaned and prepared, and the heart, liver, and kidneys were also eaten. The whole head was usually kept so that the muscles, brain, tongue, and nose could be removed and cooked. The feet and hooves were also cooked and eaten. Moose was cooked in variety of ways including boiling, roasting, stewing, frying and in soups. [10] 
 Muskox   Ovibos moschatus  ( umingmar, maskar  in Nunivak Cup'ig). Alaska's original muskox were hunted to extinction in the mid-1800s – perhaps by whalers and others. They had originally ranged Alaska's arctic and western coastal tundra. In 1935–1936 the  U.S. Biological Survey  brought 31 muskoxen from  Greenland  to  Nunivak Island  in an effort to reestablish the species in Alaska and as a means for  subsistence  living. [36]  The first modern hunting season was in 1975. Today the Nunivak herd numbers around 600 animals, down from a high of around 700 animals in 1968. [37] 
 Brown bear  (grizzly)  Ursus arctos horribilis  ( taqukaq, carayak  Yup'ik and Cup'ik,  paugnar  in Cup'ig) and  Black bear   Ursus americanus  ( tan'gerliq  in Yup'ik and Cup'ik,  tungulzria  in Cup'ig) were harvested for food (meat and fat). Bear meat ( tan'gerlim kemga ) made into jerky was often dried over a couple of weeks time. The internal organs, such as heart, kidneys, and intestines were often distributed to elders. Both black and brown bear meat was considered very tasty and was prepared by drying, boiling, baking, and roasting. The bones were boiled so that all of the meat could easily be removed from them. The marrow was only occasionally used because the bones are very thick and not easily broken. The  liver  was considered to be too rich and was  not eaten . [10] 
 Furbearers  or fur-bearing animals ( melqulek   sg   melqulget   pl  in Yup'ik and Cup'ik,  melquleg  in Cup'ig) are commonly  trapped  for their pelts and meats. The meat of all types of furbearers (beaver, mink, otter, muskrat, marten, lynx), except for fox, wolf, and wolverine, was used for human food and was also used as dog food. [10] 
 Red fox   Vulpes vulpes  ( kaviaq  in Yup'ik and Cup'ik,  kavviar  in Cup'ig). The Nunivak Cup'ig practiced few restrictions with reference to food, but the flesh of the red fox was avoided since it was believed to cause a person to sleep during the day and be restless at night. This restriction did not apply to the flesh of the white fox. [7] 
 Arctic fox   Vulpes lagopus  ( uliiq  in Yup'ik and Cup'ik,  qaterlir  [white fox],  eqyerer  [blue fox]  illaassug  [cross fox] in Cup'ig) 
 Sea otter   Enhydra lutris  ( arrnaq  in Yup'ik and Cup'ik,  aatagar  in Cup'ig) 
 Land otter  or river otter  Lontra canadensis  ( cuignilnguq  in Yup'ik and Cup'ik,  cenkar, pirturcir(ar)  in Cup'ig) 
 American mink   Neogale vison  ( imarmiutaq  in Yup'ik and Cup'ik,  imarmiutar  in Cup'ig). Mink skin parkas, and also mink pants for small boys, formerly were made. [7] 
 Beringian  or  American  ermine   Mustela erminea ,  Mustela richardsonii  ( narullgiq  in Yup'ik and Cup'ik,  terriar(ar)  [in winter coloration]  narullgir  [in summer coloration] in Cup'ig) 
 Marten   Martes americana  ( qavcicuaq  in Yup'ik and Cup'ik) 
 Muskrat   Ondatra zibethicus  ( kanaqlak, tevyuli  in Yup'ik and Cup'ik,  kanaqlag  in Cup'ig) 
 Vole   Microtus miurus  (singing vole) and  Clethrionomys rutilus  (northern red-backed vole) ( avelngaq  in Yup'ik and Cup'ik) 
 Collared lemming  or Northern collared lemming  Dicrostonyx groenlandicus  ( qilagmiutaq  in Yup'ik and Cup'ik). Iñupiaq people do not eat lemmings [38] 
 Brown lemming  or Nunivak Island brown lemming  Lemmus trimucronatus harroldi  ( pugultu  in Cup'ig) 
 Beaver   Castor canadensis  ( paluqtaq  in Yup'ik and Cup'ik,  paluqtar  in Cup'ig) 
 Porcupine   Erethizon dorsatum  ( issaluuq, issaluq, cukilek, ilaanquciq, nuuniq ) were harvested primarily for food and were prepared much the same way that hare were prepared. [10] 
 Tree squirrel  or red squirrel  Tamiasciurus hudsonicus  ( qiguiq  in Yup'ik and Cup'ik) 
 Ground squirrel  or parky squirrel, parka squirrel  Spermophilus parryii  ( qanganaq  in Yup'ik and Cup'ik,  qanganar  in Cup'ig) were skinned and hung on meat drying racks to dry. [10] 
 Marmot  or hoary marmot  Marmota caligata  ( cikigpak  in Yup'ik and Cup'ik) were used similarly to parka squirrels. [10] 
 Hare   Lepus othus  ( qayuqeggliq  in Yup'ik and Cup'ik,  qayuqegglir  in Cup'ig) and  Rabbit   Lepus americanus  ( maqaruaq  in Yup'ik and Cup'ik,  maqaruar  in Cup'ig) can be prepared much like poultry meat: roasted, broiled, grilled, fried, and stewed. 
 Birds [ edit ] 
 Birds  ( tengmiaq   sg   tengmiak   dual   tengmiat   pl  or  yaqulek   sg   yaqulgek   dual   yaqulget   pl  in Yup'ik and Cup'ik,  tengmiar   sg   tengmiag   dual   tengmiat   pl  in Cup'ig)
 Eggs of some species were collected.
 Waterfowl were prepared in a variety of ways such as boiling, baking, and in soups. [10] 
 
 Common eider  or Pacific eider  Somateria mollissima  ( metraq  in Yup'ik and Cup'ik,  angiikvak  in northern Yup'ik dialects,  metr(ar), nanwista ,  metrapig  ♀  tunupista  ♂ in Cup'ig) 
 King eider   Somateria mollissima  ( qengallek  in Yup'ik and Cup'ik,  qengalleg  in Cup'ig). 
 Steller's eider   Polysticta stelleri  ( anarnissakaq  [Yukon],  caqiar(aq)  [Kuskokwim] in Yup'ik,  qaciar(ar)  in Cup'ig) 
 Oldsquaw  or long-tailed duck  Clangula hyemalis  ( allgiar(aq)  [Kuskokwim],  allgiar  [Bristol Bay],  aliaaliq  [Unaliq-Pastuliq],  aarraaliq ,  aarraangiiq  [Kuskokwim] in Yup'ik,  aarraangiiraq, aarrangyaraq  in Cup'ik,  aarrangiir  in Cup'ig). 
 Swan  or tundra swan, whistling swan  Cygnus columbianus columbianus  ( qugyuk  in Yup'ik and Cup'ik,  qugsuk  [Unaliq-Pastuliq],  caqulegpak  [Egegik],  qugyug  in Cup'ig) 
 Sandhill crane   Grus canadensis  ( qucillgaq  in Yup'ik and Cup'ik,  qucilkuryug  in Cup'ig). 
 Ptarmigan  were preserved by freezing or drying after being plucked or skinned. Once dried, the birds commonly were eaten without any other preparation. As with many dried foods, seal oil a frequent to dried ptarmigan. Ptarmigan were also cooked by boiling and were often the basis for soups. [10] 
   Horned puffins  on a Nunivak Island sea cliff, August 2008 
 Common murre  or common guillemot  Uria aalge  ( alpa ~ alpaq  in Yup'ik and Cup'ik,  alpa  in Cup'ig) 
 Pigeon guillemot   Cepphus columba  ( ciguraq  in Yup'ik and Cup'ik,  cigurer  in Cup'ig) 
 Crested auklet   Aethia cristatella  ( cip'lagar, cukilpag  in Cup'ig) 
 Horned puffin   Fratercula corniculata  ( qilangaq, qengacuar(aq)  in Yup'ik and Cup'ik,  qilangar, tunngar  in Cup'ig) 
 Black-legged kittiwake   Rissa tridactyla  ( naruyacuaq  in Yup'ik and Cup'ik,  tengaurta, tengauqsarar(ar), qarliar(ar)  in Cup'ig) 
 Pelagic cormorant   Phalacrocorax pelagicus  ( uyalek  in Yup'ik and Cup'ik,  uyaleg  in Cup'ig) 
 Snowy owl   Bubo scandiacus  ( anipa ~ anipaq  in Yup'ik and Cup'ik,  anipar  in Cup'ig) 
 Plants [ edit ] 
 Berries  and edible plants supplemented meals consisting mostly of fish and game. Plants foods also provided a variety of essential vitamins and nutrients to the diet. Berries were preserved by freezing. The most popular use berries was when making akutaq, a whipped mixture of the berries, sugar, and shortening or fat. Households also made jam, jellies, and breads from berries. [10]  Sourdock leaves were prepared by boiling, like spinach. [10]  Labrador tea was boiled to make tea and was consumed much like commercial teas. [10]  Green spruce needles were also used for tea. [10] 
 Chuathbaluk and Sleetmute residents have harvested green plants both historically and presently for food, medicine, and ceremonial purposes. Greens are most commonly harvested and processed by females, although males and children may also participate in harvest activities. Most green plants are gathered close to the winter village and fish campsites or in the course of local boat travel. Greens are generally harvested by one or two females together during short morning or afternoon excursions for use by their household group. Formal organized gathering activities take place for the purpose of harvesting berries. [20] 
 Famine foods :  reindeer lichen  ( tuntut neqait ) was soaked in seal oil or mixed with cranberries to make it taste better. [39] 
 Indigenous plants were an integral part of the year-round diet of Eskimo people in addition to their incorporation in other facets of their life. Contrary to the popular perception of Eskimo people surviving solely on fish and meat, the Nunivak Cup'ig utilized a large number of local plants for food, medicinal, and utilitarian purposes. [40] 
 On Nunivak, most indigenous plants were traditionally gathered by women and children when the men were harvesting other available resources (e.g., caribou, waterfowl, seal). While fresh spring greens provided a welcome addition to the diet, which in winter was based largely on dried and stored foods, other greens were harvested throughout the year as they ripened, and used with some of those stored for winter use. With the melting of the island's snow pack, local greens and berries not picked during the previous fall's harvest, begin to appear and were added to the local diet. Depending on the time the ice pack began to break up, Cup'ig families would leave their winter villages and move to spring seal camps. Cup'ig men would journey out along the ice to harvest arriving sea mammals (i.e., seals, walrus) while the women would spend much of their time harvesting available plant resources (greens and seaweeds) and shellfish. Early spring plants included:  marsh marigold  ( Caltha palustris ),  sour dock  ( Rumex arcticus ),  wild celery  ( Angelica lucida ),  wild lettuce  ( Draba borealis  or  D. hyperborea ),  wild parsnip  ( Ligusticum hultonii ),  wild rhubarb  ( Polygonum viviparum ),  mountain sorrel  ( Oxyria digylla ),  Pallas buttercup  ( Ranunculus pallasii ), and  Labrador tea  ( Ledum pallustre decumbens ). [40] 
 After the completion of the hunting season, families would move to summer fish camps. Fish were the most prolific and essential subsistence resource for many Alaskan Natives living in the Yukon-Kuskokwim Delta region and its harvest would occupy the majority of the families' efforts for several months. Traditional plants would continue to be harvested as they ripened and. were eaten fresh or placed in underground caches for temporary storage. By late summer/early fall, several berry species (e.g., Rubus chamaemorus, R. arcticus, Empetrum nigrum) and local greens (c.g., Rumex arcticus) were ready to be harvested and women and children would spend most days on the tundra gathering plant resources. [40] 
 Most plants were available in a variety of locales and their harvest did not dictate moving the family to specific camps. Plants that grew in abundance in specific terrain, such as several varieties of cliff greens, usually offered other resources that could be harvested at the same time (e.g., fish, Sandhill cranes). Greens such as Rumex arcticus (sour dock) could be found throughout the island and all old camp sites are said to contain buried cache pits once used for plant storage. [40] 
 Before placing the "wild spinach" or sour dock in the caches, the cooked leaves would be drained of juice and the pit lined with woven grass mats. Berries were stored in much the same way, except that these pits would be lined with rocks. The berries would have no juice when removed, since they would have dried out while being stored underground. In the fall, people would return to their seasonal caches and transport their stored berries and greens to their winter village. [40] 
 
 See also [ edit ] 
 
 
 Food portal 
 
 Inuit diet  of Canada 
 Greenlandic cuisine  of Greenland 
 Native American cuisine  includes all food practices of the  indigenous peoples of the Americas  such as Native Americans and Alaska Natives. 
 Pacific Northwest cuisine  is a North American cuisine of the states of Oregon, Washington and Alaska, as well as British Columbia and the southern Yukon. 
 References [ edit ] 
 
 
 ^   Zona Spray Starks (2007), " Arctic foodways and contemporary cuisine ".  Gastronomica: the journal of food and culture  7(1): 41–49. 
 
 ^   Steven A. Jacobson 1984,  Central Yup'ik and the schools; a handbook for teachers . Alaska Department of Education, Bilingual/Bicultural Education Programs, Juneau, Alaska. 
 
 ^   Zona Spray Starks (2000?), " Memories of a vanishing Eskimo cuisine ". In Harlan Walker (ed.),  Food and the Memory: Proceedings of the Oxford Symposium on Food and Cookery 2000 . Prospect Books 2001. 
 
 ^  a   b   c   Yuungnaqpiallerput :  Neqkiuryaraq Neqnek-llu Qemagciyaraq = Food preparation and storage 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   e   f   g   h   i   Janet Schichnes and Molly Chythlook (1988),  Use of fish and wildlife in Manokotak, Alaska . Technical Paper No. 152, Alaska Department of Fish and Game, Division of Subsistence, Dillingham, Alaska, December 1988. 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   e   f   g   h   i   j   k   l   m   n   o   p   q   r   s   t   u   v   w   x   y   z   aa   ab   ac   ad   ae   af   ag   ah   ai   aj   ak   al   am   an   ao   ap   aq   ar   as   at   au   av   aw   ax   ay   Jacobson, Steven A. (2012).  Yup'ik Eskimo Dictionary, 2nd edition . Alaska Native Language Center. 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   e   James W. VanStone (1989),  Nunivak Island Eskimo (Yuit) technology and material culture . Chicago: Field Museum of Natural History, 1989. Fieldiana, Anthropology, New Series, No. 12. 108 p. 
 
 ^   Ann Fienup-Riordan and Alice Rearden (2005).  Wise Words of the Yup'ik People: We Talk to You Because We Love You . University of Nebraska Press. 
 
 ^  a   b   c   Nuniwarmiut Piciryarata Tamaryalkuti : Nunivak Island Cup'ig Language Preliminary Dictionary 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   e   f   g   h   i   j   k   l   m   n   o   p   q   r   s   t   u   v   w   x   y   z   aa   ab   ac   ad   ae   af   ag   ah   ai   Michael W. Coffing (1991),  Kwethluk subsistence: Contemporary land use patterns, wild resource harvest and use, and the subsistence economy of a Lower Kuskokwim River area community . Technical Paper No. 157, Alaska Department of Fish and Game, Division of Subsistence, Juneau, Alaska, December, 1991. 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   e   f   g   h   i   j   k   James A. Fall, Molly Chythlook, Janet C. Schichnes, and Judith M. Morris (1996),  An overview of the harvest and use of freshwater fish by the communities of the Bristol Bay Region, Southwest Alaska . Technical Paper No. 166, Alaska Department of Fish and Game, Division of Subsistence, Juneau, Alaska, July 1996. 
 
 ^   Judith M. Morris (1985),  The use of fish and wildlife resources by residents of the Bristol Bay Borough, Alaska . Technical Paper No. 123, Alaska Department of Fish and Game, Division of Subsistence, Juneau, Alaska, December 1985. 
 
 ^   Jody Seitz (1990) Subsistence salmon fishing in Nushagak Bay, Southwest Alaska , Technical Paper No. 195, Alaska Department of Fish and Game, Division of Subsistence, Juneau, Alaska, December 1990. 
 
 ^   Angayuqaq Oscar Kawagley , Delena Norris-Tull, and Roger A. Norris-Tull (1998),  The indigenous worldview of Yupiaq culture: its scientific nature and relevance to the practice and teaching of science .  Journal of Research in Science Teaching  Vol. 35, #2 
 
 ^  a   b   c   John Pingayak (1998),  The Cup'ik People of the Western Tundra: A Curriculum . University of Alaska Anchorage, Institute of Social and Economic Research (ISER); Kashunamiut School District, Chevak, AK. Also,  Alaskool.org 
 
 ^  a   b   John M. Wright and Molly B. Chythlook (1985),  Subsistence harvest of herring spawn-on-kelp in the Togiak District of Bristol Bay . Technical Paper No. 116, Alaska Departement of Fish and Game, Division of Subsistence, Juneau, Alaska, March 1985. 
 
 ^  a   b   Mary C. Pete and Ronald E. Kreher (1986),  Subsistence herring fishing in the Nelson Island District 1986 . Technical Paper No. 144, Alaska Departement of Fish and Game, Division of Subsistence, Bethel, Alaska, December 1986. 
 
 ^  a   b   James A. Fall, Molly Chythlook, Janet Schichnes, and Rick Sinnott (1991),  Walrus Hunting at Togiak, Bristol Bay, Southwest Alaska , Technical Paper No. 212, Alaska Department of Fish and Game, Division of Subsistence, Juneau, Alaska, October 1991 
 
 ^  a   b   c   Molly Chythlook & Philippe Coiley (1994),  The Subsistence Use of Beluga Whale in Bristol Bay by Alaska Native, 1993 . Technical Paper No. 231, Alaska Departement of Fish and Game, Division of Subsistence, Juneau, Alaska, July 1994 
 
 ^  a   b   Susan Charnley (1984),  Human Ecology of Two Central Kuskokwim Communities: Chuathbaluk and Sleetmute , Technical Paper No. 81, Alaska Department of Fish and Game, Division of Subsistence, Juneau, Alaska, December 1984. 
 
 ^   James H. Barker (2010),  Yup’ik Dancing Is Like Akutaq: A Rich Mixture . Fairbanks : University of Alaska Press. 
 
 ^   Jim Crotty (1997),  How to Talk American: A Guide to Our Native Tongues 
 
 ^  a   b   Contaminants in subsistence foods from the western Alaska coastal region . Samples collected in 2004 for the Alaska Traditional Diet Project. Prepared by the Alaska Department of Health and Social Services. July 19, 2011. 
 
 ^   Bjerregaard, Peter; Young, T. Kue; Hegele, Robert A. (2003-02-01). "Low incidence of cardiovascular disease among the Inuit—what is the evidence?".  Atherosclerosis .  166  (2): 351–357.  doi : 10.1016/s0021-9150(02)00364-7 .  ISSN   0021-9150 .  PMID   12535749 . 
 
 ^   Zeina Makhoul, Alan R Kristal, Roman Gulati, Bret Luick, Andrea Bersamin,  Bert Boyer , and Gerald V Mohatt (2010),  "Associations of very high intakes of eicosapentaenoic and docosahexaenoic acids with biomarkers of chronic disease risk among Yup'ik Eskimos."   The american journal of Clinical Nutrition  91:777–785 
 
 ^   Bert B. Boyer, Gerald V. Mohatt, Rosemarie Plaetke, Johanna Herron, Kimber L. Stanhope, Charles Stephensen, Peter J. Havel, and CANHR Project Team (2007),  "Metabolic syndrome in Yup'ik Eskimos: The Center for Alaska Native Health Research (CANHR) Study" .  Obesity  15:2535–2540. 
 
 ^   Michael J. Wilkinson, Youlim Yai, and Diane M. O’Brien (2007), " Age-related variation in red blood cell stable isotope ratios (δ 13 C and δ 15 N) from two Yupik villages in Southwest Alaska : a pilot study ".  International Journal of Circumpolar Health  66(1):31–41. 
 
 ^   Susan W. Fair (1997), "Story, storage, and symbol: functional cache architecture, cache narratives, and roadside attractions". In  Perspectives in Vernacular Architecture VII , edited by AnneMarie Adams and Sally McMurray, pp. 167–182. Nashville University of Tennessee Press.  JSTOR 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   Marie Lowe (2007),  Socioeconomic Review of Alaska's Bristol Bay Region . Prepared for North Star Group. Institute of Social and Economic Research, University of Alaska Anchorage. 
 
 ^   Alaska Department of Fish and Game :  Ice Seal Research 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   e   Susan Georgette, Michael Coffing, Cheryl Scott, and Charles Utermohle (1998),  The Subsistence Harvest of Seals and Sea Lions by Alaska Natives in the Norton Sound-Bering Strait Region, Alaska, 1996–97 . Technical Paper No. 242, Alaska Department of Fish and Game, Division of Subsistence, Juneau, Alaska, April 1998 
 
 ^   Alaska Department of Fish and Game  Caribou ( Rangifer tarandus granti )  2005-5-23. Retrieved on November 15, 2014. 
 
 ^   University of Alaska Fairbanks (UAF) : Reindeer … Caribou … What’s the Difference? 
 
 ^   M. A. Cronin, L. Renecker, B. J. Pierson, and J. C. Patton (1995), "Genetic variation in domestic reindeer and wild caribou in Alaska".  Animal Genetics  26 (6): 427–34, December 1995 
 
 ^   Marian Romano and Melanie Trost (2003),  Mt. McKinley Meat & Sausage Company, Review & Recommendations , final report, State of Alaska, Department of Natural Resources, Division of Agriculture. December 1, 2003. 
 
 ^   "Muskox (Ovibos moschatus), US Fish & Wildlife Service" . Fws.gov . Retrieved  2011-11-09 . 
 
 ^   Chuck Eisenhower,  Nunivak musk ox with bow and arrow 
 
 ^   Honoring Alaska's Indigenous Literature 
 
 ^   Jernigan, Kevin (Editor in Chief),  A Guide to the Ethnobotany of the Yukon-Kuskokwim Region . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   e   Dennis Griffin (2001),  Contributions to the Ethnobotany of the Cup'it Eskimo, Nunivak Island, Alaska .  Journal of Ethnobiology  21(2): 91–127 Winter 2001 
 
 
 External links [ edit ] 
 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons has media related to  Inuit food . 
 
 v t e Human nutrition  and  healthy diets 
 Main articles 
 Diet 
 Cuisine 
 Dietitian 
 Hunger 
 Leptin 
 Meal 
 Nutrition 
 Obesity 
 Staple food 
 Dieting Basic types 
 Omnivore 
 Plant-based 
 Regional diets 
 Western 
 Mediterranean 
 Sustainable diets 
 Low carbon 
 Planetary health 
 Religious diets 
 Buddhist 
 Christian 
 Hindu 
 Islamic 
 Jain 
 Jewish 
 Rastafari 
 Sikh 
 Vegetarianism and  veganism 
 Fruitarianism 
 Meat analogue 
 Milk substitute 
 Raw vegan 
 Tofu 
 Semi-vegetarianism 
 Ovo-lacto vegetarianism 
 Pescetarian 
 Pollotarian 
 Supplement diets 
 Bodybuilding supplements 
 Meal replacement 
 Therapeutic food 
 Non-solid diets 
 Liquid diets 
 Very-low-calorie diet 
 Specific  restrictions 
 Calorie restriction 
 Cardiac diet 
 Diabetic diet 
 Fluid restriction diet 
 Gluten-free 
 Gluten-free and casein-free 
 Intermittent fasting 
 Low-sodium 
 Low-FODMAP 
 Low-carbohydrate 
 Low-fat 
 Low-fiber/low-residue diet 
 Monotrophic diet 
 NPO 
 Renal diet 
 Soft diet 
 Specific carbohydrate 
 Other diets 
 Entomophagy 
 Cotton ball 
 Pica 
 DASH 
 Inuit 
 MIND 
 Time-restricted feeding 
 Raw foodism 
 U.S. military 
 Fad diets 
 Cambridge 
 Macrobiotic 
 Master Cleanse 
 Junk food 
 Superfood 
 Slow-Carb 
 List of diets 
 Diet food 
 Nutrition Amino acids 
 Alanine 
 Arginine 
 Asparagine 
 Aspartic acid 
 Cysteine 
 Glutamic acid 
 Glutamine 
 Glycine 
 Histidine 
 Isoleucine 
 Leucine 
 Lysine 
 Methionine 
 Phenylalanine 
 Proline 
 Selenocysteine 
 Serine 
 Threonine 
 Tryptophan 
 Tyrosine 
 Valine 
 Vitamins 
 Vitamin A 
 Vitamin B 1 
 Vitamin B 2 
 Vitamin B 3 
 Vitamin B 5 
 Vitamin B 6 
 Vitamin B 7 
 Vitamin B 9 
 Vitamin B 12 
 Vitamin C 
 Vitamin D 
 Vitamin E 
 Vitamin K 
 Minerals 
 Calcium 
 Chlorine 
 Chromium 
 Cobalt 
 Copper 
 Iodine 
 Iron 
 Magnesium 
 Manganese 
 Molybdenum 
 Nickel 
 Phosphorus 
 Potassium 
 Selenium 
 Sodium 
 Vanadium 
 Zinc 
 Nutritional  advice 
 5 A Day 
 Dairy Council of California 
 Food pyramid 
 Fruits & Veggies – More Matters 
 Healthy eating pyramid 
 Latin American Diet Pyramid 
 French paradox 
 Mediterranean Diet Pyramid 
 MyPlate 
 MyPyramid 
 Vegetarian Diet Pyramid 
 
   Category 
   Commons 
   Cookbook 
   Food portal,   Health and fitness portal 
 
 v t e Cuisines Continental 
 African 
 North 
 West 
 list 
 Americas 
 Caribbean 
 North 
 South 
 list 
 Asian 
 Caucasian 
 Central 
 Indian subcontinent 
 Levantine 
 list 
 European 
 Balkan 
 Central 
 Eastern 
 list 
 Oceanic 
 Intercontinental
 Global 
 Latin American 
 Mediterranean 
 Middle Eastern 
 National  and regional 
 Afghan 
 Albanian 
 Algerian 
 American 
 Californian 
 Floribbean 
 Hawaiian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Lowcountry (South Carolina) 
 New England 
 New Mexico 
 Pacific Northwest 
 Pennsylvania Dutch 
 Puerto Rican 
 Southern US 
 Southwest US 
 Texas 
 Angolan 
 Argentine 
 Armenian 
 Australian 
 Austrian 
 Azerbaijani 
 Bahraini 
 Bangladeshi 
 Barbadian 
 Belarusian 
 Belgian 
 Belizean 
 Beninese 
 Bhutanese 
 Bolivian 
 Bosnian-Herzegovinian 
 Botswana 
 Brazilian 
 British 
 Channel Islands 
 English 
 Gibraltarian 
 Northern Irish 
 Saint Helena 
 Scottish 
 Welsh 
 Bruneian 
 Bulgarian 
 Burkinabé 
 Burmese 
 Burundian 
 Cambodian 
 Cameroonian 
 Canadian 
 Acadian 
 Québécois 
 Central African Republic 
 Chadian 
 Chilean 
 Chinese 
 Cantonese 
 Hong Kong 
 Macanese 
 Tibetan 
 Xinjiang 
 Colombian 
 Congolese 
 Corsican 
 Croatian 
 Cuban 
 Cypriot 
 Czech 
 Danish 
 Faroese 
 Greenlandic 
 Djiboutian 
 Dominican 
 Dominican Republic 
 Dutch 
 East Timorese 
 Ecuadorian 
 Egyptian 
 Emirati 
 Equatorial Guinean 
 Eritrean 
 Estonian 
 Ethiopian 
 Fijian 
 Filipino 
 Finnish 
 French 
 Occitan 
 French Guianan 
 Gabonese 
 Gambian 
 Georgian 
 German 
 Ghanaian 
 Greek 
 Cretan 
 Epirotic 
 Greek Macedonian 
 Heptanesean 
 Guatemalan 
 Guinea-Bissauan 
 Guinean 
 Haitian 
 Honduran 
 Hungarian 
 Icelandic 
 Indian 
 Arunachalese 
 Assamese 
 Bengali 
 Bihari 
 Goan 
 Gujarati 
 Himachal Pradesh 
 Kashmiri 
 Jharkhandi 
 Karnataka 
 Kerala 
 Maharashtrian 
 Manipuri 
 Meghalayan 
 Mizo 
 Naga 
 Odia 
 Punjabi 
 Rajasthani 
 Sikkimese 
 Sindhi 
 Tamil 
 Telangana 
 Telugu 
 Indonesian 
 Acehnese 
 Balinese 
 Banjar 
 Batak 
 Betawi 
 Indo 
 Javanese 
 Madurese 
 Makassar 
 Minahasan 
 Minangkabau 
 Palembangese 
 Sundanese 
 Iranian 
 Iraqi 
 Irish 
 Israeli 
 Italian 
 Abruzzese 
 Ligurian 
 Lombard 
 Lucanian 
 Neapolitan 
 Roman 
 Sardinian 
 Sicilian 
 Venetian 
 Ivorian 
 Jamaican 
 Japanese 
 Okinawan 
 Jordanian 
 Kazakh 
 Kenyan 
 Korean 
 North Korean 
 South Korean 
 Kosovan 
 Kuwaiti 
 Kyrgyz 
 Lao 
 Latvian 
 Lebanese 
 Lesotho 
 Liberian 
 Libyan 
 Liechtensteiner 
 Lithuanian 
 Luxembourg 
 Macedonian 
 Malagasy 
 Malawian 
 Malaysian 
 Sabahan 
 Sarawakian 
 Maldivian 
 Malian 
 Maltese 
 Mauritanian 
 Mauritian 
 Mexican 
 Moldovan 
 Monégasque 
 Mongolian 
 Montenegrin 
 Moroccan 
 Mozambican 
 Namibian 
 Nauruan 
 Nepalese 
 New Zealand 
 Nicaraguan 
 Niger 
 Nigerian 
 Niuean 
 Norwegian 
 Omani 
 Pakistani 
 Palestinian 
 Panamanian 
 Peruvian 
 Polish 
 Portuguese 
 Qatari 
 Romanian  (incl.  Transylvanian Saxon ) 
 Russian 
 Bashkir 
 Chechen 
 Circassian 
 Komi 
 Mordovian 
 Sakha 
 Tatar 
 Udmurt 
 Yamal 
 Rwandan 
 Saint Lucian 
 Salvadoran 
 Sammarinese 
 São Tomé and Príncipe 
 Saudi Arabian 
 Senegalese 
 Serbian 
 Seychellois 
 Sierra Leonean 
 Singaporean 
 Slovak 
 Slovenian 
 Somali 
 South African 
 Spanish 
 Andalusian 
 Asturian 
 Balearic 
 Basque 
 Canarian 
 Cantabrian 
 Catalan 
 Extremaduran 
 Galician 
 Manchegan 
 Valencian 
 Sri Lankan 
 Sudanese 
 Swazi 
 Swedish 
 Swiss 
 Syrian 
 Taiwanese 
 Tajik 
 Tanzanian 
 Zanzibari 
 Thai 
 Togolese 
 Tunisian 
 Turkish 
 Turkmen 
 Trinidadian and Tobagonian 
 Ugandan 
 Ukrainian 
 Uruguayan 
 Uzbek 
 Venezuelan 
 Vietnamese 
 Western Saharan 
 Yemeni 
 Zambian 
 Zimbabwean 
 Ethnic 
 Ainu 
 Arab 
 Indonesian 
 Aromanian 
 Assyrian 
 Balochi 
 Berber 
 Cajun 
 Chinese 
 American 
 Canadian 
 Chifa 
 Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Crimean Tatar 
 Greek American 
 Hazaragi 
 Indian 
 Anglo-Indian 
 Indonesian 
 Malaysian 
 Indigenous American 
 Inuit 
 Italian American 
 Kurdish 
 Livonian 
 Louisiana Creole 
 Malay 
 Ossetian 
 Parsi 
 Pashtun 
 Peranakan 
 Romani 
 Sámi 
 Soul food 
 Sylheti 
 Transylvanian Saxon 
 Yup'ik 
 Religious 
 Buddhist 
 Christian 
 Goan Catholic 
 Mangalorean Catholic 
 Mennonite 
 Hindu 
 Islamic 
 Chinese 
 Ital 
 Jain 
 Jewish 
 American 
 Ashkenazi 
 Bukharan 
 Ethiopian 
 Mizrahi 
 Sephardic 
 Syrian 
 Ritual slaughter 
 Sikh 
 Historical 
 Ancient Egyptian 
 Ancient Greek 
 Ancient Israelite 
 Ancient Roman 
 Antebellum America 
 Aztec 
 Byzantine 
 Early modern European 
 Historical Chinese 
 Historical Indian subcontinent 
 Historical North Indian and Pakistani 
 History of agriculture 
 History of alcoholic drinks 
 History of bread 
 History of seafood 
 History of vegetarianism 
 Historical Argentine 
 Historical Japanese 
 Inca 
 Mayan 
 Muisca 
 Mughal 
 Medieval 
 Ottoman 
 Peasant 
 Soviet 
 Thirteen Colonies 
 Styles 
 Classique 
 Fast food 
 Fusion 
 New American 
 Eurasian 
 Haute 
 Molecular gastronomy 
 Note by Note 
 Nouvelle 
 Lists 
 List of cuisines 
 List of historical cuisines 
 Lists of prepared foods 
 Related 
 Cookbook 
 Cooking 
 Culinary arts 
 Drink 
 Food 
 history 
 Diet 
 Meal preparation 
 
   Food portal 
   Drink portal 
   Category 
   Commons 
   Cookbook 
   WikiProject 
   Outline 
 
  
NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw2316
Cached time: 20230310194534
Cache expiry: 1814400
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc, no‐toc‐conversion]
CPU time usage: 0.805 seconds
Real time usage: 0.990 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3575/1000000
Post‐expand include size: 122822/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 4921/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 7/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 74359/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.330/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 22099044/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/400
 
 
Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  622.594      1 -total
 19.15%  119.238      7 Template:Lang
 19.11%  118.950      4 Template:Navbox
 17.51%  109.046      1 Template:Reflist
 14.98%   93.252      1 Template:Diets
 11.37%   70.780      1 Template:Cite_journal
  9.01%   56.081      1 Template:Commons_category
  8.74%   54.440      1 Template:Short_description
  8.60%   53.538      1 Template:Sister_project
  8.34%   51.928      1 Template:Side_box
 
  Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:idhash:53558330-0!canonical and timestamp 20230310194533 and revision id 1125652844. Rendering was triggered because: page-view
  
 esi <esi:include src="/esitest-fa8a495983347898/content" />  
 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Yup%27ik_cuisine&oldid=1125652844 " 
 Categories :  Diets Inuit cuisine Indigenous cuisine of the Americas Siberian cuisine Yupik culture Cuisine by ethnicity Hidden categories:  Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Pages with non-English text lacking appropriate markup and no ISO hint Pages with non-English text lacking appropriate markup from October 2021 Articles containing Inupiaq-language text Commons category link is locally defined 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  This page was last edited on 5 December 2022, at 03:57  (UTC) . 
 Text is available under the  Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0 ;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the  Terms of Use  and  Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the  Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. 
 
 
 Privacy policy 
 About Wikipedia 
 Disclaimers 
 Contact Wikipedia 
 Mobile view 
 Developers 
 Statistics 
 Cookie statement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
