
 
 
 Jump to content 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle sidebar 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Create account Log in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Personal tools 
 
 
 
 
   Create account   Log in 
 
 
 
 
		Pages for logged out editors  learn more 
 
 
 Contributions Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Navigation 
 
 
 Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate 
 
 
 
 
 Contribute 
 
 
 Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file 
 
 
 
 
 Tools 
 
 
 What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item 
 
 
 
 
 Print/export 
 
 
 Download as PDF Printable version 
 
 
 
 
 In other projects 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons Wikinews Wikiquote Wikivoyage 
 
 
 
 
 Languages 
 
 On this Wikipedia the language links are at the top of the page across from the article title.  Go to top . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CentralNotice  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Contents 
 move to sidebar 
 hide 
 
 
 
 
 (Top) 
 
 
 
 
 
 1 Etymology 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 History 
 
 
				Toggle History subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 2.1 Pre-colonial era 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.2 Colonial era and Rhodesia (1888–1964) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.3 Declaration of independence and civil war (1965–1980) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.4 Independence era (1980–present) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 Geography 
 
 
				Toggle Geography subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 3.1 Geology 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.2 Climate 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.3 Biodiversity 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.4 Environmental issues 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4 Government 
 
 
				Toggle Government subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 4.1 Politics 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.2 Armed forces 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.3 Human rights 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.4 Administrative divisions 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5 Sanctions 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6 Economy 
 
 
				Toggle Economy subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 6.1 Minerals 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6.2 Agriculture 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6.3 Tourism 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6.4 Water supply and sanitation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6.5 Science and technology 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 7 Demographics 
 
 
				Toggle Demographics subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 7.1 Ethnic groups 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 7.2 Largest cities 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 7.3 Languages 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 7.4 Religion 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 7.5 Health 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 7.6 Education 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 7.7 Gender equality 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8 Culture 
 
 
				Toggle Culture subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 8.1 Arts 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8.2 Cuisine 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8.3 Sports 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8.4 Media 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8.5 National symbols 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 9 See also 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 10 References 
 
 
				Toggle References subsection
			 
 
 
 
 
 10.1 Citations 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 10.2 Sources 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 11 Further reading 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 12 External links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
						Toggle the table of contents
					 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle the table of contents 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Zimbabwe 
 
 
 
 
 243 languages 
 
 
 
 Afrikaans Alemannisch አማርኛ Anarâškielâ Ænglisc Аԥсшәа العربية Aragonés Արեւմտահայերէն Arpetan Asturianu Avañe'ẽ Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه Basa Bali Bamanankan বাংলা Banjar Bân-lâm-gú Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) भोजपुरी Bikol Central Bislama Български Boarisch བོད་ཡིག Bosanski Brezhoneg Буряад Català Чӑвашла Cebuano Čeština Chavacano de Zamboanga Chi-Chewa ChiShona Corsu Cymraeg Dagbanli Dansk الدارجة Davvisámegiella Deitsch Deutsch ދިވެހިބަސް Diné bizaad Dolnoserbski डोटेली ཇོང་ཁ Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Estremeñu Euskara Eʋegbe Farefare فارسی Fiji Hindi Føroyskt Français Frysk Fulfulde Gaeilge Gaelg Gagauz Gàidhlig Galego Gĩkũyũ ગુજરાતી 客家語/Hak-kâ-ngî Хальмг 한국어 Hausa Հայերեն हिन्दी Hornjoserbsce Hrvatski Ido Igbo Ilokano বিষ্ণুপ্রিয়া মণিপুরী Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Interlingue Ирон IsiXhosa IsiZulu Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa Kabɩyɛ ಕನ್ನಡ Kapampangan ქართული Kaszëbsczi Қазақша Kernowek Ikinyarwanda Kiswahili Kongo Kotava Kreyòl ayisyen Kriyòl gwiyannen Kurdî Кыргызча Кырык мары Ladin Latgaļu Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Лезги Lietuvių Ligure Limburgs Lingála Lingua Franca Nova Livvinkarjala La .lojban. Luganda Lombard Magyar Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം Malti Māori मराठी მარგალური مصرى مازِرونی Bahasa Melayu ꯃꯤꯇꯩ ꯂꯣꯟ Minangkabau 閩東語 / Mìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄ Мокшень Монгол မြန်မာဘာသာ Nāhuatl Naijá Dorerin Naoero Nederlands नेपाली नेपाल भाषा 日本語 Нохчийн Nordfriisk Norfuk / Pitkern Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Novial Occitan Oromoo Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ पालि Pangcah پنجابی Papiamentu پښتو Patois ភាសាខ្មែរ Picard Piemontèis Plattdüütsch Polski Português Qaraqalpaqsha Qırımtatarca Ripoarisch Română Runa Simi Русиньскый Русский Саха тыла Sakizaya Gagana Samoa संस्कृतम् Sängö Sardu Scots Seediq Seeltersk Sesotho Sesotho sa Leboa Setswana Shqip Sicilianu සිංහල Simple English سنڌي SiSwati Slovenčina Slovenščina Ślůnski Soomaaliga کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Taqbaylit Татарча / tatarça ၽႃႇသႃႇတႆး  తెలుగు ไทย ትግርኛ Тоҷикӣ Tsetsêhestâhese Tshivenda ತುಳು Türkçe Türkmençe Tyap Удмурт Українська اردو ئۇيغۇرچە / Uyghurche Vahcuengh Vèneto Vepsän kel’ Tiếng Việt Volapük Võro 文言 Winaray Wolof 吴语 Xitsonga ייִדיש Yorùbá 粵語 Zazaki Zeêuws Žemaitėška 中文 
 Edit links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Article Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 English 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 More 
 
 
 
 Read Edit View history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
 
 (Redirected from  Zimbabwean cuisine ) 
 
 This is the  latest accepted revision ,  reviewed  on  9 March 2023 . 
 
 
 
 Country in Southern Africa 
 "ZWE" redirects here. For other uses, see  Zimbabwe (disambiguation)  and  ZWE (disambiguation) . 
 
 Coordinates :  19°S   30°E ﻿ / ﻿ 19°S 30°E ﻿ /  -19; 30 
 
 Republic of Zimbabwe 
 15 other official names [1] 
   Shona : Nyika yeZimbabwe Ndebele : Ilizwe leZimbabwe Chewa : Dziko la Zimbabwe Chibarwe : Nyika ye Zimbabwe Kalanga : Hango yeZimbabwe Khoisan : Zimbabwe Nù Nambya : Inyika yeZimbabwe Ndau : Nyika yeZimbabwe Shangani : Tiko ra Zimbabwe Sesotho : Naha ya Zimbabwe Tonga : Cisi ca Zimbabwe Venda : Shango ḽa Zimbabwe Xhosa : Ilizwe lase-Zimbabwe 
 
 
 
 
 Flag 
 
 
 
  Coat of arms 
 
 Motto:  "Unity, Freedom, Work" [2] Anthem:  " Blessed be the land of Zimbabwe " [3] Location of Zimbabwe (dark green) Capital and largest city Harare 17°49′45″S   31°03′08″E ﻿ / ﻿ 17.82917°S 31.05222°E ﻿ /  -17.82917; 31.05222 Official languages 16 languages : [4]   Chewa Chibarwe English Kalanga " Koisan " (presumably  Tsoa ) Nambya Ndau Ndebele Shangani Shona " sign language " Sotho Tonga Tswana Venda Xhosa Ethnic groups    (2012 Census [5] ) 99.38%  Black African  (mainly  Shona  and  Ndebele ) 0.22%  White African 0.18%  Coloured 0.08%  Asian 0.02% Other 0.01% Not stated Religion   (2017) [6] 84.1%  Christianity —69.2%  Protestantism —14.9% Other  Christian 10.2%  No religion 4.5%  Traditional faiths 1.2% Others Demonym(s) Zimbabwean Zimbo [7]  (colloquial) Government Unitary   dominant-party   presidential   republic •  President   Emmerson Mnangagwa •  Vice-President   Constantino Chiwenga 
 Legislature Parliament •  Upper house Senate •  Lower house National Assembly Independence   from the  United Kingdom •  Declared   11 November 1965 •  Republic   2 March 1970 •  Zimbabwe Rhodesia   1 June 1979 •  Independence recognised   18 April 1980 •  Current constitution   15 May 2013 
 Area  • Total 390,757 km 2  (150,872 sq mi) ( 60th ) • Water (%) 1 Population • 2022 estimate 15,121,004 [8]  ( 73rd ) • 2022 census 15,178,979 [9] • Density 39/km 2  (101.0/sq mi) GDP   ( PPP ) 2022 estimate • Total  $40.04 billion [10]  ( 129th ) • Per capita $2,555 [10]  ( 175th ) GDP   (nominal) 2022 estimate • Total $38.2  [10] billion ( 104th ) • Per capita  $2,402 [10]  ( 140th ) Gini   (2019)  50.3 [11] high HDI   (2021)  0.593 [12] medium  ·  146th Currency Zimbabwean dollar U.S. dollar  ($) ( USD ) Time zone UTC +2  ( CAT [13] ) Date format dd/mm/yyyy Driving side left Calling code +263 ISO 3166 code ZW Internet TLD .zw 
 Zimbabwe  ( / z ɪ m ˈ b ɑː b w eɪ ,   - w i / ), officially the  Republic of Zimbabwe , is a  landlocked country  in  Southern Africa , between the  Zambezi  and  Limpopo Rivers , bordered by  South Africa  to the south,  Botswana  to the south-west,  Zambia  to the north, and  Mozambique  to the east. The capital and largest city is  Harare . The second largest city is  Bulawayo . A country of roughly 15 million people, [14]  Zimbabwe has 16  official languages , [4]  with English,  Shona , and  Ndebele  the most common. 
Beginning in the 9th century, during its late  Iron Age , the  Bantu people  (who would become the ethnic  Shona ) built the city-state of  Great Zimbabwe ; the city-state became one of the major African trade centres by the 11th century, controlling the  gold ,  ivory  and  copper  trades with the  Swahili coast , which were connected to Arab and Indian states. By the mid 15th century, the city-state had been abandoned. [15]  From there, the  Kingdom of Zimbabwe  was established, followed by the  Rozvi  and  Mutapa  empires.
 The  British South Africa Company  of  Cecil Rhodes  demarcated the  Rhodesia region  in 1890 when they conquered  Mashonaland  and later in 1893  Matabeleland  after a fierce resistance by  Matabele people  known as the  First Matabele War .  Company rule  ended in 1923 with the establishment of  Southern Rhodesia  as a  self-governing British colony . In 1965, the  white   minority government   unilaterally declared independence  as  Rhodesia . The state endured international isolation and a 15-year  guerrilla war  with  black nationalist  forces; this culminated in a  peace agreement  that established universal enfranchisement and  de jure  sovereignty as Zimbabwe in April 1980. Zimbabwe then joined the  Commonwealth of Nations , from which it was suspended in 2002 for breaches of international law by its government under  Robert Mugabe  and from which it withdrew in December 2003.
 Mugabe became  Prime Minister of Zimbabwe  in 1980, when his  ZANU–PF  party won the  general election  following the end of white minority rule; he was the  President of Zimbabwe  from 1987 until his resignation in 2017. Under Mugabe's  authoritarian  regime, the state security apparatus dominated the country and was responsible for widespread  human rights  violations. [16]  From 2000 to 2009 the economy experienced decline and  hyperinflation  before rebounding after the use of currencies other than the  Zimbabwean dollar  was permitted, although growth has since faltered. On 15 November 2017, in the wake of over  a year of protests  against his government as well as Zimbabwe's rapidly declining economy,  Mugabe was placed under house arrest  by  the country's national army  in a  coup d'état , and Mugabe resigned six days later.  Emmerson Mnangagwa  has since served as Zimbabwe's president.
 Zimbabwe is a member of the  United Nations , the  Southern African Development Community , the  African Union , and the  Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa .
 
 
 Etymology [ edit ] 
 Further information:  Rhodesia (name) 
 The name "Zimbabwe" stems from a  Shona  term for  Great Zimbabwe , a medieval city ( Masvingo ) in the country's south-east whose remains are now a protected site. Two different theories address the origin of the word. Many sources hold that "Zimbabwe" derives from  dzimba-dza-mabwe , translated from the Karanga dialect of Shona as "houses of stones" ( dzimba  = plural of  imba , "house";  mabwe  = plural of  ibwe , "stone"). [17] [18] [19]  The  Karanga-speaking  Shona people live around Great Zimbabwe in the modern-day  Masvingo  province. Archaeologist  Peter Garlake  claims that "Zimbabwe" represents a contracted form of  dzimba-hwe , which means "venerated houses" in the Zezuru dialect of Shona and usually references chiefs' houses or graves. [20] 
 Zimbabwe was formerly known as  Southern Rhodesia  (1898),  Rhodesia  (1965), and  Zimbabwe Rhodesia  (1979). The first recorded use of "Zimbabwe" as a term of national reference dates from 1960 as a coinage by the black nationalist Michael Mawema, [21]  whose Zimbabwe National Party became the first to officially use the name in 1961. [22]  The term "Rhodesia"—derived from the surname of  Cecil Rhodes , the primary instigator of British colonisation of the territory during the late 19th century—was perceived by African nationalists as inappropriate because of its colonial origin and connotations. [21] 
 According to Mawema, black nationalists held a meeting in 1960 to choose an alternative name for the country, proposing names such as "Matshobana" and " Monomotapa " before his suggestion, "Zimbabwe", prevailed. [23]  A further alternative, put forward by nationalists in  Matabeleland , had been "Matopos", referring to the  Matopos Hills  to the south of  Bulawayo . [22] 
 It was initially unclear how the chosen term was to be used—a letter written by Mawema in 1961 refers to "Zimbabweland" [22]  — but "Zimbabwe" was sufficiently established by 1962 to become the generally preferred term of the black nationalist movement. [21]  In a 2001 interview, black nationalist  Eddison Zvobgo  recalled that Mawema mentioned the name during a political rally, "and it caught hold, and that was that". [21]  The black nationalist factions subsequently used the name during the Second  Chimurenga  campaigns against the Rhodesian government during the  Rhodesian Bush War  of 1964–1979. Major factions in this camp included the  Zimbabwe African National Union  (led by  Robert Mugabe  from 1975), and the  Zimbabwe African People's Union  (led by  Joshua Nkomo  from its founding in the early 1960s). [ citation needed ] 
 
 History [ edit ] 
 Main article:  History of Zimbabwe 
 Pre-colonial era [ edit ] 
 Further information:  Bantu expansion 
   Towers of  Great Zimbabwe 
 Archaeological records date human settlement of present-day Zimbabwe to at least 500,000 years ago. [24]  The earliest known inhabitants were probably  San people , who left behind arrowheads and cave paintings. The first Bantu-speaking farmers arrived during the  Bantu expansion  around 2,000 years ago. [25] [26] 
 Societies speaking proto- Shona languages  first emerged in the middle  Limpopo River  valley in the 9th century before moving on to the Zimbabwean highlands. The Zimbabwean plateau became the centre of subsequent Shona states, beginning around the 10th century. Around the early 10th century, trade developed with  Arab merchants  on the Indian Ocean coast, helping to develop the  Kingdom of Mapungubwe  in the 11th century. This was the precursor to the Shona civilisations that dominated the region during the 13th to 15th centuries, evidenced by ruins at  Great Zimbabwe , near  Masvingo , and by other smaller sites. The main archaeological site used a unique dry stone architecture. The Kingdom of Mapungubwe was the first in a series of trading states which had developed in Zimbabwe by the time the first European explorers arrived from Portugal. These states traded gold, ivory, and copper for cloth and glass. [27] 
 By 1220, the  Kingdom of Zimbabwe  eclipsed Mapungubwe. This Shona state further refined and expanded upon Mapungubwe's stone architecture, which survives to this day at the ruins of the kingdom's capital of Great Zimbabwe. From  c.  1450 to 1760, the  Kingdom of Mutapa  ruled much of the area of present-day Zimbabwe, plus parts of central Mozambique. It is known by many names including the Mutapa Empire, also known as  Mwene Mutapa  or  Monomotapa  as well as "Munhumutapa", and was renowned for its strategic trade routes with the Arabs and Portugal. The Portuguese sought to monopolise this influence and began a series of wars which left the empire in near collapse in the early 17th century. [27] 
 As a direct response to increased European presence in the interior a new Shona state emerged, known as the  Rozwi Empire . Relying on centuries of military, political and religious development, the Rozwi (meaning "destroyers") expelled the Portuguese from the Zimbabwean plateau in 1683 by force of arms. Around 1821 the  Zulu  general  Mzilikazi  of the  Khumalo clan  successfully rebelled against King  Shaka  and established his own clan, the  Ndebele . The Ndebele fought their way northwards into the  Transvaal , leaving a trail of destruction in their wake and beginning an era of widespread devastation known as the  Mfecane . When  Dutch   trekboers  converged on the Transvaal in 1836, they drove the tribe even further northward, with the assistance of  Tswana   Barolong  warriors and  Griqua  commandos. By 1838 the Ndebele had conquered the Rozwi Empire, along with the other smaller Shona states, and reduced them to  vassaldom . [28] 
 
   A Matabele  kraal , as depicted by  William Cornwallis Harris , 1836 
 After losing their remaining South African lands in 1840, Mzilikazi and his tribe permanently settled in the southwest of present-day Zimbabwe in what became known as Matabeleland, establishing  Bulawayo  as their capital. Mzilikazi then organised his society into a military system with regimental  kraals , similar to those of Shaka, which was stable enough to repel further Boer incursions. Mzilikazi died in 1868; following a violent power struggle, his son  Lobengula  succeeded him.
 
 Colonial era and Rhodesia (1888–1964) [ edit ] 
 Main articles:  Company rule in Rhodesia ,  Southern Rhodesia , and  Federation of Rhodesia and Nyasaland 
   The  Union Jack  was raised over  Fort Salisbury  on 13 September 1890. 
 In the 1880s European colonists arrived with  Cecil Rhodes 's  British South Africa Company  (chartered in 1889). In 1888 Rhodes obtained a  concession for mining rights  from King  Lobengula  of the Ndebele peoples. [29]  He presented this concession to persuade the government of the United Kingdom to grant a  royal charter  to the company over Matabeleland, and its subject states such as  Mashonaland  as well. [30]  Rhodes used this document in 1890 to justify sending the  Pioneer Column , a group of Europeans protected by well-armed  British South Africa Police  (BSAP) through Matabeleland and into Shona territory to establish Fort Salisbury (present-day  Harare ), and thereby establish  company rule  over the area. In 1893 and 1894, with the help of their new  Maxim  guns, the BSAP would go on to defeat the Ndebele in the  First Matabele War . Rhodes additionally sought permission to negotiate similar concessions covering all territory between the Limpopo River and  Lake Tanganyika , then known as "Zambesia". [30]  In accordance with the terms of aforementioned concessions and treaties, [30]  mass settlement was encouraged, with the British maintaining control over labour as well as over precious metals and other mineral resources. [31] 
 
   The  Battle of the Shangani  on 25 October 1893 
 In 1895 the BSAC adopted the name  "Rhodesia"  for the territory, in honour of Rhodes. In 1898 "Southern Rhodesia" became the official name for the region south of the Zambezi, [32] [33]  which later adopted the name "Zimbabwe". The region to the north, administered separately, was later termed  Northern Rhodesia  (present-day Zambia). Shortly after the disastrous Rhodes-sponsored  Jameson Raid  (December 1895 - January 1896) on the  South African Republic , the Ndebele rebelled against white rule, led by their charismatic religious leader, Mlimo. The  Second Matabele War  of 1896–1897 lasted in Matabeleland until 1896, when Mlimo was assassinated by American scout  Frederick Russell Burnham . Shona agitators staged unsuccessful revolts (known as  Chimurenga ) against company rule during 1896 and 1897. [ citation needed ]  Following these failed insurrections, the Rhodes administration subdued the Ndebele and Shona groups and organised the land with a disproportionate bias favouring Europeans, thus displacing many indigenous peoples. [34] 
 The United Kingdom annexed Southern Rhodesia on 12 September 1923. [35] [36] [37] [38]  Shortly after annexation, on 1 October 1923, the first constitution for the new Colony of Southern Rhodesia came into force. [37] [39]  Under the new constitution, Southern Rhodesia became a  self-governing   British colony , subsequent to a  1922 referendum . Rhodesians of all races served on behalf of the United Kingdom during the two World Wars in the early-20th century. Proportional to the white population, Southern Rhodesia contributed more  per capita  to both the  First  and  Second World Wars  than any other part of the empire, including Britain. [40] 
 The  1930 Land Apportionment Act  restricted black land ownership to certain segments of the country, setting aside large areas solely for the purchase of the white minority. This act, which led to rapidly rising inequality, became the subject of frequent calls for subsequent land reform. [41]  In 1953, in the face of African opposition, [42]  Britain consolidated the two Rhodesias with  Nyasaland  (Malawi) in the ill-fated  Central African Federation , which Southern Rhodesia essentially dominated. Growing  African nationalism  and general dissent, particularly in Nyasaland, persuaded Britain to dissolve the union in 1963, forming three separate divisions. While  multiracial democracy  was finally introduced to Northern Rhodesia and Nyasaland, Southern Rhodesians of European ancestry continued to enjoy  minority rule . [34] 
 Following  Zambian independence  (effective from October 1964),  Ian Smith 's  Rhodesian Front  government in Salisbury dropped the designation "Southern" in 1964 (once  Northern Rhodesia  had changed its name to  Zambia , having the word  Southern  before the name  Rhodesia  became unnecessary and the country simply became known as  Rhodesia  afterwards). Intent on effectively repudiating the recently adopted British policy of " no independence before majority rule ", Smith issued a  Unilateral Declaration of Independence  (UDI) from the United Kingdom on 11 November 1965. This marked the first such course taken by a rebel British colony since the  American declaration  of 1776, which Smith and others indeed claimed provided a suitable precedent to their own actions. [40] 
 
 Declaration of independence and civil war (1965–1980) [ edit ] 
 Main articles:  Rhodesia ,  Rhodesian Bush War ,  Zimbabwe Rhodesia , and  Lancaster House Agreement 
   Ian Smith  signing the  Unilateral Declaration of Independence  on 11 November 1965 with his cabinet in audience 
 The United Kingdom deemed the Rhodesian declaration an act of rebellion but did not re-establish control by force.  The British government petitioned the United Nations for  sanctions  against Rhodesia pending unsuccessful talks with Smith's administration in 1966 and 1968. In December 1966, the organisation complied, imposing the first mandatory trade embargo on an autonomous state. [43]  These sanctions were expanded again in 1968. [43] 
 A civil war ensued when  Joshua Nkomo 's  Zimbabwe African People's Union  (ZAPU) and Robert Mugabe's  Zimbabwe African National Union  (ZANU), supported actively by communist powers and neighbouring African nations, initiated  guerrilla operations  against Rhodesia's predominantly white government. ZAPU was supported by the  Soviet Union , the  Warsaw Pact  and associated nations such as Cuba, and adopted a  Marxist–Leninist  ideology; ZANU meanwhile aligned itself with  Maoism  and the bloc headed by the People's Republic of China. Smith declared Rhodesia a republic in 1970, following the results of a  referendum the previous year , but this went unrecognised internationally. Meanwhile, Rhodesia's internal conflict intensified, eventually forcing him to open negotiations with the militant communists.
 
   Bishop  Abel Muzorewa  signs the Lancaster House Agreement seated next to  British Foreign Secretary   Lord Carrington . 
 In March 1978, Smith reached an accord with three African leaders, led by Bishop  Abel Muzorewa , who offered to leave the white population comfortably entrenched in exchange for the establishment of a biracial democracy. As a result of the  Internal Settlement ,  elections were held in April 1979 , concluding with the  United African National Council  (UANC) carrying a majority of parliamentary seats. On 1 June 1979, Muzorewa, the UANC head, became prime minister and the country's name was changed to Zimbabwe Rhodesia. The Internal Settlement left control of the  Rhodesian Security Forces , civil service, judiciary, and a third of parliament seats to whites. [44]  On 12 June, the  United States Senate  voted to lift economic pressure on the former Rhodesia.
 Following the  fifth Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting , held in  Lusaka , Zambia, from 1 to 7 August in 1979, the British government invited Muzorewa, Mugabe, and Nkomo to participate in a constitutional conference at  Lancaster House . The purpose of the conference was to discuss and reach an agreement on the terms of an independence constitution, and provide for elections supervised under British authority allowing Zimbabwe Rhodesia to proceed to legal independence. [45]  With Lord Carrington, Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs of the United Kingdom, in the chair, these discussions were mounted from 10 September to 15 December in 1979, producing a total of 47  plenary sessions . [45]  On 21 December 1979, delegations from every major interest represented reached the  Lancaster House Agreement , effectively ending the guerrilla war. [46] [47] 
 On 11 December 1979, the Rhodesian House of Assembly voted 90 to nil to revert to British colonial status (the 'aye' votes included Ian Smith). The bill then passed the senate and was assented to by the president. With the arrival of  Christopher Soames , the new governor on 12 December 1979, Britain formally took control of Zimbabwe Rhodesia as the Colony of Southern Rhodesia, although on 13 December Soames declared that during his mandate the name Rhodesia and Zimbabwe Rhodesia would continue to be used. Britain lifted sanctions on 12 December and the United Nations on 16 December. [48] [49] 
 During the  elections of February 1980 , Mugabe and the ZANU party secured a landslide victory. [50]   Prince Charles , as the representative of Britain, formally granted independence to the new nation of Zimbabwe at a ceremony in Harare in April 1980. [51] 
 
 Independence era (1980–present) [ edit ] 
   Trends in Zimbabwe's  Multidimensional Poverty Index ,  1970–2010 
 Zimbabwe's first president  after its independence was  Canaan Banana  in what was originally a mainly ceremonial role as  head of state . Mugabe was the country's first prime minister and head of government. [52]  In 1980,  Samora Machel  told Mugabe that Zimbabwe was the "Jewel of Africa" but added: "Don't tarnish it!". [53] [54] [55] 
 Opposition to what was perceived as a Shona takeover immediately erupted around Matabeleland. The Matabele unrest led to what has become known as  Gukurahundi  (Shona: 'the early rain which washes away the  chaff  before the spring rains'). [56]  The  Fifth Brigade , a North Korean-trained elite unit that reported directly to Mugabe, [57]  entered Matabeleland and massacred thousands of civilians accused of supporting "dissidents". [57] [58]  Estimates for the number of deaths during the five-year  Gukurahundi  campaign ranged from 3,750 [59]  to 80,000. [58] 
 [60]  Thousands of others were tortured in military internment camps. [61] [62]  The campaign officially ended in 1987 after Nkomo and Mugabe reached a unity agreement that merged their respective parties, creating the Zimbabwe African National Union – Patriotic Front ( ZANU–PF ). [57] [63] [64]   Elections in March 1990  resulted in another victory for Mugabe and the ZANU–PF party, which claimed 117 of the 120 contested seats. [65] [66] 
 During the 1990s, students, trade unionists, and other workers often demonstrated to express their growing discontent with Mugabe and ZANU–PF party policies. In 1996, civil servants, nurses, and junior doctors went on strike over salary issues. [67] [68]  The general health of the population also began to significantly decline; by 1997 an estimated 25% of the population had been infected by HIV in a pandemic that was affecting most of southern Africa. [69] [70] 
 Land redistribution re-emerged as the main issue for the ZANU–PF government around 1997. Despite the existence of a "willing-buyer-willing-seller" land reform programme since the 1980s, the minority white Zimbabwean population of around 0.6% continued to hold 70% of the country's most fertile agricultural land. [71] 
 In 2000, the government pressed ahead with its  Fast Track Land Reform  programme, a policy involving compulsory land acquisition aimed at redistributing land from the minority white population to the majority black population. [72]  Confiscations of white farmland, continuous droughts, and a serious drop in external finance and other support led to a sharp decline in agricultural exports, which were traditionally the country's leading export-producing sector. [72]  Some 58,000 independent black farmers have since experienced limited success in reviving the gutted cash crop sectors through efforts on a smaller scale. [73] 
 President Mugabe and the ZANU–PF party leadership found themselves beset by a wide range of international sanctions. [74]  In 2002, the nation was suspended from the  Commonwealth of Nations  due to the reckless farm seizures and blatant  election tampering . [75]  The following year, Zimbabwean officials voluntarily terminated its Commonwealth membership. [76]   In 2001, the United States enacted the  Zimbabwe Democracy and Economic Recovery Act  (ZDERA).  It came into effect in 2002 and froze credit to the Zimbabwean government. The bill was sponsored by  Bill Frist  and co-sponsored by U.S. senators  Hillary Clinton ,  Joe Biden ,  Russ Feingold , and  Jesse Helms . Through ZDERA Section 4C ("Multilateral Financing Restriction"), the Secretary of the Treasury is ordered to direct U.S. Directors at the International Financial Institutions listed in Section 3 "to oppose and vote against-- (1) any extension by the respective institution of any loan, credit, or guarantee to the Government of Zimbabwe; or (2) any cancellation or reduction of indebtedness owed by the Government of Zimbabwe to the United States or any international financial institution." [77] 
 By 2003, the country's economy had collapsed. It is estimated that up to a quarter of Zimbabwe's 11 million people had fled the country. Three-quarters of the remaining Zimbabweans were living on less than one U.S. dollar a day. [78] 
 Following  elections in 2005 , the government initiated " Operation Murambatsvina ", an effort to crack down on illegal markets and slums emerging in towns and cities, leaving a substantial section of urban poor homeless. [79] [80]  The Zimbabwean government has described the operation as an attempt to provide decent housing to the population, although according to critics such as  Amnesty International , authorities have yet to properly substantiate their claims. [81] 
 
   Map showing the food insecurity in Zimbabwe in June 2008 
 On 29 March 2008, Zimbabwe held a  presidential election  along with a  parliamentary election . The results of this election were withheld for two weeks, after which it was generally acknowledged that the  Movement for Democratic Change – Tsvangirai  (MDC-T) had achieved a majority of one seat in the lower house of parliament. [82] 
 On 10 July 2008, Russia and China vetoed UN sanctions on Zimbabwe pushed by the United Kingdom and the United States. [83]  The United States drafted the file, which would have placed an arms embargo on Mugabe's regime. However, nine of 15 countries on the UN Security Council opposed it, including Vietnam, South Africa and Libya, which argued that Zimbabwe was not a 'threat to international peace and security.' [84] 
 In late 2008, problems in Zimbabwe reached crisis proportions in the areas of living standards, public health (with a major  cholera outbreak  in December) and various basic affairs. [85]  During this period, NGOs took over from government as a primary provider of food during this period of food insecurity in Zimbabwe. [86] 
 In September 2008, a  power-sharing agreement  was reached between Tsvangirai and President Mugabe, permitting the former to hold the office of prime minister. Due to ministerial differences between their respective political parties, the agreement was not fully implemented until 13 February 2009. By December 2010, Mugabe was threatening to completely expropriate remaining privately owned companies in Zimbabwe unless "western sanctions" were lifted. [87] 
 
   Zimbabwean President  Robert Mugabe  attended the Independence Day celebrations in South Sudan in July 2011. 
 A 2011 survey by  Freedom House  suggested that living conditions had improved since the power-sharing agreement. [88]  The United Nations  Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs  stated in its 2012–2013 planning document that the "humanitarian situation has improved in Zimbabwe since 2009, but conditions remain precarious for many people". [89] 
 On 17 January 2013, Vice-president  John Nkomo  died of cancer at St Anne's Hospital, Harare, at the age of 78. [90]  A new constitution approved in the  Zimbabwean constitutional referendum, 2013  curtails presidential powers. [91] 
 Mugabe was re-elected president in the July 2013  Zimbabwean general election  which  The Economist  described as "rigged". [92]  and the  Daily Telegraph  as "stolen". [93]  The Movement for Democratic Change alleged massive fraud and tried to seek relief through the courts. [94]  In a surprising moment of candour at the ZANU–PF congress in December 2014, President Robert Mugabe accidentally let slip that the opposition had in fact won the contentious 2008 polls by an astounding 73%. [95]  After winning the election, the Mugabe ZANU–PF government re-instituted  one party rule , [93]  doubled the civil service and, according to  The Economist , embarked on "misrule and dazzling corruption". [92]  A 2017 study conducted by the  Institute for Security Studies  (ISS) concluded that due to the deterioration of government and the economy "the government encourages corruption to make up for its inability to fund its own institutions" with widespread and informal police roadblocks to issue fines to travellers being one manifestation of this. [96] 
 On 22 October 2015, president Robert Mugabe was awarded the  Confucius Peace Prize , a Chinese alternative to the  Nobel Peace Prize  for his commitment to the nation's political and economic order.
 In July 2016  nationwide protests  took place regarding the economic collapse in the country, [97] [98]  and the finance minister admitted "Right now we literally have nothing." [92] 
 In November 2017,  the army led a coup d'état  following the dismissal of Vice-president  Emmerson Mnangagwa , placing Mugabe under house arrest. The army denied that their actions constituted a  coup . [99] [100]   On 19 November 2017, ZANU–PF sacked Robert Mugabe as party leader and appointed former Vice-president Emmerson Mnangagwa in his place. [101]  On 21 November 2017, Mugabe tendered his resignation prior to impeachment proceedings being completed. [102]  Although under the  Constitution of Zimbabwe  Mugabe should be succeeded by Vice-president  Phelekezela Mphoko , a supporter of  Grace Mugabe , ZANU–PF chief whip  Lovemore Matuke  stated to the  Reuters  news agency that Mnangagwa would be appointed as president. [102] 
 On 30 July 2018 Zimbabwe held its  general elections , [103]  which were won by the ZANU-PF party led by Mnangagwa. [104]   Nelson Chamisa  who was leading the main opposition party  MDC Alliance  contested the election results claiming voter fraud, [105]   and subsequently filed a petition to the Constitution Court of Zimbabwe. [106]  The court confirmed Mnangagwa's victory, making him the newly elected president after Mugabe. [107] [108] 
 In December 2017 the website Zimbabwe News, calculating the cost of the Mugabe era using various statistics, said that at the time of independence in 1980, the country was growing economically at about five per cent a year, and had done so for quite a long time. If this rate of growth had been maintained for the next 37 years, Zimbabwe would have in 2016 a GDP of US$52 billion. Instead it had a formal sector GDP of only US$14 billion, a cost of US$38 billion in lost growth. The population growth in 1980 was among the highest in Africa at about 3.5 per cent per annum, doubling every 21 years. Had this growth been maintained, the population would have been 31 million. Instead, as of 2018, it is about 13 million. The discrepancies were believed to be partly caused by death from starvation and disease, and partly due to decreased fertility. The life expectancy has halved, and deaths from politically motivated violence sponsored by the government exceed 200,000 since 1980. The Mugabe government has directly or indirectly caused the deaths of at least three million Zimbabweans in 37 years. [109]  According to World Food Programme, over two million people are facing starvation because of the recent droughts the country is going through. [110] 
 In 2018, President Mnangagwa announced that his government would seek to rejoin  the Commonwealth , which is as of 2023 conducting a fact-finding mission prior to asking the  Secretary-General  to issue a recommendation. [111] 
 On 6 September 2019, former president Robert Mugabe died in Singapore, aged 95. [112] 
 
 Geography [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Geography of Zimbabwe 
   The  Zambezi River  in the  Mana Pools National Park 
   Zimbabwe map of Köppen climate classification 
 Zimbabwe is a landlocked country in southern Africa, lying between latitudes  15°  and  23°S , and longitudes  25°  and  34°E . It is bordered by  South Africa  to the south,  Botswana  to the west and southwest,  Zambia  to the northwest, and  Mozambique  to the east and northeast. Its northwest corner is roughly 150 meters from  Namibia , nearly forming a four-nation  quadripoint . Most of the country is elevated, consisting of a central plateau (high veld) stretching from the southwest northwards with altitudes between 1,000 and 1,600 m. The country's extreme east is mountainous, this area being known as the  Eastern Highlands , with  Mount Nyangani  as the highest point at 2,592 m. [113] 
 The highlands are known for their natural environment, with tourist destinations such as  Nyanga , Troutbeck,  Chimanimani ,  Vumba  and  Chirinda Forest  at  Mount Selinda . About 20% of the country consists of low-lying areas, (the low veld) under 900m.  Victoria Falls , one of the world's largest and most spectacular waterfalls, is located in the country's extreme northwest and is part of the  Zambezi  river. [114] [115] 
 
 Geology [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Geology of Zimbabwe 
 Over geological time Zimbabwe has experienced two major post- Gondwana  erosion cycles (known as African and post-African), and a very subordinate Plio-Pleistocene cycle. [116] 
 
 Climate [ edit ] 
 Zimbabwe has a  subtropical climate  with many local variations. The southern areas are known for their heat and aridity, while parts of the central plateau receive frost in winter. The Zambezi valley is known for its extreme heat, and the  Eastern Highlands  usually experience cool temperatures and the highest rainfall in the country. The country's  rainy season  generally runs from late October to March, and the hot climate is moderated by increasing altitude. Zimbabwe is faced with recurring droughts. In 2019, at least 55 elephants died because of drought. [117]  Severe storms are rare. [118] 
 
 Biodiversity [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Wildlife of Zimbabwe 
   An elephant at a water hole in  Hwange National Park 
 Zimbabwe contains seven terrestrial ecoregions:  Kalahari acacia–baikiaea woodlands , Southern Africa  bushveld ,  Southern miombo woodlands ,  Zambezian Baikiaea woodlands ,  Zambezian and mopane woodlands ,  Zambezian halophytics , and Eastern Zimbabwe montane forest-grassland mosaic in the Eastern Highlands. [119] 
 The country is mostly  savanna , although the moist and mountainous Eastern Highlands support areas of tropical evergreen and hardwood forests. Trees found in the Eastern Highlands include  teak ,  mahogany , enormous specimens of  strangler fig ,  forest Newtonia , big leaf,  white stinkwood , chirinda stinkwood,  knobthorn  and many others.
 In the low-lying parts of the country  fever trees ,  mopane ,  combretum  and  baobabs  abound. Much of the country is covered by miombo woodland, dominated by  brachystegia  species and others. Among the numerous flowers and shrubs are  hibiscus ,  flame lily ,  snake lily ,  spider lily ,  leonotis ,  cassia , tree  wisteria  and  dombeya . There are around 350 species of mammals that can be found in Zimbabwe. There are also many snakes and lizards, over 500 bird species, and 131 fish species.
 
 Environmental issues [ edit ] 
 Large parts of Zimbabwe were once covered by forests with abundant wildlife.  Deforestation  and  poaching  has reduced the amount of wildlife.  Woodland degradation  and deforestation caused by  population growth ,  urban expansion  and use for fuel are major concerns [120]  and have led to erosion which diminishes the amount of fertile soil. Local farmers have been criticised by environmentalists for burning off vegetation to heat their tobacco barns. [121]  The country had a 2019  Forest Landscape Integrity Index  mean score of 6.31/10, ranking it 81st globally out of 172 countries. [122] 
 
 Government [ edit ] 
 Main articles:  Politics of Zimbabwe ,  Elections in Zimbabwe , and  Foreign relations of Zimbabwe 
   Parliament of Zimbabwe  in Harare 
 Zimbabwe is a republic with a  presidential system  of government. The  semi-presidential system  was abolished with the adoption of a new constitution after  a referendum in 2013 . Under the constitutional changes in 2005, an  upper chamber , the  Senate , was reinstated. [123]  The  House of Assembly  is the  lower chamber  of Parliament. In 1987 Mugabe revised the constitution, abolishing the  ceremonial presidency  and the prime ministerial posts to form an executive president—a presidential system. His ZANU-PF party has won every election since independence—in the 1990 election the second-placed party,  Edgar Tekere 's Zimbabwe Unity Movement (ZUM), obtained 20% of the vote. [124] [125] 
 
 Politics [ edit ] 
 During the 1995 parliamentary elections most opposition parties, including the ZUM, boycotted the voting, resulting in a near sweep by the ruling party. [126]  When the opposition returned to the polls in 2000, they won 57 seats, only five fewer than ZANU-PF. [126]   Presidential elections were again held in 2002  amid allegations of vote-rigging, intimidation and fraud. [127]  The  2005 Zimbabwe parliamentary elections  were held on 31 March, and multiple claims of vote rigging, election fraud and intimidation were made by the  Movement for Democratic Change  party and  Jonathan Moyo , calling for investigations into 32 of the 120 constituencies. [128]  Moyo participated in the elections despite the allegations and won a seat as an independent member of Parliament. [129] 
 
   Supporters of the  Movement for Democratic Change  in 2005 In 2005, the MDC split into two factions: the Movement for Democratic Change – Mutambara ( MDC-M ), led by  Arthur Mutambara  which contested the elections to the Senate, and the  Movement for Democratic Change – Tsvangirai  (MDC-T) led by  Morgan Tsvangirai  which was opposed to contesting the elections, stating that participation in a rigged election is tantamount to endorsing Mugabe's claim that past elections were free and fair. The two MDC camps had their congresses in 2006 with Tsvangirai being elected to lead MDC-T, which became more popular than the other group. [130] 
 In the  2008 general election , the official results required a run-off between Mugabe and Tsvangirai. The MDC-T challenged these results, claiming widespread election fraud by the Mugabe government. [131] [132]  The run-off was scheduled for 27 June 2008. On 22 June, citing the continuing unfairness of the process and refusing to participate in a "violent, illegitimate sham of an election process", Tsvangirai pulled out of the presidential run-off, the election commission held the run-off, and President Mugabe received a landslide majority. [133]  The MDC-T did not participate in the Senate elections, while the MDC-M won five seats in the Senate. The MDC-M was weakened by defections from members of parliament and individuals who were disillusioned by their manifesto. [130]  On 28 April 2008, Tsvangirai and Mutambara announced at a joint news conference in  Johannesburg  that the two MDC formations were co-operating, enabling the MDC to have a clear parliamentary majority. [134] [135]  Tsvangirai said that Mugabe could not remain president without a parliamentary majority. [135] 
 In mid-September 2008, after protracted negotiations overseen by the leaders of South Africa and Mozambique, Mugabe and Tsvangirai signed a power-sharing deal in which Mugabe retained control over the army. Donor nations adopted a 'wait-and-see' attitude, wanting to see real change being brought about by this merger before committing themselves to funding rebuilding efforts, which are estimated to take at least five years. On 11 February 2009 Tsvangirai was sworn in as prime minister by Mugabe. [136] [137] 
 In November 2008, the government of Zimbabwe spent US$7.3 million donated by  The Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria . A representative of the organisation declined to speculate on how the money was spent, except that it was not for the intended purpose, and the government has failed to honour requests to return the money. [138] 
 In February 2013, Zimbabwe's election chief,  Simpson Mtambanengwe , resigned due to ill health. His resignation came months before the country's constitutional referendum and elections. [139] 
 The status of Zimbabwe politics has been thrown into question by a coup taking place in November 2017, ending Mugabe's 30 year presidential incumbency. Emmerson Mnangagwa was appointed president following this coup and was officially elected with 50.8% of the vote in the  2018 Zimbabwean general election , avoiding a run-off and making him the third president of Zimbabwe.
 The government has received negative comments among its citizen for always shutting down the internet in the past amid protests such as the one planned on the 31st of July. 2020. [140] 
 
 Armed forces [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Zimbabwe Defence Forces 
   The flag of the  Zimbabwe Defence Forces 
 The Zimbabwe Defence Forces were set up by unifying three insurrectionist forces – the  Zimbabwe African National Liberation Army  (ZANLA), the  Zimbabwe People's Revolutionary Army  (ZIPRA), and the Rhodesian Security Forces (RSF) – after the  Second Chimurenga  and Zimbabwean independence in 1980. The integration period saw the formation of the  Zimbabwe National Army  (ZNA) and  Air Force of Zimbabwe  (AFZ) as separate entities under the command of General  Solomon Mujuru  and Air Marshal  Norman Walsh , who retired in 1982 and was replaced by Air Marshal Azim Daudpota who handed over command to Air Chief Marshal  Josiah Tungamirai  in 1985. In 2003, General  Constantine Chiwenga , was promoted and appointed Commander of the Zimbabwe Defence Forces. Lieutenant General P. V. Sibanda replaced him as Commander of the Army. [141] 
 The ZNA has an active duty strength of 30,000. The Air Force has about 5,139 standing personnel. [142]  The  Zimbabwe Republic Police  (includes Police Support Unit, Paramilitary Police) is part of the Zimbabwe Defence Forces and numbers 25,000. [143] 
 Following majority rule in early 1980,  British Army  trainers oversaw the integration of guerrilla fighters into a  battalion  structure overlaid on the existing Rhodesian armed forces. For the first year, a system was followed where the top-performing candidate became battalion commander. If he or she was from ZANLA, then his or her second-in-command was the top-performing ZIPRA candidate, and vice versa. [144]  This ensured a balance between the two movements in the command structure.
 The ZNA was originally formed into four  brigades , composed of a total of 28 battalions. The brigade support units were composed almost entirely of specialists of the former Rhodesian Army, while unintegrated battalions of the  Rhodesian African Rifles  were assigned to the 1st, 3rd and 4th Brigades. The Fifth Brigade was formed in 1981 and disbanded in 1988 after the demonstration of mass brutality and murder during the brigade's occupation of Matabeleland in what became known as  Gukurahundi . [56] [145]  The brigade had been re-formed by 2006, with its commander, Brigadier General John Mupande praising its "rich history". [146] 
 
 Human rights [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Human rights in Zimbabwe 
 See also:  Child marriage in Zimbabwe 
   A demonstration in  London  against  Robert Mugabe . Protests are discouraged by Zimbabwean police in Zimbabwe. [147] 
 There are widespread reports of systematic and escalating violations of human rights in Zimbabwe under the Mugabe administration and the dominant ZANU–PF party. [148]  According to human rights organisations such as Amnesty International [149]  and  Human Rights Watch [150]  the government of Zimbabwe violates the rights to shelter, food,  freedom of movement  and residence,  freedom of assembly  and the  protection of the law . In 2009, Gregory Stanton, president of the International Association of Genocide Scholars, stated there was "clear evidence that Mugabe government was guilty of crimes against humanity and that there was sufficient evidence of crimes against humanity to bring Mugabe to trial in front of the  International Criminal Court .” [151] 
 Male  homosexuality  is  illegal in Zimbabwe . Since 1995, the government has  carried out campaigns  against both homosexual men and women. [152]  President Mugabe has blamed gays for many of Zimbabwe's problems and viewed homosexuality as an "un-African" and immoral culture brought by European colonists and practised by only "a few whites" in his country. [153] 
 Opposition gatherings are frequently the subject of reprisals by the police force, such as the crackdown on an 11 March 2007 MDC rally and several others during the 2008 election campaign. [154]  Police actions have been strongly condemned by the  UN Secretary-General   Ban Ki-moon , the European Union, and the United States. [155]  There are also concerns over Fox Southwest media rights and access. The Zimbabwean government is accused of suppressing freedom of the press and freedom of speech. [149]  It has been repeatedly accused of using the public broadcaster, the  Zimbabwe Broadcasting Corporation , as a propaganda tool. [156]  Newspapers critical of the government, such as the  Daily News , closed after bombs exploded at their offices and the government refused to renew their licence. [157] [158]   BBC News ,  Sky News , and  CNN  were banned from filming or reporting from Zimbabwe. In 2009 reporting restrictions on the BBC and CNN were lifted. [159]  Sky News continues to report on happenings within Zimbabwe from neighbouring countries like South Africa. [160] [161] 
 On 24 July 2020, the  Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights  (OHCHR) expressed concerns over allegations suggesting that Zimbabwean authorities may have used the  COVID-19  crisis as a pretext to suppress freedom of expression and peaceful assembly on the streets. OHCHR spokesperson Liz Throssell stated that people have a right to protest corruption or anything else. The authorities in Zimbabwe used force to disperse and arrest nurses and health workers, who were peacefully protesting for better salaries and work conditions. The reports suggest that a few members of opposition party and investigative journalists were also arbitrarily arrested and detained for taking part in a protest. [162] 
 On 5 August 2020, the #ZimbabweanLivesMatter campaign on  Twitter  drew attention of international celebrities and politicians towards human rights abuses in the country, mounting pressure on Emmerson Mnangagwa's government. The campaign was in response to arrests, abductions and torture of political activists and the incarceration of journalist  Hopewell Chin'ono  and the  Booker Prize  author  Tsitsi Dangarembga . [163] 
 
 Administrative divisions [ edit ] 
 Main articles:  Provinces of Zimbabwe ,  Districts of Zimbabwe , and  Wards of Zimbabwe 
   Administrative divisions of Zimbabwe 
 Zimbabwe has a  centralised government  and is divided into eight provinces and two cities with provincial status, for administrative purposes. Each province has a provincial capital from where government administration is usually carried out. [3] 
 
 
 
 Province 
 Capital
 
 
 Bulawayo 
 Bulawayo 
 
 
 Harare 
 Harare 
 
 
 Manicaland 
 Mutare 
 
 
 Mashonaland Central 
 Bindura 
 
 
 Mashonaland East 
 Marondera 
 
 
 Mashonaland West 
 Chinhoyi 
 
 
 Masvingo 
 Masvingo city 
 
 
 Matabeleland North 
 Lupane District 
 
 
 Matabeleland South 
 Gwanda 
 
 
 Midlands 
 Gweru 
 
 The names of most of the provinces were generated from the Mashonaland and Matabeleland divide at the time of colonisation: Mashonaland was the territory occupied first by the British South Africa Company Pioneer Column and Matabeleland the territory conquered during the First Matabele War. This corresponds roughly to the precolonial territory of the Shona people and the Matabele people, although there are significant ethnic minorities in most provinces. Each province is headed by a provincial governor, appointed by the president. [164]  The provincial government is run by a provincial administrator, appointed by the Public Service Commission. Other government functions at provincial level are carried out by provincial offices of national government departments. [165] 
 The provinces are subdivided into 59  districts  and 1,200  wards  (sometimes referred to as municipalities). Each district is headed by a district administrator, appointed by the Public Service Commission. There is also a Rural District Council, which appoints a chief executive officer. The Rural District Council is composed of elected ward councillors, the district administrator, and one representative of the chiefs (traditional leaders appointed under customary law) in the district. Other government functions at district level are carried out by district offices of national government departments. [166] 
 At the ward level there is a Ward Development Committee, comprising the elected ward councillor, the kraalheads (traditional leaders subordinate to chiefs) and representatives of Village Development Committees. Wards are subdivided into villages, each of which has an elected Village Development Committee and a headman (traditional leader subordinate to the kraalhead). [167] 
 
 Sanctions [ edit ] 
 Since the early 2000s, Zimbabwe has been under sanctions imposed by the United States and the European Union that have shaped Zimbabwe's domestic politics as well as the country's relations with the  Western nations . [168]  In 2002, Zimbabwe held general elections and ahead of that election the EU sent observers, but the election observer team was forced to leave the country. In February 2002 the EU placed targeted or restrictive measures on Zimbabwe. At least 20 government officials were banned from entering Europe, and EU funding was halted. Prior to the elections there was $128 million that was budgeted for the Zimbabwean government from 2002 to 2007, this was cancelled. Nevertheless, the EU only stopped funding the government directly but it continued sending money only through aid agencies and NGOs. [169] 
 After some years the EU and Zimbabwe resolved some of their disputes and a lot of the EU sanctions were removed. Only Mugabe and his wife remained on the list while other government officials were removed. However, the EU still did not give Zimbabwe money. So, the government channels money through NGOs as it was seen in the 4 March 2019 – 21 March 2019  Cyclone Idai . [170] 
 The United States also imposed sanctions on Zimbabwe. There are two types of U.S. sanctions on Zimbabwe. The first one is  Zimbabwe Democracy and Economic Recovery Act  (ZIDERA) and the second one is the Targeted Sanctions Program. ZIDERA made several demands, the first one was that Zimbabwe must respect human rights, second Zimbabwe must stop its interference in the  Democratic Republic of the Congo , third Zimbabwe must stop the expropriation of white farms. If none of these demands were met, the U.S. would block the  IMF  and the  World Bank  from lending money to Zimbabwe. [171]  A new ZIDERA came into effect in 2018 with the motto that, Restore Democracy or there won't be any friendship, there must be free elections, free media and human rights, Zimbabwe must enforce the ruling of the  SADC Tribunal . The Targeted Sanctions Program was implemented in 2003, which lists Zimbabwean companies and people who are not allowed to deal with U.S. companies. The sanctions on Zimbabwe have been in place for more than two decades. In March 2021 the U.S. renewed its sanctions on Zimbabwe. [171] 
 
 Economy [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Economy of Zimbabwe This section needs to be  updated .  Please help update this article to reflect recent events or newly available information.   ( July 2022 )   Historical GDP per capita development in southern African countries, since 1950 
   A proportional representation of Zimbabwe exports, 2019 
The main foreign exports of Zimbabwe are minerals, gold, [118]  and agriculture. Zimbabwe is the largest trading partner of South Africa on the continent. [172]  Taxes and tariffs are high for private enterprises, while state enterprises are strongly subsidised. State regulation is costly to companies; starting or closing a business is slow and expensive. [173]  Tourism also plays a key role in the economy [174]  but has been failing in recent years. The Zimbabwe Conservation Task Force released a report in June 2007, estimating that 60% of Zimbabwe's wildlife had died since 2000 as a result of poaching and deforestation. The report warns that the loss of life combined with widespread deforestation is potentially disastrous for the tourism industry. [175]  The  information and communications technology  sector has been growing at a fast pace. A report by the mobile internet browser company Opera in 2011 ranked Zimbabwe as Africa's fastest growing market. [176] [177]   A market in  Mbare, Harare 
 Since January 2002, the government has had its lines of credit at international financial institutions frozen, through U.S. legislation called the Zimbabwe Democracy and Economic Recovery Act of 2001 (ZDERA). Section 4C instructs the secretary of the treasury to direct international financial institutions to veto the extension of loans and credit to the Zimbabwean government. [178]  According to the United States, these sanctions target only seven specific businesses owned or controlled by government officials and not ordinary citizens. [179] 
 
   The GDP per capita (current), compared to neighbouring countries (world average = 100) 
 Zimbabwe maintained positive economic growth throughout the 1980s (5% GDP growth per year) and 1990s (4.3% GDP growth per year). The economy declined from 2000: 5% decline in 2000, 8% in 2001, 12% in 2002 and 18% in 2003. [180]  Zimbabwe's involvement from 1998 to 2002 in the war in the Democratic Republic of the Congo drained hundreds of millions of dollars from the economy. [181]  From 1999 to 2009, Zimbabwe saw the lowest ever economic growth with an annual GDP decrease of 6.1%. [182]  The downward spiral of the economy has been attributed mainly to mismanagement and corruption by the government and the eviction of more than 4,000 white farmers in the controversial land confiscations of 2000. [183] [184] [185] [186]  The Zimbabwean government and its supporters attest that it was Western policies to avenge the expulsion of their kin that sabotaged the economy. [187] 
 By 2005, the purchasing power of the average Zimbabwean had dropped to the same levels in real terms as 1953. [188]  In 2005, the government, led by central bank governor  Gideon Gono , started making overtures that white farmers could come back. There were 400 to 500 still left in the country, but much of the land that had been confiscated was no longer productive. [189]  By 2016, there remained about 300 of the original 4,500 farms owned by white farmers. The farms that left were either too remote or their owners had paid for protection or collaborated with the regime. [93]  In January 2007, the government issued long-term leases to some white farmers. [190]  At the same time, however, the government also continued to demand that all remaining white farmers, who were given eviction notices earlier, vacate the land or risk being arrested. [191] [192]  Mugabe pointed to foreign governments and alleged "sabotage" as the cause of the fall of the Zimbabwean economy, as well as the country's 80% formal unemployment rate. [193] 
 Inflation rose from an annual rate of 32% in 1998, to an estimated high of 11,200,000% in August 2008 according to the Central Statistical Office. [194]  This represented a state of  hyperinflation , and the central bank introduced a new 100 trillion dollar note. [195]  In January 2009, in an effort to counteract runaway inflation, acting Finance Minister  Patrick Chinamasa  announced that Zimbabweans would be permitted to use other, more stable currencies to do business, alongside the  Zimbabwean dollar . [196]  In an effort to combat inflation and foster economic growth, the Zimbabwean dollar was suspended indefinitely in April 2009. [197]  In 2016, Zimbabwe allowed trade in the  United States dollar  and various other currencies such as the  rand  (South Africa), the  pula  (Botswana), the  euro , and the  pound sterling  (UK). [198]  In February 2019,  Reserve Bank of Zimbabwe  Governor  John Mangudya  introduced a new local currency, the  Real Time Gross Settlement dollar , in a move to address some of the Zimbabwean economic and financial challenges. [199] 
 After the formation of the Unity Government and the adoption of several currencies instead of the Zimbabwe dollar in 2009, the Zimbabwean economy rebounded. GDP grew by 8–9% per year between 2009 and 2012. [200]  In November 2010, the  International Monetary Fund  described the Zimbabwean economy as "completing its second year of buoyant economic growth". [201] [202]  The pan-African investment bank IMARA released a favourable report in February 2011 on investment prospects in Zimbabwe, citing an improved revenue base and higher tax receipts. [203]  In January 2013, the finance ministry reported that they had only $217 in their treasury and would apply for donations to finance the coming elections. [204]  By 2014, Zimbabwe had recovered to levels seen in the 1990s [200]  but growth faltered between 2012 and 2016. [205]  Inflation was 42% in 2018; in June 2019, the inflation rate reached 175%, leading to mass unrest across the country. [206] 
 
 Minerals [ edit ] 
 The mining sector is lucrative, with some of the world's largest  platinum  reserves being mined by  Anglo American plc , Zimplats, and Impala Platinum. [207]  Zimplats, the nation's largest platinum company, has proceeded with US$500 million in expansions, and is also continuing a separate US$2 billion project, despite threats by Mugabe to nationalise the company. [208] 
 The  Marange diamond fields , discovered in 2006, are considered the biggest diamond find in over a century. [209]  They have the potential to improve the fiscal situation of the country considerably, but almost all revenues from the field have disappeared into the pockets of army officers and ZANU–PF politicians. [210]  In terms of carats produced, the Marange field is one of the largest diamond-producing projects in the world, [211]  estimated to have produced 12 million carats in 2014 worth over $350 million. [212] 
 As of October 2014 [update] ,  Metallon Corporation  was Zimbabwe's largest gold miner. [213] 
 
 Further information on tin from the:  Kamativi mine 
 Agriculture [ edit ] 
 Zimbabwe's commercial farming sector was traditionally a source of exports and foreign exchange and provided 400,000 jobs. However, the government's land reform program badly damaged the sector, turning Zimbabwe into a net importer of food products. [3]  For example, between 2000 and 2016, annual wheat production fell from 250,000 tons to 60,000 tons, maize was reduced from two million tons to 500,000 tons and cattle slaughtered for beef fell from 605,000 head to 244,000 head. [93]  Coffee production, once a prized export commodity, came to a virtual halt after seizure or expropriation of white-owned coffee farms in 2000 and has never recovered. [214] 
 For the past ten years, the  International Crops Research Institute for the Semi-Arid Tropics  has been assisting Zimbabwe's farmers to adopt  conservation agriculture  techniques, a sustainable method of farming that can help increase yields. By applying the three principles of minimum soil disturbance, legume-based cropping and the use of organic mulch, farmers can improve infiltration, reduce evaporation and soil erosion, and build up organic soil content. [215]  Between 2005 and 2011, the number of smallholders practicing conservation agriculture in Zimbabwe increased from 5,000 to more than 150,000. Cereal yields rose between 15 and 100 per cent across different regions. [216]  The government declared potato a national strategic food security crop in 2012. [217] 
 Mvurwi, a region in Mashonaland Central Province, once fell in the "breadbasket region" of Zimbabwe, with fertile soils.  However, over the past 30 years, this is one of the areas that have been negatively impacted by the land reforms, causing it to be less prosperous than it was in the late 20th century.
 
 Tourism [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Tourism in Zimbabwe 
   Victoria Falls , the end of the upper  Zambezi  and beginning of the middle Zambezi 
 Since the  land reform programme  in 2000, tourism in Zimbabwe has steadily declined. In 2018, tourism peaked with 2.6 million tourists. [218]  In 2016, the total contribution of tourism to Zimbabwe was $1.1 billion (USD), or about 8.1% of Zimbabwe's GDP. Employment in travel and tourism, as well as industries travel and tourism indirectly supports, was 5.2% of national employment. [219] 
 Several airlines pulled out of Zimbabwe between 2000 and 2007. Australia's  Qantas , Germany's  Lufthansa , and  Austrian Airlines  were among the first to pull out and in 2007  British Airways  suspended all direct flights to Harare. [220] [221]  The country's flagship airline  Air Zimbabwe , which operated flights throughout Africa and a few destinations in Europe and Asia, ceased operations in February 2012. [222] [ needs update ]  As of 2017, several major commercial airlines had resumed flights to Zimbabwe.
 Zimbabwe has several major tourist attractions. Victoria Falls on the Zambezi, which are shared with Zambia, are located in the north-west of Zimbabwe. Before the economic changes, much of the tourism for these locations came to the Zimbabwe side, but now Zambia is the main beneficiary. The  Victoria Falls National Park  is also in this area and is one of the eight main national parks in Zimbabwe, [223]  the largest of which is  Hwange National Park .
 The Eastern Highlands are a series of mountainous areas near the border with Mozambique. The highest peak in Zimbabwe,  Mount Nyangani  at 2,593 m (8,507 ft) is located there as well as the  Bvumba Mountains  and the  Nyanga National Park .  World's View  is in these mountains, and it is from here that places as far away as 60–70 km (37–43 mi) are visible and, on clear days, the town of  Rusape  can be seen.
 Zimbabwe is unusual in Africa in that there are a number of ancient and medieval ruined cities built in a unique  dry stone  style. Among the most famous of these are the Great Zimbabwe ruins in Masvingo. Other ruins include  Khami Ruins, Zimbabwe ,  Dhlo-Dhlo  and  Naletale . The Matobo Hills are an area of granite  kopjes  and wooded valleys commencing some 35 km (22 mi) south of Bulawayo in southern Zimbabwe. The hills were formed over two billion years ago with granite being forced to the surface, then being eroded to produce smooth "whaleback dwalas" and broken kopjes, strewn with boulders and interspersed with thickets of vegetation. Mzilikazi, founder of the Ndebele nation, gave the area its name, meaning 'Bald Heads'. They have become a tourist attraction because of their ancient shapes and local wildlife. Cecil Rhodes and other early white colonists like  Leander Starr Jameson  are buried in these hills at World's View. [224] 
 
 Water supply and sanitation [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Water supply and sanitation in Zimbabwe 
 There are many small-scale successful water supply and sanitation programs, but there is also a general lack of improved water and sanitation systems for the majority of Zimbabwe. According to the  World Health Organization  in 2012, 80% of Zimbabweans had access to improved, i.e. clean, drinking water sources, and only 40% of Zimbabweans had access to improved sanitation facilities. [225]  Access to improved water supply and sanitation is distinctly less in rural areas. [226]  There are many factors which continue to determine the nature, for the foreseeable future of water supply and sanitation in Zimbabwe. Three major factors are the severely depressed state of the Zimbabwean economy, the reluctance of foreign aid organisations to build and finance infrastructure projects, and the political instability of the state. [226] [227] 
 
 Science and technology [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Science and technology in Zimbabwe 
   Scientific research output in terms of publications in Southern Africa, cumulative totals by field, 2008–2014. Source: UNESCO Science Report: towards 2030 (2015), figure 20.6. 
 Zimbabwe has relatively well-developed national infrastructure and a long-standing tradition of promoting research and development, as evidenced by the levy imposed on tobacco-growers since the 1930s to promote market research. [228] [229]  The country has a well-developed education system, with one in 11 adults holding a tertiary degree. Given the country's solid knowledge base and abundant natural resources, Zimbabwe has great growth potential. [228] [229]  Zimbabwe was ranked 113rd in the  Global Innovation Index  in 2021, up from 122nd in 2019. [230] [231] [232] [233] 
 To achieve its growth potential, Zimbabwe will need to correct a number of structural weaknesses. For instance, it lacks the critical mass of researchers needed to trigger innovation. Although the infrastructure is in place to harness research and development to Zimbabwe's socio-economic development, universities and research institutions lack the financial and human resources to conduct research and the regulatory environment hampers the transfer of new technologies to the business sector. The economic crisis has precipitated an exodus of university students and professionals in key areas of expertise (medicine, engineering, etc.) that is of growing concern. More than 22% of Zimbabwean tertiary students were completing their degrees abroad in 2012, compared to a 4% average for sub-Saharan Africa as a whole. In 2012, there were 200 researchers (head count) employed in the public sector, one-quarter of whom were women. This is double the continental average (91 in 2013) but only one-quarter the researcher density of South Africa (818 per million inhabitants). The government has created the Zimbabwe Human Capital Website to provide information for the diaspora on job and investment opportunities in Zimbabwe. [228] [229] 
 
   Scientific publication trends in the most productive SADC countries, 2005–2014. Source: UNESCO Science Report: towards 2030 (2015), data from Thomson Reuters' Web of Science, Science Citation Index Expanded. 
 Despite the fact that human resources are a pillar of any research and innovation policy, the  Medium Term Plan   2011–2015  did not discuss any explicit policy for promoting postgraduate studies in science and engineering. The scarcity of new PhDs in science and engineering fields from the University of Zimbabwe in 2013 was symptomatic of this omission. [228] [229] 
 Nor does the development agenda to 2018, the  Zimbabwe Agenda for Sustainable Economic Transformation,  contain any specific targets for increasing the number of scientists and engineers, or the staffing requirements for industry and other productive sectors. In addition, the lack of co-ordination and coherence among governance structures has led to a multiplication of research priorities and poor implementation of existing policies. [228] [229] 
 The country's  Second Science and Technology Policy  was launched in June 2012, after being elaborated with UNESCO assistance. It replaces the earlier policy dating from 2002. The 2012 policy prioritises biotechnology, information and communication technologies (ICTs), space sciences, nanotechnology, indigenous knowledge systems, technologies yet to emerge and scientific solutions to emergent environmental challenges. The  Second Science and Technology Policy  also asserts the government commitment to allocating at least 1% of GDP to research and development, focusing at least 60% of university education on developing skills in science and technology and ensuring that school pupils devote at least 30% of their time to studying science subjects. [228] [229] 
 In 2014, Zimbabwe counted 21 publications per million inhabitants in internationally catalogued journals, according to Thomson Reuters' Web of Science (Science Citation Index Expanded). This placed Zimbabwe sixth out of the 15 SADC countries, behind Namibia (59), Mauritius (71), Botswana (103) and, above all, South Africa (175) and the Seychelles (364). The average for sub-Saharan Africa was 20 scientific publications per million inhabitants, compared to a global average of 176 per million. [229] 
 
 Demographics [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Demographics of Zimbabwe 
 Ethnic groups [ edit ] 
   A Tonga woman pleating a basket 
 According to the 2012 census report, 99.7% of the population is of African origin. [5]  The majority people, the Shona, comprise 82%, while Ndebele make up 14% of the population. [234]  The Ndebele descended from Zulu migrations in the 19th century and the other tribes with which they intermarried. Up to one million Ndebele may have left the country over the last five years, [ when? ]  mainly for South Africa. Other ethnic groups include  Venda ,  Tonga ,  Tsonga ,  Kalanga ,  Sotho ,  Ndau ,  Nambya ,  Tswana ,  Xhosa  and  Lozi .
 Minority ethnic groups include  white Zimbabweans , who make up less than 1% of the total population. White Zimbabweans are mostly of British origin, but there are also  Afrikaner ,  Greek ,  Portuguese ,  French  and Dutch communities. The white population dropped from a peak of around 278,000, or 4.3% of the population, in 1975. [235]  The 2012 census lists the total white population at 28,782 (roughly 0.22% of the population), one-twentieth of its peak. [236]  Most emigration has been to the United Kingdom (between  200,000 and 500,000  Britons are of Rhodesian or Zimbabwean origin), South Africa, Botswana,  Zambia , [237]  Mozambique, [238]  Canada, Australia and New Zealand.  Coloureds  form 0.5% of the population, and various  Asian  ethnic groups, mostly of Indian and Chinese origin, are also 0.5%. [239] 
 
 Largest cities [ edit ] 
 
 
 
       Largest cities or towns in Zimbabwe According to the 2012 Census [240] 
 
 
 
 Rank
 
 Name 
 
 Province 
 
 Pop.
 
 
 
 
 Harare Bulawayo 
 
 1 
 Harare 
 Harare 
 1,485,231
 
 Mutare 
 
 
 2 
 Bulawayo 
 Bulawayo 
 653,337
 
 
 3 
 Chitungwiza 
 Harare 
 356,840
 
 
 4 
 Mutare 
 Manicaland 
 186,208
 
 
 5 
 Epworth 
 Harare 
 167,462
 
 
 6 
 Gweru 
 Midlands 
 154,825
 
 
 7 
 Kwekwe 
 Midlands 
 100,900
 
 
 8 
 Kadoma 
 Mashonaland West 
 91,633
 
 
 9 
 Masvingo 
 Masvingo 
 87,886
 
 
 10 
 Chinhoyi 
 Mashonaland West 
 68,273
 
 
 Languages [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Languages of Zimbabwe 
 Zimbabwe has 16 official languages and under the constitution, an Act of Parliament may prescribe other languages as officially recognised languages. [4]  English is the main language used in the education and judicial systems. The  Bantu languages   Shona  and  Ndebele  are the principal indigenous languages of Zimbabwe. Shona is spoken by 78% of the population, Ndebele by 20%. Other minority Bantu languages include Venda,  Tsonga , Shangaan, Kalanga, Sotho, Ndau and Nambya. Less than 2.5%, mainly the white and "coloured" (mixed race) minorities, consider English their native language. [241]  Shona has a rich oral tradition, which was incorporated into the first Shona novel,  Feso  by  Solomon Mutswairo , published in 1956. [242]  English is primarily spoken in the cities but less so in rural areas. Radio and television news are broadcast in Shona, Sindebele and English. [ citation needed ] 
 There is a large community of Portuguese speakers in Zimbabwe, mainly in the border areas with Mozambique and in major cities. [243]  Beginning in 2017, teaching Portuguese was included in secondary education of Zimbabwe. [244] [245] 
 
 Religion [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Religion in Zimbabwe 
   Catholic church  in  Harare 
 According to the 2017 Inter Censal Demography Survey by the  Zimbabwe National Statistics Agency , 84% of Zimbabweans are Christian; 10% of the population do not belong to any religion, and 0.7% are  Muslim . [6] [246] [247] 
 62% of the population attend religious services regularly. [248]  69% of Zimbabweans belong to  Protestant  Christianity, 8% are Roman Catholic. [6]  Pentecostal-charismatic forms of Christianity, in particular, have grown rapidly in recent years and are playing a prominent role in public, social and political life. [249]  The largest Christian churches are  Anglican ,  Roman Catholic ,  Seventh-day Adventist [250]  and  Methodist .
 As in other African countries, Christianity may be mixed with enduring traditional beliefs.  Indigenous religion , which predates colonialism, has become relatively marginal but continues to be an important part of the Zimbabwean religious field. [251] [252]   Ancestral worship  is the most practised non-Christian religion, involving spiritual intercession; the  mbira dzavadzimu , which means "voice of the ancestors", an instrument related to many  lamellophones  ubiquitous throughout Africa, is central to many ceremonial proceedings.
 
 Health [ edit ] 
 See also:  Health in Zimbabwe ,  HIV/AIDS in Zimbabwe , and  Zimbabwean cholera outbreak 
   Life expectancy in select Southern African countries, 1950–2019.  HIV/AIDS  has caused a fall in life expectancy. 
   Mother of Peace AIDS orphanage,  Mutoko  (2005) 
 At independence, the policies of racial inequality were reflected in the disease patterns of the black majority. The first five years after independence saw rapid gains in areas such as immunisation coverage, access to health care, and contraceptive prevalence rate. [253]  Zimbabwe was thus considered internationally to have achieved a good record of health development. [254] 
 Zimbabwe suffered occasional outbreaks of acute diseases. The gains on the national health were eroded by structural adjustment in the 1990s, [255]  the impact of the HIV/AIDS pandemic [207]  and the economic crisis since 2000. In 2006, Zimbabwe had one of the lowest life expectancies in the world according to UN figure—44 for men and 43 for women, down from 60 in 1990, but recovered to 60 in 2015. [256] [257]  The rapid drop was ascribed mainly to the HIV/AIDS pandemic.  Infant mortality  rose from 6% in the late 1990s to 12.3% by 2004. [207]  Official fertility rates over the last decade were 3.6 (2002), [258]  3.8 (2006) [259]  and 3.8 (2012). [5]  The 2014 maternal mortality rate per 100,000 births for Zimbabwe was 614 [200]  compared to 960 in 2010–11 [200]  and 232 in 1990. The under five mortality rate, per 1,000 births was 75 in 2014 (94 in 2009). [200]  The number of midwives per 1,000 live births was unavailable in 2016 and the lifetime risk of death for pregnant women 1 in 42. [260] 
 In 2006 an association of doctors in Zimbabwe made calls for Mugabe to make moves to assist the ailing health service. [261]  The  HIV infection rate in Zimbabwe  was estimated to be 14% for people aged 15–49 in 2009. [262]   UNESCO  reported a decline in HIV prevalence among pregnant women from 26% in 2002 to 21% in 2004. [263]  By 2016 HIV/AIDS prevalence had been reduced to 13.5% [256]  compared to 40% in 1998. [200] 
 At the end of November 2008, some operations at three of Zimbabwe's four major referral hospitals had shut down, along with the Zimbabwe Medical School, and the fourth major hospital had two wards and no operating theatres working. [264]  Those hospitals still open were not able to obtain basic drugs and medicines. [265]  The situation changed drastically after the Unity Government and the introduction of the multi-currency system in February 2009 although the political and economic crisis also contributed to the emigration of the doctors and people with medical knowledge. [266] 
 
   Map showing the spread of  cholera  in and around Zimbabwe put together from several sources 
 In August 2008 large areas of Zimbabwe were struck by the ongoing cholera epidemic. By December 2008 more than 10,000 people had been infected in all but one of Zimbabwe's provinces, and the outbreak had spread to Botswana, Mozambique, South Africa and Zambia. [267] [268]  On 4 December 2008 the Zimbabwe government declared the outbreak to be a national emergency and asked for international aid. [269] [270]  By 9 March 2009 The World Health Organization estimated that 4,011 people had succumbed to the waterborne disease since the outbreak began, and the total number of cases recorded had reached 89,018. [271]  In Harare, the city council offered free graves to cholera victims. [272] 
 
 Education [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Education in Zimbabwe 
   St. George's College, Harare  was established in 1896 by a French  Jesuit . 
 Large investments in education since independence has resulted in the highest adult literacy rate in Africa which in 2013 was 90.70%. [273]  This is lower than the 92% recorded in 2010 by the  United Nations Development Programme [274] [275]  and the 97.0% recorded in the 2002 census, while still substantially higher than 80.4% recorded in the 1992 census. [276] 
 The wealthier portion of the population usually send their children to independent schools as opposed to the government-run schools which are attended by the majority as these are subsidised by the government. School education was made free in 1980, but since 1988, the government has steadily increased the charges attached to school enrolment until they now greatly exceed the real value of fees in 1980. The Ministry of Education of Zimbabwe maintains and operates the government schools, but the fees charged by independent schools are regulated by the cabinet of Zimbabwe. The education department has stated that 20,000 teachers have left Zimbabwe since 2007 and that half of Zimbabwe's children have not progressed beyond primary school. [277]  Education came under threat since the economic changes in 2000, with teachers going on strike because of low pay, students unable to concentrate because of hunger, and the price of uniforms soaring making this standard a luxury. Teachers were also one of the main targets of Mugabe's attacks because he thought they were not strong supporters. [278] 
 Zimbabwe's education system consists of two years of pre-school, seven years of primary and six years of secondary schooling before students can enter university in the country or abroad. The academic year in Zimbabwe runs from January to December, with three terms, separated by one-month breaks, with a total of 40 weeks of school per year. National examinations are written during the third term in November, with  "O" level  and  "A" level  subjects also offered in June. [279] 
 There are seven public (government) universities as well as four church-related universities in Zimbabwe that are internationally accredited. [279]  The  University of Zimbabwe , the first and largest, was built in 1952 and is located in the Harare suburb of  Mount Pleasant . Notable alumni from Zimbabwean universities include Welshman Ncube,  Peter Moyo ,  Tendai Biti ,  Chenjerai Hove  and Arthur Mutambara. Many of the politicians in the government of Zimbabwe have obtained degrees from universities in the United States or other universities abroad.
 National University of Science and Technology  is the second largest public research university in Zimbabwe located in Bulawayo. It was established in 1991. The National University of Science and Technology strives to become a flourishing and reputable institution not only in Zimbabwe and in Southern Africa but also among the international fraternity of universities.  Africa University  is a United Methodist university in Manicaland which attracts students from at least 36 African countries.
 
 Gender equality [ edit ] 
 Further information:  Child marriage in Zimbabwe ,  Polygamy in Zimbabwe ,  Human trafficking in Zimbabwe , and  Abortion in Zimbabwe 
 Women in Zimbabwe are disadvantaged in many facets including economic, political, and social spheres, and experience sex and gender based violence. [280]  A 2014 UN report found that deep rooted cultural issues, patriarchal attitudes, and religious practices negatively impacted women's rights and freedoms in the country. [280]  These negative views toward women as well as societal norms impact the incentive for women to participate in the economy and hinder their economic production. [280]  Zimbabwe's constitution has provisions in it that provide incentive to achieve greater gender equality, but the data shows that enforcement has been lax and adoption slow. [280]  In December 2016 the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies conducted a case study to determine how to best implement effective policy to address issues such as gender violence and implementation of equality laws. [281]  It was found that sex and gender based violence against women and girls was increasing in areas that had experienced disasters (floods, drought, disease) but could not quantify the extent of the increase. [281]  Some of the obstacles in combating these issues are that there are economic barriers to declaring sex and gender based violence to be unacceptable as well as social barriers. [281]  Additionally, governmental services which were installed to help educate the populace about these issues as well as provide services to victims are underfunded and unable to carry out their duties. [281]  The UN also provided economic incentive to adopt policies which would discourage these practices which negatively impacted women in Zimbabwe. [282] 
 Women are often seen as inferior, treated as objects, and viewed in subordinate roles in history and philosophy. [283]   Ubuntu , an African philosophy's spiritual aspect, instills the belief that boys should be more valued than girls as boys pass on lineage, and the belief system places high value in respecting one's ancestors. [283]  A common expression used in court, " vakadzi ngavanyarare ", translates to " women should keep quiet, " and as a result women are not consulted in decision-making; they must implement the men's wishes. [283]  The subordination of women in Zimbabwe, and the cultural forces which dictate what they must be, have led to deaths and the sacrifice of professional advancement in order for them to fulfill their roles as wives, mothers, and subordinates. [284] [283]  Women are taught that they must never refuse their husband's sexual advances, even if they know they are infected with HIV from being unfaithful. [283]  As a result of this practice, Zimbabwean women aged 15–49 have an HIV prevalence rate of 16.1% and make up 62% of the total population infected with HIV in that age group. [285] 
 Zimbabwean women face cultural and social adversity in their professional lives which affects their educational attainment, professional development, and advancement. [284]  In 2009 the South African Journal of Education found that although the majority of primary school teachers in their random sample size were qualified for advancement to administrative positions, none of them had applied for administrative openings. [284]  The women did not see themselves as equals with their male counterparts and believed their role as a wife and mother superseded all other parts of their lives. [284]  The women surveyed in this trial were also found to have low self-esteem, a possible correlation to their societal roles and gender stereotypes. [284]  In 2016 the FAO found that only 60% of women participated in the economy in some form compared to 74.3% for their male counterparts. [286]  Women also made up the majority of low education jobs, such as 70% of the agriculture work force, yet only made up 16.7% and 21% of local authority and managers in the private sector respectively. [286]  In the public sector, women comprised 14% of the Zimbabwean House of Assembly and 33% of the Senate, despite the population ratio being 0.95 males per 1 female. [287] [282]  To address gender inequality in the economy, the UN supports policies which help increase the number of women in leadership roles, such as heads of schools, with increased funding in line with #3 of the outlined Millennium Development Goals. [282]  Through these policies Zimbabwe has made gains in closing the gender gap in school enrolment: 50.5% of males are enrolled in secondary schools compared to 49.5% in females. [287] 
 Zimbabwe experiences high rates of domestic and sexual violence; the Zimbabwe National Statistics Office shows that rates are increasing. [288]  21 rapes are reported per day in Zimbabwe - a rate of 0.12 rapes per day per 100,000 people. As not all rapes are reported, the actual number is likely higher. Reported rape increased 42% between 2010 and 2016. [288]  Of all the violence against girls and women reported in Zimbabwe, 78% was inflicted by their spouse, father, or domestic partner. [288]  UNICEF reports show that one in three girls that grow up in Zimbabwe experience sexual assault before turning 18; this is further exacerbated by cultural norms such as child marriage. [288]  Young girls often run away with older men when their educational opportunities are limited or to escape a violent household. [288]  These incidents of domestic violence or young girls running away with older men are usually not investigated by police as men are viewed as superior to women in Zimbabwean culture and their role as the dominant person in the relationship is to discipline their spouse, often violently. [288]  There is an ingrained cultural norm that violence can be a show of power and love which makes ending domestic abuse in Zimbabwe difficult. [288]  The Zimbabwe Women's Lawyers Association is an organisation that is assisting the implementation of the legal framework, as defined in the 2013 constitution, to help women. The association provides programmes which help educate women on their rights and provides them with opportunities as a way of combating domestic and sexual violence. [288] 
 
 Culture [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Culture of Zimbabwe 
 Zimbabwe has many different cultures, with Shona beliefs and ceremonies being prominent. The Shona people have many types of sculptures and carvings. [289] 
 Zimbabwe first celebrated its independence on 18 April 1980. [290]  Celebrations are held at either the  National Sports Stadium  or  Rufaro Stadium  in Harare. The first independence celebrations were held in 1980 at the Zimbabwe Grounds. At these celebrations, doves are released to symbolise peace, fighter jets fly over, and the  national anthem  is sung. The flame of independence is lit by the president after parades by the presidential family and members of the armed forces of Zimbabwe. The president also gives a speech to the people of Zimbabwe which is televised for those unable to attend the stadium. [291]  Zimbabwe also has a national beauty pageant, the  Miss Heritage Zimbabwe  contest, which has been held annually since 2012.
 
 Arts [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Zimbabwean art 
 See also:  Music of Zimbabwe 
   "Reconciliation", a  stone sculpture  by  Amos Supuni 
 Traditional arts in Zimbabwe include  pottery ,  basketry , textiles, jewellery and carving. Among the distinctive qualities are symmetrically patterned woven baskets and stools carved out of a single piece of wood. Shona sculpture, which has a long cultural history, began evolving into its modern form in the mid 20th century and gained increasing international popularity. [292]  Most subjects of carved figures of stylised birds and human figures among others are made with sedimentary rock such as  soapstone , as well as harder igneous rocks such as  serpentine  and the rare stone  verdite . Zimbabwean artefacts can be found in countries like Singapore, China and Canada. e.g.  Dominic Benhura 's statue in the  Singapore Botanic Gardens .
 Shona sculpture has survived through the ages, and the modern style is a fusion of African folklore with European influences. World-renowned Zimbabwean sculptors include Nicholas, Nesbert and Anderson Mukomberanwa, Tapfuma Gutsa, Henry Munyaradzi and Locardia Ndandarika. Internationally, Zimbabwean sculptors have managed to influence a new generation of artists, particularly black Americans, through lengthy apprenticeships with master sculptors in Zimbabwe. 
 Several authors are well known within Zimbabwe and abroad.  Charles Mungoshi  is renowned in Zimbabwe for writing traditional stories in English and in Shona, and his poems and books have sold well with both the black and white communities. [293]   Catherine Buckle  has achieved international recognition with her two books  African Tears  and  Beyond Tears  which tell of the ordeal she went through under the 2000 Land Reform. [294]  The first  Prime Minister of Rhodesia , Ian Smith, wrote two books –  The Great Betrayal  and  Bitter Harvest .  The book  The House of Hunger  by  Dambudzo Marechera  won an award in the UK in 1979 and the Nobel Prize-winning author  Doris Lessing 's first novel  The Grass Is Singing , the first four volumes of  Children of Violence  sequence, as well as the collection of short stories  African Stories  are set in Rhodesia. In 2013 NoViolet Bulawayo's novel  We Need New Names  was shortlisted for the  Booker Prize . The novel tells the story of the devastation and emigration caused by the brutal suppression of Zimbabwean civilians during the Gukurahundi in the early 1980s. [ citation needed ] 
 Notable artists include Henry Mudzengerere and Nicolas Mukomberanwa. A recurring theme in Zimbabwean art is the metamorphosis of man into beast. [295]  Zimbabwean musicians like  Thomas Mapfumo ,  Oliver Mtukudzi , the  Bhundu Boys ;  Stella Chiweshe ,  Alick Macheso  and  Audius Mtawarira  have achieved international recognition. Among members of the white minority community, Theatre has a large following, with numerous theatrical companies performing in Zimbabwe's urban areas. [296] 
 
 Cuisine [ edit ] 
   A meal of  sadza   (right) , greens, and goat  offal . The goat's small intestines are wrapped around small pieces of large intestines before cooking. 
 Like in many African countries, the majority of Zimbabweans depend on a few staple foods. "Mealie meal", also known as  cornmeal , is used to prepare  sadza  or  isitshwala , as well as  porridge  known as  bota  or  ilambazi .  Sadza  is made by mixing the cornmeal with water to produce a thick paste/porridge. After the paste has been cooking for several minutes, more cornmeal is added to thicken the paste. This is usually eaten as lunch or dinner, usually with sides such as gravy, vegetables (spinach,  chomolia , or  spring greens /collard greens), beans, and meat (stewed, grilled, roasted, or sundried).  Sadza  is also commonly eaten with curdled milk ( sour milk ), commonly known as "lacto" ( mukaka wakakora ), or dried  Tanganyika sardine , known locally as  kapenta  or  matemba .  Bota  is a thinner porridge, cooked without the additional cornmeal and usually flavoured with peanut butter, milk, butter, or jam. [297]   Bota  is usually eaten for breakfast.
 Graduations, weddings, and any other family gatherings will usually be celebrated with the killing of a goat or cow, which will be barbecued or roasted by the family.
 
   Raw  boerewors 
 Even though the Afrikaners are a small group (10%) within the white minority group, Afrikaner recipes are popular.  Biltong , a type of jerky, is a popular snack, prepared by hanging bits of spiced raw meat to dry in the shade. [298]   Boerewors  is served with  sadza . It is a long sausage, often well-spiced, composed of beef rather than pork, and barbecued. [ citation needed ] 
 As Zimbabwe was a British colony, some people there have adopted some colonial-era English eating habits. For example, most people will have porridge in the morning, as well as 10 o'clock tea (midday tea). They will have lunch, often leftovers from the night before, freshly cooked  sadza , or sandwiches (which is more common in the cities). After lunch, there is usually 4 o'clock tea (afternoon tea), which is served before dinner. It is not uncommon for tea to be had after dinner. [ citation needed ] 
 Rice, pasta, and  potato-based foods  (French fries and mashed potato) also make up part of Zimbabwean cuisine. A local favourite is rice cooked with peanut butter, which is taken with thick gravy, mixed vegetables and meat. [ citation needed ]  A potpourri of peanuts known as  nzungu , boiled and sundried maize, black-eyed peas known as  nyemba , and  Bambara groundnuts  known as  nyimo  makes a traditional dish called  mutakura .  Mutakura  can also be the above ingredients cooked individually.
 
 Sports [ edit ] 
 Main article:  Sport in Zimbabwe 
   Zimbabwe women's national football team  at the  2016 Olympic Games 
 Football  (also known as soccer)  is the most popular sport in Zimbabwe. [299]   The Warriors  have qualified for the  Africa Cup of Nations  five times (2004, 2006, 2017, 2019, 2021), and won the  Southern Africa championship  on six occasions (2000, 2003, 2005, 2009, 2017, 2018) and the  Eastern Africa cup  once (1985). The team is ranked 68th in 2022. [300]   Rugby union  is a significant sport in Zimbabwe.  The national side  have represented the country at 2  Rugby World Cup  tournaments in 1987 and 1991. [301]   Cricket  also has a following among the white minority. It is one of twelve  Test cricket  playing nations and an  ICC  full member as well. Notable cricket players from Zimbabwe include  Andy Flower ,  Heath Streak  and  Brendan Taylor .
 Zimbabwe has won eight Olympic medals, one in  field hockey   with the women's team  at the  1980 Summer Olympics  in Moscow, and seven by swimmer  Kirsty Coventry , three at the  2004 Summer Olympics  and four at the  2008 Summer Olympics . Zimbabwe has done well in the  Commonwealth Games  and  All-Africa Games  in swimming with Coventry obtaining 11 gold medals in the different competitions. [302] [303] [304] [305]  Zimbabwe has competed at  Wimbledon  and the  Davis Cup  in tennis, most notably with the Black family, which comprises  Wayne Black ,  Byron Black  and  Cara Black . The Zimbabwean  Nick Price  held the official World Number 1 golf status longer than any player from Africa has done. [306] 
 Other sports played in Zimbabwe are basketball, volleyball,  netball , and  water polo , as well as  squash ,  motorsport , martial arts,  chess , cycling,  polocrosse ,  kayaking  and  horse racing . However, most of these sports do not have international representatives but instead stay at a junior or national level.
 Zimbabwean professional  rugby league  players playing overseas are  Masimbaashe Motongo  and  Judah Mazive . [307] [308]  Former players include now  SANZAAR  CEO  Andy Marinos  who made an appearance for  South Africa  at the  Super League World Nines  and featured for the  Sydney Bulldogs  as well as Zimbabwe-born former  Scotland rugby union international   Scott Gray , who spent time at the  Brisbane Broncos . [309] 
 Zimbabwe has had success in karate as Zimbabwe's  Samson Muripo  became  Kyokushin  world champion in Osaka, Japan in 2009. Muripo is a two-time World Kyokushi Karate Champion and was the first black African to become the World Kyokushin Karate Champion. [310] 
 
 Media [ edit ] 
 The  media of Zimbabwe  is now once again diverse, having come under tight restriction between 2002 and 2008 by the government during the economic and political crisis. The Zimbabwean constitution promises freedom of the media and expression. Since the appointment of a new media and information minister in 2013 the media is facing less political interference and the supreme court has ruled some sections of the strict media laws as unconstitutional. [311]  In July 2009 the BBC and CNN were able to resume operations and report legally and openly from Zimbabwe. The Zimbabwe Ministry of Media, Information and Publicity stated that, "the Zimbabwe government never banned the BBC from carrying out lawful activities inside Zimbabwe". [159]  The BBC welcomed the move saying, "we're pleased at being able to operate openly in Zimbabwe once again". [312] 
 In 2010 the Zimbabwe Media Commission was established by the inclusive, power-sharing government. In May 2010 the commission licensed three privately owned newspapers, including the previously banned  Daily News , for publication. [313]   Reporters Without Borders  described the decisions as a "major advance". [314]  In June 2010  NewsDay  became the first independent daily newspaper to be published in Zimbabwe in seven years. [315]  ZBC's monopoly in the broadcasting sector was ended with the licensing of two private radio stations in 2012. [316] 
 Since the  2002 Access to Information and Protection of Privacy Act  was passed, a number of privately owned news outlets were shut down by the government, including  Daily News  whose managing director Wilf Mbanga went on to form the influential  The Zimbabwean . [317] [318]  As a result, many press organisations have been set up in both neighbouring and Western countries by exiled Zimbabweans. Because the internet is unrestricted, many Zimbabweans are allowed to access online news sites set up by exiled journalists. [319]  Reporters Without Borders claims the media environment in Zimbabwe involves "surveillance, threats, imprisonment, censorship, blackmail, abuse of power and denial of justice are all brought to bear to keep firm control over the news." [317]  The main published newspapers are  The Herald  and  The Chronicle  which are printed in Harare and Bulawayo respectively. The heavy-handedness on the media has progressively relaxed since 2009.
 In its 2021 report, Reporters Without Borders ranked the Zimbabwean media as 130th out of 180, noting that "access to information has improved and self-censorship has declined, but journalists are still often attacked or arrested". [317]  The government also bans many foreign broadcasting stations from Zimbabwe, including the  CBC , Sky News,  Channel 4 ,  American Broadcasting Company ,  Australian Broadcasting Corporation , and  Fox News . News agencies and newspapers from other Western countries and South Africa have also been banned from the country.
 
 National symbols [ edit ] 
   Traditional Zimbabwe Bird design 
 The stone-carved  Zimbabwe Bird  appears on the national flags and the coats of arms of both Zimbabwe and Rhodesia, as well as on  banknotes  and coins (first on  Rhodesian pound  and then  Rhodesian dollar ). It probably represents the  bateleur eagle  or the  African fish eagle . [320] [321]  The famous soapstone bird carvings stood on walls and monoliths of the ancient city of Great Zimbabwe. [322] 
 Balancing rocks  are geological formations all over Zimbabwe. The rocks are perfectly balanced without other supports. They are created when ancient granite intrusions are exposed to weathering, as softer rocks surrounding them erode away. They are often remarked on and have been depicted on both the  banknotes of Zimbabwe  and the Rhodesian dollar banknotes. The ones found on the current notes of Zimbabwe, named the Banknote Rocks, are located in  Epworth , approximately 14 km (9 mi) south east of Harare. [323]  There are many different formations of the rocks, incorporating single and paired columns of three or more rocks. These formations are a feature of south and east tropical Africa from northern South Africa northwards to Sudan. The most notable formations in Zimbabwe are located in the Matobo National Park in Matabeleland. [324] 
 The  national anthem of Zimbabwe  is "Blessed be the Land of Zimbabwe" ( Shona :  Simudzai Mureza wedu WeZimbabwe ;  Northern Ndebele :  Kalibusiswe Ilizwe leZimbabwe ). It was introduced in March 1994 after a nationwide competition to replace  Ishe Komborera Africa  as a distinctly Zimbabwean song. The winning entry was a song written by Professor  Solomon Mutswairo  and composed by Fred Changundega. It has been translated into all three of the main languages of Zimbabwe. [324] 
 
 See also [ edit ] 
 Index of Zimbabwe-related articles 
 Outline of Zimbabwe 
 References [ edit ] 
 Citations [ edit ] 
 
 
 ^   "Constitution of the Republic of Zimbabwe 2013, as amended to 2017" .  constitutions.unwomen.org . Retrieved  26 November  2022 . 
 
 ^   "Zimbabwe" .  The Beaver County Times . 13 September 1981 . Retrieved  2 November  2011 . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   "The World Factbook – Zimbabwe" . Central Intelligence Agency. 2 December 2021. 
 
 ^  a   b   c   "Constitution of Zimbabwe (final draft)"   (PDF) . Government of Zimbabwe. January 2013. Archived from  the original   (PDF)  on 2 October 2013 – via Kubatana.net. 
 
 ^  a   b   c   "Census 2012 National Report"   (PDF) .  ZIMSTAT . Archived from  the original   (PDF)  on 1 September 2014 . Retrieved  4 May  2016 . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   "Inter Censal Demography Survey 2017 Report"   (PDF) . Zimbabwe National Statistics Agency. 2017. 
 
 ^   Developments in English .  International Association of University Professors of English Conference . Cambridge University Press. 31 October 2014.  ISBN   9781107038509  – via Google Books. 
 
 ^   "Zimbabwe" .  The World Factbook  (2023 ed.).  Central Intelligence Agency . Retrieved  24 September  2022 . 
 
 ^   "2022 Population and Housing Census - Preliminary Report - Zimbabwe Data Portal" .  zimbabwe.opendataforafrica.org . Retrieved  27 July  2022 . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   "World Economic Outlook Database, October 2022" .  IMF.org .  International Monetary Fund . October 2022 . Retrieved  11 October  2022 . 
 
 ^   "GINI Index" . World Bank . Retrieved  16 June  2021 . 
 
 ^   "Human Development Report 2021/2022"   (PDF) .  United Nations Development Programme . 8 September 2022 . Retrieved  30 September  2022 . 
 
 ^   "Zimbabwe Time" .  Greenwich Mean Time . Greenwich 2000. Archived from  the original  on 19 July 2011 . Retrieved  17 November  2017 . 
 
 ^   "Zimbabwe Population 1950-2021" .  macrotrends.net . Retrieved  29 June  2021 . 
 
 ^   "Who built Great Zimbabwe? And why? - Breeanna Elliott" .  TED-Ed . Retrieved  13 March  2022 . 
 
 ^   "Zimbabwe 2015 Human Rights Report" .  United States Department of State   Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor . 2015 . Retrieved  6 May  2016 . 
 
 ^   "Zimbabwe – big house of stone" . Somali Press. Archived from  the original  on 3 May 2011 . Retrieved  14 December  2008 . 
 
 ^   Lafon, Michel (1994).  "Shona Class 5 revisited: a case against *ri as Class 5 nominal prefix"   (PDF) .  Zambezia .  21 : 51–80. 
 
 ^   Vale, Lawrence J. (1999). "Mediated monuments and national identity".  Journal of Architecture .  4  (4): 391–408.  doi : 10.1080/136023699373774 . 
 
 ^   Garlake, Peter  (1973).  Great Zimbabwe: New Aspects of Archaeology . London, UK: Thames & Hudson. p.  13 .  ISBN   978-0-8128-1599-3 . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   Fontein, Joost (September 2006).  The Silence of Great Zimbabwe: Contested Landscapes and the Power of Heritage  (First ed.). London:  University College London Press . pp. 119–20.  ISBN   978-1844721238 . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   Ndlovu-Gatsheni, Sabelo J. (2009).  Do "Zimbabweans" Exist? Trajectories of Nationalism, National Identity Formation and Crisis in a Postcolonial State  (First ed.). Bern:  Peter Lang AG . pp. 113–14.  ISBN   978-3-03911-941-7 . 
 
 ^   "What's in a Name? Welcome to the 'Republic of Machobana' " .  Read on . Harare: Training Aids Development Group: 40. 1991. 
 
 ^   "Zimbabwe - Cultural life | Britannica" .  www.britannica.com . Retrieved  11 February  2022 . 
 
 ^   "Pre-colonial history of SA" .  South African History Online . Archived from  the original  on 2 July 2016 . Retrieved  17 July  2016 . 
 
 ^   "Zimbabwe" .  South African History Online . Archived from  the original  on 7 January 2019 . Retrieved  19 January  2019 . 
 
 ^  a   b   Hall, Martin; Stephen W. Silliman (2005).  Historical Archaeology . Wiley Blackwell. pp. 241–44.  ISBN   978-1-4051-0751-8 . 
 
 ^   Nelson, Harold (1983).  Zimbabwe: A Country Study . The Studies. pp. 1–317. 
 
 ^   
 Hensman, Howard (1901).  Cecil Rhodes: A Study of a Career  (reprint ed.). Creative Media Partners, LLC (published 2018). pp. 106–107.  ISBN   9781376448528 . Retrieved  12 July  2020 . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   Parsons , pp. 178–81. 
 
 ^   Bryce, James (2008).  Impressions of South Africa . p. 170;  ISBN   055430032X . 
 
 ^   Southern Rhodesia Order in Council of 20 October 1898, which includes at section 4 thereof: "The territory for the time being within the limits of this Order shall be known as Southern Rhodesia." 
 
 ^   Gray, J. A. (1956).  "A Country in Search of a Name" .  The Northern Rhodesia Journal .  3  (1): 78. Archived from  the original  on 30 April 2009 . Retrieved  16 May  2007 . 
 
 ^  a   b   "Zimbabwe | South African History Online" .  www.sahistory.org.za . Archived from  the original  on 7 January 2019 . Retrieved  3 February  2020 . 
 
 ^   Southern Rhodesia (Annexation) Order in Council, 30 July 1923 which provided by section 3 thereof: "From and after the coming into operation of this Order the said territories shall be annexed to and form part of His Majesty's Dominions, and shall be known as the Colony of Southern Rhodesia." 
 
 ^   Stella Madzibamuto v Desmond William Larder – Burke, Fredrick Phillip George (1969) A.C 645 – Authority for date of annexation having been 12 September 1923, being the date the Rhodesia (Annexation) Order in Council came into effect 
 
 ^  a   b   Collective Responses to Illegal Acts in International Law: United Nations Action in the Question of Southern Rhodesia  by Vera Gowlland-Debbas 
 
 ^   Stella Madzibamuto v Desmond William Larder – Burke, Fredrick Phillip George (1969) A.C 645 
 
 ^   Southern Rhodesia Constitution Letters Patent, 1923 
 
 ^  a   b   
 Moorcraft, Paul (31 August 1990).  "Rhodesia's War of Independence" .  History Today .  40  (9).  [P]er head of (white) population Rhodesia had contributed more in both world wars than any other part of the empire, including the United Kingdom. ... There is little doubt now that after a few resignations here and there, the army, the Royal Navy and even the Royal Air Force (supposedly the most disaffected service) would have carried out any orders to subdue the first national treason against the Crown since the American War of Independence. 
 
 ^   Machingaidze, Victor E.M. (1991). "Agrarian Change from above: The Southern Rhodesia Native Land Husbandry Act and African Response".  The International Journal of African Historical Studies .  24  (3): 557–588.  doi : 10.2307/219092 .  JSTOR   219092 . 
 
 ^   Parsons , p. 292. 
 
 ^  a   b   Hastedt, Glenn P. (2004)  Encyclopedia of American Foreign Policy , Infobase Publishing, p. 537;  ISBN   143810989X . 
 
 ^   "On This Day" .  BBC News . 1 June 1979 . Retrieved  14 December  2008 . 
 
 ^  a   b   Chung, Fay (2006).  Re-living the Second Chimurenga: memories from the liberation struggle in Zimbabwe , Preben (INT) Kaarsholm. p. 242;  ISBN   9171065512 . 
 
 ^   Preston, Matthew (2004).  Ending Civil War: Rhodesia and Lebanon in Perspective.  p. 25;  ISBN   1850435790 . 
 
 ^   Lord Soames, "From Rhodesia to Zimbabwe."  International Affairs   56#3 (1980): 405–419.  online 
 
 ^   Zimbabwe, May 1980/Joint Committee on Foreign Affairs and Defence, Canberra: Government Printer, 1980. p. 122. 
 
 ^   Waddy, Nicholas (2014). "The Strange Death of 'Zimbabwe-Rhodesia': The Question of British Recognition of the Muzorewa Regime in Rhodesian Public Opinion, 1979".  South African Historical Journal .  66  (2): 227–248.  doi : 10.1080/02582473.2013.846935 .  S2CID   159650816 . 
 
 ^   George M. Houser.  "Letter by George M. Houser, Executive Director of the American Committee on Africa (ACOA), on the 1980 independence election in Rhodesia" . Retrieved  1 December  2007 . 
 
 ^   Smith, Ian  (2008).  Bitter Harvest . London: John Blake Publishing Ltd. p. 367.  ISBN   978-1-85782-604-3 . 
 
 ^   Godwin, Peter ;  Hancock, Ian  (1995) [1993].  'Rhodesians Never Die': The Impact of War and Political Change on White Rhodesia, c. 1970–1980 . Harare: Baobab Books. p. 312.  ISBN   978-0-908311-82-8 . 
 
 ^   Johnson, Boris (15 November 2017).  "Robert Mugabe tarnished the jewel that is Zimbabwe. Now is its chance to shine again" .  The Telegraph .  Archived  from the original on 10 January 2022 – via www.telegraph.co.uk. 
 
 ^   Lessing, Doris (10 April 2003).  "The Jewel of Africa" .  The New York Review of Books . 
 
 ^   Chifera, Irwin.  "What Happened to Zimbabwe, Once Known as The Jewel of Africa?" . 
 
 ^  a   b   Nyarota, Geoffrey (2006).  Against the Grain , Zebra, p. 134;  ISBN   1770071121 . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   Meredith, Martin  (September 2007) [2002].  Mugabe: Power, Plunder and the Struggle for Zimbabwe . New York:  PublicAffairs . pp.  62–73 .  ISBN   978-1-58648-558-0 . 
 
 ^  a   b   Hill, Geoff (2005) [2003].  The Battle for Zimbabwe: The Final Countdown . Johannesburg: Struik Publishers. p. 77.  ISBN   978-1-86872-652-3 . 
 
 ^   "Report on the 1980s disturbances in Matabeleland and the Midlands, by the Catholic Commission for Justice and Peace in Zimbabwe, March 1997 – Conclusion – FINAL ESTIMATE: The figure for the dead and missing is not less than 3000. This statement is now beyond reasonable doubt. Adding up the conservative suggestions made above, the figure is reasonably certainly 3750 dead. More than that it is still not possible to say, except to allow that the real figure for the dead could be possibly double 3000, or even higher. Only further research will resolve the issue"   (PDF) . 
 
 ^   "Gukurahundi killed 80,000: Eddie Cross" . Archived from  the original  on 12 November 2016 . Retrieved  11 November  2016 . 
 
 ^   Catholic Commission for Justice and Peace in Zimbabwe; Legal Resources Foundation (1 January 1997).  "Breaking the Silence, Building True Peace"  – via Internet Archive. 
 
 ^   "REPORT ON THE 1980s DISTURBANCES IN MATABELELAND & THE MIDLANDS" .  Catholic Commission for Justice and Peace in Zimbabwe . March 1997 . Retrieved  8 August  2015 . 
 
 ^   "Chronology of Zimbabwe" . badley.info. Archived from  the original  on 23 November 2008 . Retrieved  9 December  2008 . 
 
 ^   "Timeline: Zimbabwe" .  BBC News . 15 October 2009 . Retrieved  9 December  2008 . 
 
 ^   "Zimbabwe: 1990 General Elections" . EISA. Archived from  the original  on 5 December 2008 . Retrieved  9 December  2008 . 
 
 ^   Moyo, Jonathon N.  "Voting for Democracy: A Study of Electoral Politics in Zimbabwe" . University of Zimbabwe. Archived from  the original  on 2 September 2009 . Retrieved  9 December  2008 . 
 
 ^   "A Brief History of Zimbabwe" . about.com. Archived from  the original  on 8 January 2008. 
 
 ^   "Zimbabwe: ZANU PF hegemony and its breakdown (1990–1999)" . EISA. Archived from  the original  on 5 December 2008 . Retrieved  9 December  2008 . 
 
 ^   "History of Zimbabwe" .  infoplease.com . 
 
 ^   "History of HIV & AIDS in Africa" .  AVERT . 20 July 2015 . Retrieved  8 August  2015 . 
 
 ^   "Britain's troubles with Mugabe" .  BBC News . 3 April 2000. 
 
 ^  a   b   "Fast Track Land Reform in Zimbabwe"   (PDF) .  Human Rights Watch .   (175 KB) 
 
 ^   Polgreen, Lydia (20 July 2012).  "In Zimbabwe Land Takeover, a Golden Lining" .  The New York Times . Retrieved  21 July  2012 . 
 
 ^   "Council Common Position renewing restrictive measures against Zimbabwe"   (PDF) .  Council of the European Union . 26 January 2009. 
 
 ^   "Zimbabwe Suspended Indefinitely from Commonwealth" .  Human Rights First . 8 December 2003. Archived from  the original  on 29 June 2007. 
 
 ^   "Commonwealth website confirms Zimbabwe "terminated" its membership with effect from 7 December 2003" . Thecommonwealth.org. 12 December 2003. Archived from  the original  on 5 July 2008. 
 
 ^   "Text of S. 494 (107th): Zimbabwe Democracy and Economic Recovery Act of 2001 (Passed Congress/Enrolled Bill version)" .  GovTrack . 12 December 2001 . Retrieved  29 December  2016 .    This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the  public domain . 
 
 ^   "Searching for fuel and other tales from Zimbabwe" . 1 October 2003. 
 
 ^   "Zimbabwe destruction: One man's story" . BBC. 30 August 2005 . Retrieved  19 December  2008 . 
 
 ^   "Driving out the filth in Zimbabwe" . 31 January 2007. 
 
 ^   "Zimbabwe: Housing policy built on foundation of failures and lies – Amnesty International" . 9 August 2006. Archived from  the original  on 10 October 2006 . Retrieved  30 December  2013 . 
 
 ^   Kenneth Ingham; Clyde William Sanger; Kenneth Bradley.  "Zimbabwe - 2008 elections and aftermath | Britannica" . Encyclopedia Britannica. Archived from  the original  on 15 January 2023 . Retrieved  15 January  2023 . 
 
 ^   Nasaw, Daniel (11 July 2008).  "China and Russia veto Zimbabwe sanctions" .  The Guardian .  ISSN   0261-3077 . Retrieved  9 June  2019 . 
 
 ^   "Russia and China veto U.N. Zimbabwe sanctions" .  Reuters . 12 July 2008 . Retrieved  9 June  2019 . 
 
 ^   Jacobson, Celean (24 November 2008).  "Carter warns situation appears dire in Zimbabwe" .  Fox News . Associated Press. 
 
 ^   Ndlovu, Nompilo (2009).  A case study of Non-Governmental Organisations' (NGOS) responses to food insecurity in Matabeleland, Zimbabwe  (MSocSc). University of Cape Town. 
 
 ^   "Mugabe wants sanctions removed" .  United Press International . 18 December 2010 . Retrieved  21 August  2011 . 
 
 ^   Booysen, Susan (4 March 2011).  Changing Perceptions in Zimbabwe – Nationwide Survey of the Political Climate in Zimbabwe November 2010 – January 2011   (PDF)  (Report).  Freedom House . Archived from  the original   (PDF)  on 12 December 2012 . Retrieved  16 February  2012 . 
 
 ^   OCHA in 2012–2013: Plan and Budget: Zimbabwe  (Report). United Nations  Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs . December 2011. Archived from  the original  on 30 January 2012 . Retrieved  16 February  2012 . 
 
 ^   Chinaka, Cris (17 January 2013).  "Mugabe deputy John Nkomo dies after cancer battle" .  Reuters . Retrieved  30 December  2013 . 
 
 ^   Dzirutwe, MacDonald.  "Zimbabweans start voting to adopt new constitution" .  Reuters . Archived from  the original  on 27 September 2013 . Retrieved  16 March  2013 . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   "Bailing out bandits" .  The Economist . Vol. 420, no. 8997. 9 July 2016. pp. 43–44.  ISSN   0013-0613 . Retrieved  8 July  2016 . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   Fletcher, Martin (7 February 2017). "Out of House and Home".  The Telegraph  (Telegraph Magazine ed.). p. 39. 
 
 ^   "Zimbabwe election: A guide to rigging allegations" .  BBC News . 7 August 2013 . Retrieved  7 June  2016 . 
 
 ^   "As the House Burns, Whither the Zimbabwean Opposition? – By Nicole Beardsworth" . 23 April 2015. 
 
 ^   Matyszak, Derek (20 September 2017).  "Zimbabwe's shady police roadblocks reflect its failing governance – ISS Africa" .  ISS Africa . Retrieved  22 September  2017 . 
 
 ^   "Zimbabwe 'shut down' over economic collapse" .  BBC News . Retrieved  7 July  2016 . 
 
 ^   Raath, Jan; Graham, Stuart (25 July 2016).  "Mugabe at war with militias that keep him in power" .  The Times . Retrieved  25 July  2016 . 
 
 ^   McKenzie, David; Swails, Brent; Dewan, Angela.  "Zimbabwe in turmoil after apparent coup" .  CNN . Retrieved  15 November  2017 . 
 
 ^   "Zimbabwe's Robert Mugabe confined to home as army takes control" .  The Guardian . 15 November 2017 . Retrieved  15 November  2017 . 
 
 ^   "Ruling party sacks Mugabe as leader" .  BBC News . 19 November 2017 . Retrieved  19 November  2017 . 
 
 ^  a   b   "Zimbabwe's President Mugabe 'resigns' " .  BBC News . 21 November 2017 . Retrieved  21 November  2017 . 
 
 ^   Gondo, Talent.  "BREAKING- Record 23 Presidential Candidates For Zimbabwe's July 30 Polls" .  zimeye.net . Archived from  the original  on 17 January 2019 . Retrieved  17 January  2019 . 
 
 ^   Mabhena, Charles (2 August 2018).  "BREAKING NEWS: Emerson Mnangagwa wins Zimbabwe Presidential Elections 2018, ZEC" .  ZWNews . Retrieved  17 January  2019 . 
 
 ^   Bruce Mutsvairo; Cleophas T. Muneri (29 November 2019).  Journalism, Democracy, and Human Rights in Zimbabwe . Rowman & Littlefield. pp. 14–.  ISBN   978-1-4985-9977-1 .  OCLC   1128426040 . 
 
 ^   "Zimbabwe's Chamisa challenges election result" .  TRTWORLD . 10 August 2018. Archived from  the original  on 17 January 2019 . Retrieved  26 September  2019 . 
 
 ^   "Zim ConCourt dismisses MDC's challenge, confirms Mnangagwa winner – SABC News – Breaking news, special reports, world, business, sport coverage of all South African current events. Africa's news leader" .  www.sabcnews.com . 24 August 2018 . Retrieved  17 January  2019 . 
 
 ^   "Top Zimbabwe court confirms Mnangagwa's presidential election victory" .  Reuters . 25 August 2018 . Retrieved  17 January  2019 . 
 
 ^   "The costs of the Robert Mugabe era" .  newzimbabwe.com . Archived from  the original  on 1 February 2018 . Retrieved  12 March  2018 . 
 
 ^   Mark Chingono and Bukola Adebayo (7 August 2019).  "Millions in Zimbabwe facing starvation after severe droughts, UN food agency says" .  CNN . Retrieved  14 August  2019 . 
 
 ^   "Canada and others debate Zimbabwe's bid to rejoin Commonwealth" .  The Globe and Mail . 7 February 2023. p. A4. 
 
 ^   "Former Zimbabwean leader Robert Mugabe dies – DW – 09/06/2019" .  dw.com . 
 
 ^   "Inyangani, Zimbabwe" .  Peakbagger . Retrieved  23 August  2020 . 
 
 ^   Helicon, ed. (2018).  The Hutchinson Unabridged Encyclopedia with Atlas and Weather Guide  – via Credo Reference. 
 
 ^   "Victoria Falls" .  Victoria Falls Tourism . 2019 . Retrieved  3 December  2019 . 
 
 ^   Moore, A E;  et al. (2009).  "Landscape evolution in Zimbabwe from the Permian to present, with implications for kimberlite prospecting"   (PDF) .  Geological Society of South Africa .  112 : 1–47–88. 
 
 ^   "At least 55 elephants die in Zimbabwe drought" . 21 October 2019 . Retrieved  22 October  2019 . 
 
 ^  a   b   Baughan, M. (2005). Continent in the Balance: Zimbabwe-Juvenile literature. Philadelphia, PA: Mason Crest Publishers;  ISBN   1590848101 . 
 
 ^   Dinerstein, Eric;  et al. (2017).  "An Ecoregion-Based Approach to Protecting Half the Terrestrial Realm" .  BioScience .  67  (6): 534–545.  doi : 10.1093/biosci/bix014 .  ISSN   0006-3568 .  PMC   5451287 .  PMID   28608869 . 
 
 ^   Chipika, J; Kowero, G. (2000). "Deforestation of woodlands in communal areas of Zimbabwe: is it due to agricultural policies?".  Agriculture, Ecosystems & Environment .  79  (2–3): 175.  doi : 10.1016/S0167-8809(99)00156-5 . 
 
 ^   "Chaos as tobacco sales start" . NewsdezeZimbabwe. Archived from  the original  on 27 September 2013 . Retrieved  21 March  2015 . 
 
 ^   Grantham, H. S.;  et al. (2020).  "Anthropogenic modification of forests means only 40% of remaining forests have high ecosystem integrity - Supplementary Material" .  Nature Communications .  11  (1): 5978.  Bibcode : 2020NatCo..11.5978G .  doi : 10.1038/s41467-020-19493-3 .  ISSN   2041-1723 .  PMC   7723057 .  PMID   33293507 . 
 
 ^   "Constitution of Zimbabwe Amendment (No. 17) Act, 2005" .  kubatana.net . NGO Network Alliance Project. 16 September 2005. Archived from  the original  on 27 September 2007. 
 
 ^   "Tekere says Mugabe 'insecure' in new book" . Archived from  the original  on 27 December 2007 . Retrieved  6 January  2008 . 
 
 ^   Mugabe, Robert. (2007).  Encyclopædia Britannica 2007 Ultimate Reference Suite , Chicago: Encyclopædia Britannica. 
 
 ^  a   b   Frankel, Matthew (26 May 2010).  "Myanmar boycott is misguided" .  Los Angeles Times .  Archived  from the original on 23 February 2021. 
 
 ^   Zimbabwe: Election Fraud Report, 04/18/05 .  University of Pennsylvania , 18 April 2005. 
 
 ^   "Mugabe's former ally accuses him of foul play" ,  Independent Online Zimbabwe , 12 March 2005. 
 
 ^   Makgetlaneng, Sehlare.  "ZIMBABWE'S 2005 PARLIAMENTARY ELECTIONS: Lessons for the Movement for Democratic Change"   (PDF) .  Africa Institute of South Africa : 124. 
 
 ^  a   b   Latham, Brian (4 March 2002).  "Contrast in styles as contenders hold rallies in Harare townships" .  The Independent . UK. Archived from  the original  on 29 December 2013. 
 
 ^   "Mugabe critics predict fraud in Zimbabwe elections" . CNN. 28 March 2008. 
 
 ^   "Zimbabwe stands 'on a precipice' " .  BBC News . 31 March 2008 . Retrieved  6 June  2012 . 
 
 ^   "Mugabe rival quits election race" .  BBC News . 22 June 2008. 
 
 ^   "Zimbabwe's MDC factions reunite" . Archived from  the original  on 2 May 2008 . Retrieved  13 February  2009 . , SABC News, 28 April 2008. 
 
 ^  a   b   "Opposition reunites in Zimbabwe" .  BBC News . 28 April 2008 . Retrieved  6 June  2012 . 
 
 ^   Services, Msnbc com News (11 February 2009).  "Tsvangirai sworn in as Zimbabwe's PM" .  msnbc.com . Retrieved  10 July  2020 . 
 
 ^   "Tsvangirai sworn in as Zimbabwe PM - CNN.com" .  www.cnn.com . Retrieved  10 July  2020 . 
 
 ^   Dugger, Celia W. (3 November 2008).  "Aid Group Says Zimbabwe Misused $7.3 Million" .  The New York Times . 
 
 ^   "Zimbabwe: Election chief Mutambanengwe resigns" .  BBC News . 2013. 
 
 ^   Shiangala, Mike (31 July 2020).  "Zimbabwe to allegedly shutdown the Internet on 31st July" .  Smatt Geeks Media . Retrieved  31 July  2020 . 
 
 ^   "Zimbabwe Ministry of Defence" . Archived from  the original  on 2 November 2007 . Retrieved  17 November  2007 . 
 
 ^   "Zimbabwe Defence Forces News" . ZDF News . Retrieved  17 April  2009 . 
 
 ^   Chari, Freeman Forward (24 December 2007).  "MILITARISATION OF ZIMBABWE: Does the opposition stand a chance?" . zimbabwejournalists.com. Archived from  the original  on 5 January 2008. 
 
 ^   Godwin, Peter  (1996).  Mukiwa – A White Boy in Africa . London, UK: Macmillan.  ISBN   978-0-333-67150-4 . 
 
 ^   "Ministry of Defence, Zimbabwe" . Archived from  the original  on 2 November 2007 . Retrieved  11 November  2007 . 
 
 ^   "5th Brigade gets new commander" . Zimbabwe Defence Forces News. 22 February 2006 . Retrieved  18 April  2009 . 
 
 ^   "Police baton charge Harare protesters" .  ABC News . 3 December 2008. 
 
 ^   Howard-Hassmann, Rhoda E. (24 November 2010). "Mugabe's Zimbabwe, 2000–2009: Massive Human Rights Violations and the Failure to Protect".  Human Rights Quarterly .  32  (4): 898–920.  doi : 10.1353/hrq.2010.0030 .  ISSN   1085-794X .  S2CID   143046672 . 
 
 ^  a   b   "Zimbabwe" . Amnesty International. Archived from  the original  on 3 December 2007 . Retrieved  2 December  2007 . 
 
 ^   "Zimbabwe – Events of 2006" . Human Rights Watch. Archived from  the original  on 11 October 2007 . Retrieved  2 December  2007 . 
 
 ^   Howard-Hassmann 2010, p. 909 
 
 ^   "State Sponsored Homophobia 2016: A world survey of sexual orientation laws: criminalisation, protection and recognition"   (PDF) .  International Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Trans and Intersex Association . 17 May 2016. 
 
 ^   "BBC News – Africa – Zimbabwe gay rights face dim future" .  news.bbc.co.uk . 
 
 ^   Whitaker, Raymond (22 June 2008).  "Zimbabwe election violence spreads to Harare" .  The New Zealand Herald . Retrieved  7 December  2008 . 
 
 ^   "Unbowed Tsvangirai urges defiance" . BBC. 14 March 2007 . Retrieved  2 December  2007 . 
 
 ^   Zimbabwe Press, Media, TV, Radio, Newspapers   Press Reference , 2006. 
 
 ^   "Zimbabwe newspaper bombed" .  BBC News . 28 January 2001 . Retrieved  6 June  2012 . 
 
 ^   Wines, Michael (7 February 2004).  "Zimbabwe: Newspaper Silenced" .  The New York Times . Retrieved  6 June  2012 . 
 
 ^  a   b   "Zimbabwe lifts reporting ban on BBC and CNN" ,  The Daily Telegraph , 30 July 2009. 
 
 ^   Nkosi, Milton (1 April 2005).  "Why did Zimbabwe ban the BBC?" .  BBC News . Retrieved  6 June  2012 . 
 
 ^   "Al Jazeera kicked out of Zimbabwe" . Archived from  the original  on 23 June 2008 . Retrieved  1 June  2016 . , zimbabwemetro.com, 22 June 2008. 
 
 ^   "Zimbabwe: COVID-19 must not be used to stifle freedoms, says UN rights office" .  UN News . 24 July 2020 . Retrieved  24 July  2020 . 
 
 ^   "#ZimbabweanLivesMatter: celebrities join campaign against human rights abuses" .  The Guardian . 5 August 2020 . Retrieved  5 August  2020 . 
 
 ^   "Constitution of the Republic of Zimbabwe"   (PDF) . Parliament of Zimbabwe. Archived from  the original   (PDF)  on 21 December 2008 . Retrieved  19 December  2008 . 
 
 ^   "Provincial Councils and Administration Act (Chapter 29:11)"   (PDF) . Parliament of Zimbabwe. Archived from  the original   (PDF)  on 27 December 2013 . Retrieved  19 December  2008 . 
 
 ^   "Rural District Councils Act (Chapter 29:13)"   (PDF) . Parliament of Zimbabwe. Archived from  the original   (PDF)  on 27 December 2013 . Retrieved  19 December  2008 . 
 
 ^   "Traditional Leaders Act (Chapter 29:17)"   (PDF) . Parliament of Zimbabwe. Archived from  the original   (PDF)  on 4 September 2015 . Retrieved  19 December  2008 . 
 
 ^   Ndakaripa, Musiwaro (3 April 2021).  "Zimbabwe's Economic Meltdown: Are Sanctions Really to Blame?" .  The Washington Quarterly .  44  (2): 95–120.  doi : 10.1080/0163660X.2021.1934997 .  ISSN   0163-660X .  S2CID   235465633 . 
 
 ^   "Zimbabwe: Background" .  www.everycrsreport.com . Retrieved  14 November  2021 . 
 
 ^   "Cyclones Idai and Kenneth" .  OCHA . 18 March 2019 . Retrieved  14 November  2021 . 
 
 ^  a   b   "Zimbabwe" .  EU Sanctions . Retrieved  14 November  2021 . 
 
 ^   "Zimbabwe-South Africa economic relations since 2000" . Africa News. 31 October 2007. Archived from  the original  on 1 January 2008 . Retrieved  3 December  2007 .  Zimbabwe remains South Africa's most important trading partner in Africa. 
 
 ^   "Zimbabwe Economy: Facts, Data, & Analysis on Economic Freedom" . Heritage.org. 12 January 2012 . Retrieved  6 June  2012 . 
 
 ^   "Country Profile – Zimbabwe" . Foreign Affairs and International Trade Canada. Archived from  the original  on 26 February 2008 . Retrieved  2 December  2007 .  Since the country is well endowed with natural resources such as minerals,  arable land  and  wildlife , many opportunities lie in resource-based activities such as mining, agriculture and tourism and their downstream industrial activities. 
 
 ^   Wadhams, Nick (1 August 2007).  "Zimbabwe's Wildlife Decimated by Economic Crisis" . Nairobi:  National Geographic News . Retrieved  5 August  2007 . 
 
 ^   Zimbabwe Ranked Fastest growing Internet Market . Biztechafrica.com (10 August 2011); retrieved 4 July 2013. 
 
 ^   Why ICT is critical in ‘illiterate’ Africa|BiztechAfrica Business, Telecom, Technology & IT News Africa . Biztechafrica.com (3 December 2012); retrieved 4 July 2013. 
 
 ^   "Zimbabwe Democracy And Economic Recovery Act of 2001 at Govtrack.us News" . 18 October 2011. 
 
 ^   Boucher, Richard (2 March 2004).  "Zimbabwe: Sanctions Enhancement"  (Press release).  United States Department of State . 
 
 ^   Richardson, Craig J.  "The loss of property rights and the collapse of Zimbabwe"   (PDF) .  Cato Journal .  25 : 541–565. Archived from  the original   (PDF)  on 2 January 2011 . Retrieved  10 November  2010 . 
 
 ^   "Organised Violence and Torture in Zimbabwe in 1999" .  Zimbabwe Human Rights NGO Forum . Archived from  the original  on 2 June 2010 . Retrieved  16 March  2007 . 
 
 ^   Glenday, Craig (2013).  Guinness Book of Records 2014 . p.  123 .  ISBN   9781908843159 . 
 
 ^   "Zimbabwe President Mugabe labels white farmers 'enemies' " .  CNN.com . Harare, Zimbabwe. 18 April 2000. Archived from  the original  on 29 June 2006 . Retrieved  20 September  2007 . 
 
 ^   Robinson, Simon (18 February 2002).  "A Tale of Two Countries" ,  Time ; accessed 4 May 2016. 
 
 ^   "Zimbabwe forbids white farmers to harvest" .  USA Today . 24 June 2002 . Retrieved  6 June  2012 . 
 
 ^   "White farmers under siege in Zimbabwe" .  BBC News . 15 August 2002. Archived from  the original  on 6 January 2012 . Retrieved  6 June  2012 . 
 
 ^   Mugabe Interview: The Full Transcript , News.sky.com (24 May 2004); retrieved 4 July 2013. 
 
 ^   Clemens, Michael; Moss, Todd (20 July 2005).  Costs and Causes of Zimbabwe's Crisis  (Report).  Center for Global Development . Archived from  the original  on 4 May 2011 . Retrieved  4 April  2011 . 
 
 ^   Meldrum, Andrew (21 May 2005).  "As country heads for disaster, Zimbabwe calls for return of white farmers" .  The Guardian . London, UK . Retrieved  4 April  2011 . 
 
 ^   Timberg, Craig (6 January 2007).  "White Farmers Given Leases in Zimbabwe" .  The Washington Post . Retrieved  4 April  2011 . 
 
 ^   "Zimbabwe threatens white farmers" .  The Washington Post .  Associated Press . 5 February 2007 . Retrieved  4 April  2011 . 
 
 ^   Chinaka, Cris (8 August 2007).  "Zimbabwe threatens white farmers on evictions" .  Reuters . Retrieved  4 April  2011 . 
 
 ^   "How to stay alive when it all runs out" .  The Economist . 12 July 2007 . Retrieved  6 June  2012 . 
 
 ^   "Zimbabwe inflation hits 11,200,000 percent" . CNN. 19 August 2008 . Retrieved  4 May  2016 . 
 
 ^   "Zimbabwe to print first $100 trillion note" .  CNN . 16 January 2009.  Archived  from the original on 27 September 2013 . Retrieved  1 June  2019 . 
 
 ^   "Zimbabwe abandons its currency" .  BBC News . 29 January 2009 . Retrieved  4 April  2011 . 
 
 ^   "Zimbabwe Suspends Use of Own Currency" . VOA News. 12 April 2009. 
 
 ^   Giokos, Eleni (29 February 2016).  "This country has nine currencies" .  CNNMoney . Retrieved  8 January  2017 . 
 
 ^   Staff Reporter (20 February 2019).  "RBZ introduces 'RTGS Dollars' " .  The Zimbabwe Mail . Retrieved  20 May  2019 . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   e   f   "Zimbabwe Overview" .  The World Bank . World Bank Group. 4 October 2016 . Retrieved  8 January  2017 . 
 
 ^   "Zimbabwe economy buoyant, more reform needed: IMF" .  Reuters . 8 November 2010. Archived from  the original  on 11 November 2010. 
 
 ^   "Zimbabwe economy growing: IMF" . talkzimbabwe.co. 9 November 2010. Archived from  the original  on 12 November 2010. 
 
 ^   "IMARA: Global investors get upbeat briefing on Zim prospects"  (Press release).  IMARA . 17 February 2011. Archived from  the original  on 11 May 2011 . Retrieved  4 April  2011 . 
 
 ^   Nyathi, Kitsepile (30 January 2013).  "Zimbabwe has only $217 in the bank, says finance minister" .  AfricaReview.com .  Nation Media Group . Archived from  the original  on 22 December 2019. 
 
 ^   Chitiyo, Knox; Vines, Alex; Vandome, Christopher (September 2016).  "The Domestic and External Implications of Zimbabwe's Economic Reform and Re-engagement Agenda" .  Chatham House . Royal Institute for International Affairs . Retrieved  8 January  2017 . 
 
 ^   Marima, Tendai (19 August 2019).  "In Zimbabwe, An Economic Crisis With 175% Inflation Drives Discontent" .  NPR.org . Retrieved  20 August  2019 . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   Madslien, Jorn (14 April 2008).  "No quick fix for Zimbabwe's economy" . BBC . Retrieved  19 December  2008 . 
 
 ^   Dube, Jennifer (3 April 2011).  "Zimplats ignores seizure threat" .  The Standard . Harare, Zimbabwe. Archived from  the original  on 11 May 2011 . Retrieved  4 April  2011 . 
 
 ^   "Diamond company in trouble with Harare MPs" ,  Independent Online , South Africa, 2 February 2010. 
 
 ^   "Diamonds in the rough, report by Human Rights Watch" . Human Rights Watch. 26 June 2009. Archived from  the original  on 8 September 2012 . Retrieved  6 June  2012 . 
 
 ^   "Ranking Of The World's Diamond Mines By Estimated 2013 Production" ,  Kitco , 20 August 2013. 
 
 ^   "Zimbabwe diamond exports fell 34 pct in 2014: official" .  Reuters . 14 May 2015. Archived from  the original  on 17 May 2015 . Retrieved  11 April  2019 . 
 
 ^   Marawanyika, Godfrey,  Biggest Zimbabwe Gold Miner to Rule on London Trade by March , Bloomberg News, 17 October 2014. Retrieved 3 August 2016. 
 
 ^   Mumera, Wisdom (9 January 2016).  "Zimbabwe's Coffee Production Declines" .  newsofhesouth.com . 
 
 ^   "|| ICRISAT || Impact" .  www.icrisat.org . Retrieved  23 February  2022 . 
 
 ^   Conservation agriculture and microdosing in Zimbabwe , WRENmedia, January 2013 
 
 ^   University, Wageningen; form, Research Contact (23 October 2015).  "Agronomic and environmental studies of potato (Solanum tuberosum L.) and analysis of its value chain in Zimbabwe" .  WUR . Retrieved  17 December  2020 . 
 
 ^   News, The Sunday.  "Zimbabwe 2018 tourist arrivals peak 2,6million" .  The Sunday News .   {{ cite web }} :  |last=  has generic name ( help ) 
 
 ^   "Travel and tourism: Economic impact 2017 Zimbabwe"   (PDF) . March 2017. Archived from  the original   (PDF)  on 10 November 2017. 
 
 ^   Machipisa, Lewis (14 March 2001).  "Sun sets on Zimbabwe tourism" .  BBC News . Retrieved  16 November  2007 . 
 
 ^   Berger, Sebastien (29 October 2007).  "British Airways abandons flights to Zimbabwe" .  The Daily Telegraph . London, UK. Archived from  the original  on 30 November 2007 . Retrieved  16 November  2007 . 
 
 ^   Sibanda, Tichaona (23 February 2012).  "Zimbabwe: Air Zimbabwe Vanishes From the Skies Indefinitely" . allAfrica.com . Retrieved  6 June  2012 . 
 
 ^   "Zimbabwe Tourism Authority" . Archived from  the original  on 3 December 2007 . Retrieved  16 November  2007 . 
 
 ^   "Zimbabwe: The Spirit of Matobo" .  zimbabwe.safari.co.za . Archived from  the original  on 1 November 2013. 
 
 ^   "Exposure Data by Country" , World Health Organization; accessed 19 October 2014. 
 
 ^  a   b   "Water Supply and Sanitation in Zimbabwe AMCOW. Collaboratively published report circa 2010   Archived  30 January 2020 at the  Wayback Machine , wsp.org; accessed 4 May 2016. 
 
 ^   "Troubled Water Burst Pipes, Contaminated Wells, and Open Defecation in Zimbabwe’s Capital" ,  Human Rights Watch  (2013). 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   e   f   Lemarchand, Guillermo A.; Schneegans, Susan, eds. (2014).  Mapping Research and Innovation in the Republic of Zimbabwe   (PDF) . Paris: UNESCO. pp. Volume 2. GO–SPIN Profiles in Science, Technology and Innovation.  ISBN   978-92-3-100034-8 . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   e   f   g   UNESCO Science Report: towards 2030   (PDF) . Paris: UNESCO. 2015. pp. 535–555.  ISBN   978-92-3-100129-1 . 
 
 ^   "Global Innovation Index 2021" .  World Intellectual Property Organization .  United Nations . Retrieved  5 March  2022 . 
 
 ^   "Global Innovation Index 2019" .  www.wipo.int . Retrieved  2 September  2021 . 
 
 ^   "RTD - Item" .  ec.europa.eu . Retrieved  2 September  2021 . 
 
 ^   "Global Innovation Index" .  INSEAD Knowledge . 28 October 2013. Archived from  the original  on 2 September 2021 . Retrieved  2 September  2021 . 
 
 ^   "Ethnicity and Race by Countries" .  Infoplease . 21 May 2020. 
 
 ^   Wiley, David and Isaacman, Allen F. (1981).  Southern Africa: society, economy, and liberation . Michigan State University, University of Minnesota. p. 55 
 
 ^   Quarterly Digest Of Statistics, Zimbabwe Printing and Stationery Office, 1999. 
 
 ^   "Business Zimbabwe's land reform: Zambia's gain, a cautionary tale for South Africa?" .  Deutsche Welle . 16 January 2019. 
 
 ^   "Zimbabwe's white farmers start anew in Mozambique" .  Al-Jazeera . 28 October 2015. 
 
 ^   Quarterly Digest of Statistics, 1998, Zimbabwe Printing and Stationery Office. 
 
 ^   "Zimbabwe" .  citypopulation.de . Retrieved  28 February  2022 . 
 
 ^   "Zimbabwe"   (PDF) . Archived from  the original   (PDF)  on 25 March 2009 . Retrieved  1 June  2016 . , gapadventures.com; accessed 4 May 2016. 
 
 ^   Williams, Angela A. (April 1998).  "Mother Tongue: Interviews with Musaemura B. Zimunya and Solomon Mutswairo" .  The Journal of African Travel-Writing  (4): 36–44. Archived from  the original  on 26 March 2018. 
 
 ^   Martins, Margarida (12 March 2019). "Português em África" [Portuguese in Africa].  Diário de Notícias  (in Portuguese). Portugal. 
 
 ^   "Português vai ser introduzido no ensino secundário no Zimbabué" .  SAPO 24  (in Portuguese) . Retrieved  21 July  2020 . 
 
 ^   "Zimbabwe: Português vai ser introduzido no ensino secundário do país - África - Angola Press - ANGOP" .  www.angop.ao  (in European Portuguese). Archived from  the original  on 6 August 2020 . Retrieved  21 July  2020 . 
 
 ^   Religious composition by country   Archived  10 March 2016 at the  Wayback Machine , Pew Research, Washington DC (2012) 
 
 ^   "Zimbabwe – International Religious Freedom Report 2005" . U.S. Department of State . Retrieved  3 December  2007 .  An estimated 1% of the total population is Muslim. 
 
 ^   MSN Encarta . Archived from  the original  on 31 October 2007 . Retrieved  13 November  2007 . 
 
 ^   Chitando, Ezra (2021).  Innovation and Competition in Zimbabwean Pentecostalism . Bloomsbury.  ISBN   9781350176041 . 
 
 ^   "Zimbabwe" . Archived from  the original  on 24 July 2011 . Retrieved  22 January  2008 . 
 
 ^   Shoko, Tabona (2007).  Karanga Indigenous Religion in Zimbabwe: Health and Well-Being . London: Routledge.  ISBN   9781032099705 . 
 
 ^   Moyo, Method (2020).  Traditional Religion and Its Impact on the Practices of Apostolic and Zionist Churches in Zimbabwe . GRIN Verlag. 
 
 ^   Davies, R. and Sanders, D. (1998). "Adjustment policies and the welfare of children: Zimbabwe, 1980–1985". In: Cornia, G.A., Jolly, R. and Stewart, F. (eds.)  Adjustment with a human face, Vol. II: country case studies . Clarendon Press, Oxford, pp. 272–99;  ISBN   0198286112 . 
 
 ^   Dugbatey, K. (1999). "National health policies: sub-Saharan African case studies (1980–1990)".  Soc. Sci. Med .  49  (2): 223–239.  doi : 10.1016/S0277-9536(99)00110-0 .  PMID   10414831 . 
 
 ^   Marquette, C.M. (1997). "Current poverty, structural adjustment, and drought in Zimbabwe".  World Development .  25  (7): 1141–1149.  doi : 10.1016/S0305-750X(97)00019-3 . 
 
 ^  a   b   "Zimbabwe in 10 numbers" .  BBC News . 18 November 2017 . Retrieved  18 November  2017 . 
 
 ^   "United Nations Statistics Division" . Retrieved  7 December  2008 . 
 
 ^   "Zimbabwe Profile based on the 2002 Population Census"   (PDF) .  ZIMSTAT . Archived from  the original   (PDF)  on 2 April 2015. 
 
 ^   "Zimbabwe Demographic and Health Survey 2005–06"   (PDF) .  ZIMSTAT . Archived from  the original   (PDF)  on 2 April 2015 . Retrieved  4 May  2016 . 
 
 ^   "The State of the World's Midwifery" . United Nations Population Fund . Retrieved  1 June  2016 . 
 
 ^   Thornycroft, Peta (10 April 2006).  "In Zimbabwe, life ends before 40" .  The Sydney Morning Herald . Harare . Retrieved  10 April  2006 . 
 
 ^   "Zimbabwe" . UNAIDS . Retrieved  16 January  2011 . 
 
 ^   "HIV Prevalence Rates Fall in Zimbabwe" . UNESCO. Archived from  the original  on 30 March 2008 . Retrieved  3 December  2007 . 
 
 ^   Hungwe, Brian (7 November 2008).  "The death throes of Harare's hospitals" . BBC . Retrieved  3 December  2008 . 
 
 ^   "Zimbabwe: coping with the cholera outbreak" . 26 November 2008 . Retrieved  3 December  2008 . 
 
 ^   "Zimbabwe cholera deaths near 500" . BBC. 2 December 2008 . Retrieved  2 December  2008 . 
 
 ^   "PM urges Zimbabwe cholera action" .  BBC News . 6 December 2008 . Retrieved  6 June  2012 . 
 
 ^   "Miliband backs African calls for end of Mugabe" ,  The Times , 5 December 2008. 
 
 ^   "Zimbabwe declares national emergency over cholera" .  Reuters . 4 December 2008 . Retrieved  4 December  2008 . 
 
 ^   "Zimbabwe declares cholera outbreak a national emergency" . Agence France-Presse. 4 December 2008. Archived from  the original  on 27 September 2013 . Retrieved  4 December  2008 . 
 
 ^   On the cholera frontline .  IRIN . 9 March 2009 
 
 ^   "Zimbabwe says cholera epidemic may spread with rain" .  Reuters . 30 November 2008. Archived from  the original  on 6 December 2008 . Retrieved  3 December  2008 . 
 
 ^   "Ranking of African Countries By Literacy Rate: Zimbabwe No. 1" . The African Economist. 
 
 ^   "Zimbabwe: Unlicensed and outdoors or no school at all" .  irinnews.org . Epworth, Zimbabwe:  OCHA . 23 July 2010. Archived from  the original  on 11 May 2011. 
 
 ^   Nyathi, Kitsepile (14 July 2010).  "Zimbabwe: Country Leads in Africa Literacy Race" .  AllAfrica.com . 
 
 ^   Poverty Income Consumption and Expenditure Survey 2011/12 Report  (Report). Zimstat. 2013. Archived from  the original  on 27 September 2013. 
 
 ^   Nkepile Mabuse (28 September 2009).  "Zimbabwe schools begin fightback" . CNN . Retrieved  28 September  2009 . 
 
 ^   "BBC report on 40 years in Zimbabwe's schools" .  BBC News . 19 April 2007 . Retrieved  3 November  2007 . 
 
 ^  a   b   "Zimbabwe US Embassy" . Archived from  the original  on 18 November 2007 . Retrieved  15 November  2007 . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   "Gender Equality | UN in Zimbabwe" .  www.zw.one.un.org . Archived from  the original  on 14 August 2018 . Retrieved  2 October  2018 . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   "Effective law and policy on gender equality and protection from sexual and gender-based violence in disasters – Zimbabwe" .  International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies . Retrieved  18 October  2018 . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   "7. Women's Empowerment, Gender Equality and Equity | UN in Zimbabwe" .  www.zw.one.un.org . Archived from  the original  on 5 December 2018 . Retrieved  18 October  2018 . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   e   Manyonganise, Molly (2015).  "Oppressive and liberative: A Zimbabwean woman's reflections on ubuntu" .  Verbum et Ecclesia .  36  (2): 1–7.  doi : 10.4102/VE.V36I2.1438 .  ISSN   2074-7705 . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   e   Chabaya, O.; Rembe, S.; Wadesango, N. (1 January 2009).  "The persistence of gender inequality in Zimbabwe: factors that impede the advancement of women into leadership positions in primary schools" .  South African Journal of Education .  29  (2): 235–251.  doi : 10.15700/saje.v29n2a259 .  ISSN   2076-3433 . 
 
 ^   "Zimbabwe" .  www.unaids.org . Retrieved  4 December  2018 . 
 
 ^  a   b   "National gender profile of agriculture and rural livelihoods: Zimbabwe | FAO" .  www.fao.org . Retrieved  25 October  2018 . 
 
 ^  a   b   "CountrySTAT – Zimbabwe" .  countrystat.org . Archived from  the original  on 5 December 2018 . Retrieved  18 October  2018 . 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d   e   f   g   h   "Why the world must pay attention to violence against women and girls in Zimbabwe" .  The Independent .  Archived  from the original on 7 May 2022 . Retrieved  26 November  2018 . 
 
 ^   Berliner, Paul (June 1993).  The Soul of Mbira: Music and Traditions of the Shona People of Zimbabwe . University of Chicago Press.  ISBN   9780226043791 .  zimbabwe shona. 
 
 ^   Owomoyela, Oyekan (2002).  Culture and Customs of Zimbabwe . Westport, Conn.: Greenwood Press. p.  77 .  ISBN   978-0-313-31583-1 . 
 
 ^   "Zimbabwe Celebrates 25 years of Independence" . Konrad Adenauer Stiftung. Archived from  the original  on 10 October 2006 . Retrieved  6 January  2008 . 
 
 ^   "Art of Zimbabwe: Shona Sculpture - The Sculpture Park" .  Default Store View . 6 March 2019 . Retrieved  19 April  2022 . 
 
 ^   "Charles Mungoshi" . Zimbabwe – Poetry International Web. Archived from  the original  on 16 October 2007. 
 
 ^   "Tribute to Cathy Buckle" . Archived from  the original  on 30 October 2007 . Retrieved  2 November  2007 . 
 
 ^   "Cultural Origins of art" . Archived from  the original  on 1 October 2000 . Retrieved  6 January  2008 . 
 
 ^   "African theatre – Southern and South Africa | art" .  Encyclopedia Britannica . Retrieved  19 January  2018 . 
 
 ^   "Sadza ne Nyama: A Shona Staple Dish" . Zambuko.com . Retrieved  3 November  2007 . 
 
 ^   Stephanie Hanes (20 September 2006).  "Biltong: much more than just a snack" .  The Christian Science Monitor . Retrieved  3 October  2006 . 
 
 ^   Alao, Abiodun ;  Tofa, Moses  (2015).  "Zimbabwe" .  In  Falola, Toyin ;  Jean-Jacques, Daniel  (eds.).  Africa: An Encyclopedia of Culture and Society [3 Volumes] . ABC-CLIO. pp. 1305–1326.  ISBN   978-1598846652 . 
 
 ^   "Men's Ranking" .  www.fifa.com . Archived from  the original  on 22 October 2021 . Retrieved  23 July  2022 . 
 
 ^   worldrugby.org.  "World Rugby" . 
 
 ^   "2004 Olympic Games swimming results" . CNN. Archived from  the original  on 9 May 2006 . Retrieved  22 July  2007 . 
 
 ^   "Montreal 2005 Results" . Archived from  the original  on 28 January 2007 . Retrieved  9 June  2007 . 
 
 ^   "12th FINA World Championships" . Archived from  the original  on 6 June 2007 . Retrieved  9 June  2007 . 
 
 ^   "BBC Sport Commonwealth Games 2002 Statistics" .  BBC News . Retrieved  29 August  2007 . 
 
 ^   Gold, Jack Of (29 May 2012).  "Africa punching above it's [sic] weight in golf" . Free TV 4 Africa. Archived from  the original  on 8 February 2013 . Retrieved  6 June  2012 . 
 
 ^   "From Zimbabwe to Hull FC: Masimbaashe Matongo's 'dream' journey is just beginning" .  Hull Daily Mail . 17 November 2015. Archived from  the original  on 25 December 2015 . Retrieved  18 February  2017 . 
 
 ^   "Zimbabwe teenager Judah Mazive signs contract to play rugby in England" .  Zimbabwe Today . Archived from  the original  on 13 January 2017 . Retrieved  18 February  2017 . 
 
 ^   "South Africa's Marinos appointed new SANZAR CEO – Super Rugby – Super 18 Rugby and Rugby Championship News, Results and Fixtures from Super XV Rugby" . 23 November 2015 . Retrieved  18 February  2017 . 
 
 ^   "The making of Samson Muripo | The Standard" . 22 October 2017 . Retrieved  21 July  2021 . 
 
 ^   "Supreme Court strikes down repressive media legislation" .  Committee to Protect Journalist . 7 May 2003. 
 
 ^   Williams, Jon (29 July 2009).  "Resuming operations in Zimbabwe" . BBC. 
 
 ^   Banya, Nelson (26 May 2010).  "Zimbabwe licenses new private newspapers" .  Reuters . 
 
 ^   "independent dailies allowed to resume publishing" ,  International Freedom of Expression Exchange , 28 May 2010. 
 
 ^   Chinaka, Cris (4 June 2010).  "Zimbabwe gets first private daily newspaper in years" .  Reuters . 
 
 ^   "Finally, Zimbabwe's 'private' radio station goes on air" . zimeye.org. 26 June 2012. Archived from  the original  on 25 July 2014. 
 
 ^  a   b   c   "Reporters without Borders Press Freedom Index" . Reports Without Borders . Retrieved  24 February  2022 . 
 
 ^   Ruzengwe, Blessing  (17 March 2005)  "The nine lives of Wilf Mbanga" ,  The London Globe  via  Metrovox . 
 
 ^   "Freedom House 2007 Map of Press Freedom: Zimbabwe" . Freedomhouse.org. Archived from  the original  on 27 December 2010 . Retrieved  6 June  2012 . 
 
 ^   Huffman, Thomas N. (1985). "The Soapstone Birds from Great Zimbabwe".  African Arts .  18  (3): 68–73, 99–100.  doi : 10.2307/3336358 .  JSTOR   3336358 . 
 
 ^   Sinclair, Paul (2001). "Review: The Soapstone Birds of Great Zimbabwe Symbols of a Nation by Edward Matenga".  The South African Archaeological Bulletin .  56  (173/174): 105–106.  doi : 10.2307/3889033 .  JSTOR   3889033 . 
 
 ^   Landow, George P.  "Great Zimbabwe" . Brown University. Archived from  the original  on 9 August 2007. 
 
 ^   "Balancing Rocks" . Archived from  the original  on 17 August 2009 . Retrieved  15 November  2007 . 
 
 ^  a   b   "Zimbabwe | History, Map, Flag, Population, Capital, & Facts" .  Encyclopedia Britannica . Retrieved  29 May  2020 . 
 
 
 Sources [ edit ] 
 
 Parsons, Neil (1993).  A New History of Southern Africa  (2nd ed.). London, England: Macmillan.  ISBN   978-0-84195319-2 . 
  This article incorporates text from a  free content  work.  Licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0 IGO. Text taken from  UNESCO Science Report: towards 2030​ ,   UNESCO.  To learn how to add  open license  text to Wikipedia articles, please see  this how-to page . For information on  reusing text from Wikipedia , please see  the terms of use . 
 
 Further reading [ edit ] 
 Burke, Jason (10 August 2019).  " 'Hungry kids collapse as looters take millions': life in today's Zimbabwe" .  The Guardian . 
 Barclay, Philip (2010),  Zimbabwe: Years of Hope and Despair . 
 Bourne, Richard.  Catastrophe: What Went Wrong in Zimbabwe?  (2011); 302 pages. 
 McGregor, JoAnn; Primorac, Ranka, eds. (2010),  Zimbabwe's New Diaspora: Displacement and the Cultural Politics of Survival ,  Berghahn Books , 286 pages. Scholarly essays on displacement as a result of Zimbabwe's continuing crisis, with a focus on diasporic communities in Britain and South Africa; also explores such topics as the revival of Rhodesian discourse. 
 Meredith, Martin .  Mugabe: Power, Plunder, and the Struggle for Zimbabwe's Future  (2007)  excerpt and text search . 
 Orner, Peter ; Holmes, Annie (2011),  Hope Deferred: Narratives of Zimbabwean Lives , Voice of witness . 
 Smith, Ian Douglas.  Bitter Harvest: Zimbabwe and the Aftermath of its Independence  (2008)  excerpt and text search . 
 David Coltart. The struggle continues: 50 Years of Tyranny in Zimbabwe. Jacana Media (Pty) Ltd: South Africa, 2016. 
 External links [ edit ] 
 
 
 Zimbabwe   at Wikipedia's  sister projects 
 
 Definitions  from Wiktionary Media  from Commons News  from Wikinews Quotations  from Wikiquote Texts  from Wikisource Textbooks  from Wikibooks Resources  from Wikiversity Travel information  from Wikivoyage 
 
 Official Government of Zimbabwe Web Portal   Archived  23 December 2017 at the  Wayback Machine 
 Parliament of Zimbabwe 
 Zimbabwe  at  Curlie 
 Zimbabwe profile  from the  BBC News 
   Wikimedia Atlas of Zimbabwe 
 Zimbabwe .  The World Factbook .  Central Intelligence Agency . 
 Zimbabwe  from  UCB Libraries GovPubs 
 Key Development Forecasts for Zimbabwe  from  International Futures 
 World Bank Summary Trade Statistics Zimbabwe 
 v t e Zimbabwe   articles 1890–1923:  Company rule ; 1923–1980:  Southern Rhodesia ; 1953–1963:  Federation ; 1965–1979:  Rhodesia  under  UDI ; 1979:  Zimbabwe Rhodesia  under UDI; 1980–present:  Zimbabwe History Chronology 
 Pre-colonial 
 Rudd Concession 
 Company rule 
 Pioneer Column 
 First Matabele War 
 Shangani Patrol 
 Second Matabele War 
 Second Boer War 
 First World War 
 Southern Rhodesia 
 colonial history 
 Second World War 
 Rhodesia–Nyasaland federation 
 Malayan Emergency involvement 
 Unilateral Declaration of Independence 
 Rhodesia 
 Bush War 
 1975 Victoria Falls Conference 
 1976 Geneva Conference 
 Internal Settlement 
 Zimbabwe Rhodesia 
 Lancaster House Agreement 
 Gukurahundi 
 2008–2009 cholera outbreak 
 2016–2017 protests 
 2017 coup d'état 
 2019 fuel protests 
 By topic 
 Constitutional 
 Cricket (to 1992) 
 Cricket (1992–2006) 
 Cricket crisis (2003–2007) 
 Military 
 Geography 
 Chimanimani District 
 Cities and towns 
 Districts 
 Great Zimbabwe 
 Place name renaming 
 Provinces 
 Rivers 
 Wards (municipalities) 
 Wildlife 
 Politics 
 Elections 
 Foreign relations 
 Human rights 
 LGBT rights 
 Land reform 
 Military 
 Parliament 
 Political parties 
 Heads of State 
 Presidents 
 Vice-President 
 Prime Minister 
 2007 political crisis 
 Economy 
 Central bank 
 Dollar (suspended currency) 
 Stock Exchange 
 Telecommunications 
 Tourism 
 Transportation 
 Culture 
 Abortion 
 Architecture 
 Art 
 Child marriage 
 Human trafficking 
 Media 
 Music 
 Polygamy 
 Prostitution 
 Public holidays 
 Demographics Ethnic groups ( diaspora ) Black 
 Hungwe 
 Kunda 
 Lemba 
 Manyika 
 Ndebele 
 Rusape Jews 
 Shona 
 Tokaleya 
 Tonga 
 White 
 Afrikaners 
 British 
 Greeks 
  Portuguese 
 Others 
 Coloureds  ( Goffals ) 
 Jews 
 Indians 
 Languages 
 Afrikaans 
  English 
 Shona 
 Sindebele 
 Symbols 
 Animal 
 Anthem 
 Coat of arms 
 Emblem 
 Flag 
 Flower 
 Outline Index 
 Category 
 Links to related articles 
 v t e Subdivisions of Zimbabwe Provinces 
 Bulawayo 
 Harare  (Salisbury) 
 Manicaland 
 Mashonaland Central 
 Mashonaland East 
 Mashonaland West 
 Masvingo  (Victoria) 
 Matabeleland North 
 Matabeleland South 
 Midlands 
 Districts 
 Beitbridge 
 Bikita 
 Bindura 
 Binga 
 Bubi 
 Buhera 
 Bulawayo 
 Bulilima 
 Chegutu  (Hartley) 
 Chikomba 
 Chimanimani  (Melsetter) 
 Chipinge  (Chipinga) 
 Chiredzi 
 Chirumhanzu 
 Chivi  (Chibi) 
 Gokwe North 
 Gokwe South 
 Goromonzi 
 Guruve 
 Gutu 
 Gwanda 
 Gweru  (Gwelo) 
 Harare  (Salisbury) 
 Hwange  (Wankie) 
 Insiza 
 Kariba 
 Karoi 
 Kwekwe  (Que Que) 
 Lupane 
 Makonde 
 Makoni 
 Mangwe 
 Marondera  (Marandellas) 
 Masvingo  (Victoria) 
 Matobo  (Matopos) 
 Mazowe 
 Mberengwa 
 Mbire 
 Mhondoro–Ngezi 
 Mount Darwin 
 Mudzi 
 Murehwa  (Mrewa) 
 Mutare  (Umtali) 
 Mutasa 
 Mutoko 
 Muzarabani 
 Mwenezi  (Nuanetsi) 
 Nkayi 
 Nyanga  (Inyanga) 
 Rushinga 
 Sanyati 
 Seke 
 Shamva 
 Shurugwi  (Selukwe) 
 Tsholotsho  (Tjolotjo) 
 Umguza  (Esiphezini) 
 Umzingwane  (Essexvale) 
 Uzumba–Maramba–Pfungwe 
 Wedza 
 Zaka 
 Zvimba 
 Zvishavane  (Shabani) 
 Wards 
 Wards of Zimbabwe 
 Largest cities 
 Harare  (Salisbury) 
 Bulawayo 
 Chitungwiza 
 Mutare  (Umtali) 
 Gweru  (Gwelo) 
 Kwekwe  (Que Que) 
 Kadoma  (Gatooma) 
 Masvingo  (Fort Victoria) 
 Chinhoyi  (Sinoia) 
 Marondera  (Marandellas) 
 Beitbridge 
 Rusape 
 Kariba 
 Victoria Falls 
 
 v t e Languages of Zimbabwe Official languages 
 Zimbabwean English 
 Chewa 
 Chibarwe 
 Kalanga 
 Koisan 
 Nambya 
 Ndau 
 Ndebele 
 Shona 
 Sotho 
 Tonga 
 Tsonga 
 Tswana 
 Venda 
 Xhosa 
 Zimbabwe Sign 
 Unofficial languages 
 Kunda 
 Tsoa 
 Tswa 
 Immigrant languages 
 French 
 Punjabi 
 Hindi 
 Chinese 
 Portuguese 
 
 v t e Countries and territories  of  Africa Sovereign states 
 Algeria 
 Angola 
 Benin 
 Botswana 
 Burkina Faso 
 Burundi 
 Cameroon 
 Cape Verde 
 Central African Republic 
 Chad 
 Comoros 
 Democratic Republic of the Congo 
 Republic of the Congo 
 Djibouti 
 Egypt  (partly in Asia) 
 Equatorial Guinea 
 Eritrea 
 Eswatini 
 Ethiopia 
 Gabon 
 The Gambia 
 Ghana 
 Guinea 
 Guinea-Bissau 
 Ivory Coast 
 Kenya 
 Lesotho 
 Liberia 
 Libya 
 Madagascar 
 Malawi 
 Mali 
 Mauritania 
 Mauritius 
 Morocco 
 Mozambique 
 Namibia 
 Niger 
 Nigeria 
 Rwanda 
 São Tomé and Príncipe 
 Senegal 
 Seychelles 
 Sierra Leone 
 Somalia 
 South Africa 
 South Sudan 
 Sudan 
 Tanzania 
 Togo 
 Tunisia 
 Uganda 
 Zambia 
 Zimbabwe 
 States with limited recognition 
 Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic  ( unclear sovereignty ) 
 Somaliland 
 Dependent territories France 
 Îles Éparses 
 Mayotte 
 Réunion 
 Italy 
 Pantelleria 
 Pelagie Islands 
 Spain 
 Canary Islands 
 Ceuta 
 Melilla 
 Plazas de soberanía 
 Others 
 Madeira  (Portugal) 
 Saint Helena, Ascension and Tristan da Cunha  (United Kingdom) 
 Socotra  (Yemen) 
 
   Category 
   Africa portal 
 
 v t e Nations in the Group of 15 (G-15) Summits 
 1990 
 1991 
 1992 
 1994 
 1995 
 1996 
 1997 
 1998 
 1999 
 2000 
 2001 
 2004 
 2006 
 2010 
 2012 
 Members 
 Algeria 
 Argentina 
 Brazil 
 Chile 
 Egypt 
 India 
 Indonesia 
 Iran 
 Jamaica 
 Kenya 
 Malaysia 
 Mexico 
 Nigeria 
 Senegal 
 Sri Lanka 
 Venezuela 
 Zimbabwe 
 
 v t e Southern African Development Community  (SADC) Member states 
 Angola 
 Botswana 
 Democratic Republic of the Congo 
 Eswatini 
 Lesotho 
 Madagascar 
 Malawi 
 Mauritius 
 Mozambique 
 Namibia 
 Seychelles 
 South Africa 
 Tanzania 
 Zambia 
 Zimbabwe 
 Leaders Chairpersons 
 Levy Mwanawasa 
 Kgalema Motlanthe 
 Secretaries-General 
 Kaire Mbuende 
 Prega Ramsamy 
 Tomaz Salomão 
 See also 
 Southern African Development Coordination Conference  (forerunner) 
 Southern African Customs Union  (SACU) 
 Common Monetary Area  (CMA) 
 Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa  (COMESA) 
 
 v t e African Union History 
 Pan-Africanism 
 Decolonisation of Africa 
 Casablanca Group 
 Monrovia Group 
 African and Malagasy Union 
 Abuja Treaty 
 Sirte Declaration 
 Lome Summit 
 Organisation of African Unity 
 Chairperson 
 Secretary General 
 Geography 
 Borders 
 Extreme points 
 Member states 
 Regions 
 Organs 
 Executive Council 
 Permanent Representatives' Committee 
 Specialized Technical Committees 
 Assembly 
 Chairperson 
 Commission 
 Chairperson 
 Deputy Chairperson 
 AUCC 
 Pan-African Parliament 
 Bureau 
 Secretariat 
 Gallagher Estate 
 African Court of Justice 
 African Court on Human and Peoples' Rights 
 ECOSOCC Committees 
 Peace and Security 
 Political Affairs 
 Infrastructure and Energy 
 Social Affairs and Health 
 HR, Sciences and Technology 
 Trade and Industry 
 Rural Economy and Agriculture 
 Economic Affairs 
 Women and Gender 
 Cross-Cutting Programs 
 Financial institutions 
 African Central Bank 
 African Monetary Fund 
 African Investment Bank 
 Peace and Security Council 
 ACIRC 
 African Standby Force 
 Panel of the Wise 
 UNAMID 
 AMIB 
 AMIS 
 AMISOM 
 MISCA 
 Specialised agencies and institutions 
 Africa Centres for Disease Control and Prevention 
 Politics 
 APRM 
 Foreign relations 
 African Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights 
 African Commission on Human and Peoples' Rights 
 Enlargement 
 United States Africa Command  ( United States military bases ) 
 United States ambassador 
 Symbols 
 Anthem 
 Emblem 
 Flag 
 Passport 
 Economy 
 Currencies  ( Gold standard ) 
 Development Bank 
 African Economic Community 
 NEPAD 
 African Continental Free Trade Area 
 Single African Air Transport Market 
 Culture 
 Africa Day 
 Languages 
 Theory 
 Afro 
 United States of Africa 
 United States of Latin Africa 
 East African Federation 
 
   Category 
 
 v t e British Empire 
 Legend 
 Current territory 
 Former territory 
 * Now a  Commonwealth realm 
 Now a member of the  Commonwealth of Nations 
 Culture: Anglosphere 
 
 Europe 
 1542–1800  Ireland   (integrated into the UK) 
 1708–1757, 1763–1782 and 1798–1802  Minorca 
 Since 1713  Gibraltar 
 1794-1796  Corsica 
 1800–1813  Malta (Protectorate) 
 1813–1964  Malta (Colony) 
 1807–1890  Heligoland 
 1809–1864  Ionian Islands 
 1878–1960  Cyprus 
 1921–1931  Irish Free State 
 Since 1960  Akrotiri and Dhekelia  (before as part of  Cyprus ) 
 v t e Africa 17th and 18th centuries 19th century 20th century 
 Since 1658  Saint Helena 23 
 1792–1961  Sierra Leone 
 1795–1803  Cape Colony 
 
 Since 1815  Ascension Island 23 
 Since 1816  Tristan da Cunha 23 
 1806–1910  Cape of Good Hope 
 1807–1808  Madeira 
 1810–1968  Mauritius 
 1816–1965  The Gambia 
 1856–1910  Natal 
 1862–1906  Lagos 
 1868–1966  Basutoland 6 
 1874–1957  Gold Coast 7 
 1882–1922  Egypt 
 
 1884–1900  Niger Coast 
 1884–1966  Bechuanaland 8 
 1884–1960  Somaliland 
 1887–1897  Zululand 
 1890–1962  Uganda 
 1890–1963  Zanzibar 9 
 1891–1964  Nyasaland 10 
 1891–1907  Central Africa 
 1893–1968  Swaziland 11 
 1895–1920  East Africa 
 1899–1956  Sudan 
 
 1900–1914  Northern Nigeria 
 1900–1914  Southern Nigeria 
 1900–1910  Orange River 
 1900–1910  Transvaal 
 1903–1976  Seychelles 
 1910–1931  South Africa 
 1914–1960  Nigeria 
 1915–1931  South-West Africa 12 
 1919–1961  Cameroons 13 
 1920–1963  Kenya 
 1922–1961  Tanganyika 13 
 1923–1965 and 1979–1980  Southern Rhodesia 14 
 1924–1964  Northern Rhodesia 15 
 
 6. Now  Lesotho . 
 7. Now  Ghana . 
 8. Now  Botswana . 
 9. Now part of  Tanzania . 
 10. Now  Malawi . 
 11. Now named Eswatini. 
 12. Now  Namibia . 
 13.  League of Nations mandate . British Cameroons is now part of  Cameroon , while Tanganyika is part of  Tanzania . 
 14.  Self-governing  Southern Rhodesia  unilaterally declared independence  in 1965 (as  Rhodesia ) and continued as an  unrecognised  state until the 1979  Lancaster House Agreement . After recognised independence in 1980, Zimbabwe was a member of the Commonwealth until it withdrew in 2003. 
 15. Now  Zambia . 
 v t e Asia 17th and 18th centuries 19th century 20th century 
 1685–1824  Bencoolen 
 1702–1705  Pulo Condore 
 1757–1947  Bengal 
 1762–1764  Manila and Cavite 
 1781–1784 and 1795–1819  Padang 
 1786–1946  Penang 
 1795–1948  Ceylon 16 
 1796–1965  Maldives 
 
 1811–1816  Java 
 1812–1824  Banka  and  Billiton 
 1819–1826  Malaya 
 1824–1948  Burma 
 1826–1946  Straits Settlements 
 1839–1967  Aden Colony 
 1839–1842  Afghanistan 
 1841–1997  Hong Kong 
 1841–1946  Sarawak 17 
 1848–1946  Labuan 
 1858–1947  India 18 
 1874–1963  Borneo 
 
 1879–1919  Afghanistan  (protectorate) 
 1882–1963  North Borneo 17 
 1885–1946  Unfederated Malay States 
 1888–1984  Brunei 
 1891–1971  Muscat and Oman 
 1892–1971  Trucial States 
 1895–1946  Federated Malay States 
 1898–1930  Weihai 
 1878–1960  Cyprus 
 
 1907–1949  Bhutan  (protectorate) 
 1918–1961  Kuwait 
 1920–1932  Mesopotamia 19 
 1921–1946  Transjordan 8 
 1923–1948  Palestine 19 
 1945–1946  South Vietnam 
 1946–1963  North Borneo 
 1946–1963  Sarawak 
 1946–1963  Singapore 
 1946–1948  Malayan Union 
 1948–1957  Federation of Malaya 17 
 Since 1965  British Indian Ocean Territory  (before as part of  Mauritius  and  Seychelles ) 
 
 16. Now  Sri Lanka . 
 17. Now part of  Malaysia . 
 18. Now  India ,  Pakistan  and  Bangladesh . 
 19.  League of Nations mandate . Iraq's mandate was not enacted and replaced by the  Anglo-Iraqi Treaty 
 v t e North America 17th century and before 18th century 19th and 20th centuries 
 1579  New Albion 
 16th c.–1880  British Arctic Territories 
 1583–1907  Newfoundland 
 1605–1979 * Saint Lucia 
 1607–1776  Virginia 
 Since 1619  Bermuda 
 1620–1691  Plymouth 
 1623–1983  Saint Kitts 
 1624–1966 * Barbados 
 1625–1650  Saint Croix 
 1627–1979 * Saint Vincent and the Grenadines 
 1628–1983  Nevis 
 1629–1691  Massachusetts-Bay 
 1632–1776  Maryland 
 since 1632  Montserrat 
 1632–1860  Antigua 
 1635–1644  Saybrook 
 1636–1776  Connecticut 
 1636–1776  Rhode Island 
 1637–1662  New Haven 
 
 1643–1860  Bay Islands 
 Since 1650  Anguilla 
 1655–1860  Mosquito Coast 
 1655–1962 * Jamaica 
 1663–1712  Carolina 
 1664–1776  New-York 
 1665–1674 and 1702–1776  New-Jersey 
 Since 1666  Virgin Islands 
 Since 1670  Cayman Islands 
 1670–1973 * Bahamas 
 1670–1870  Rupert's Land 
 1671–1816  Leeward Islands 
 1674–1702  East Jersey 
 1674–1702  West Jersey 
 1680–1776  New Hampshire 
 1681–1776  Pennsylvania 
 1686–1689  New England 
 1691–1776  Massachusetts-Bay 
 
 1701–1776  Delaware 
 1712–1776  North-Carolina 
 1712–1776  South-Carolina 
 1713–1867  Nova-Scotia 
 1733–1776  Georgia 
 1754–1820  Cape Breton Island 
 1762–1974 * Grenada 
 1763–1978  Dominica 
 1763–1873  Prince Edward Island 
 1763–1791  Quebec 
 1763–1783  East Florida 
 1763–1783  West Florida 
 1784–1867  New Brunswick 
 1791–1841  Lower Canada 
 1791–1841  Upper Canada 
 Since 1799  Turks and Caicos Islands 
 
 1818–1846  Columbia District / Oregon Country 1 
 1833–1960  Windward Islands 
 1833–1960  Leeward Islands 
 1841–1867  Canada 
 1843  Paulet affair 
 1849–1866  Vancouver Island 
 1853–1863  Queen Charlotte Islands 
 1858–1866  British Columbia 
 1859–1870  North-Western Territory 
 1860–1981 * Antigua and Barbuda 
 1862–1863  Stickeen 
 1866–1871  British Columbia 
 1867–1931 * Dominion of Canada 2 
 1871–1981 * Belize 
 1882–1983 * Saint Kitts and Nevis 
 1889–1962  Trinidad and Tobago 
 1907–1949  Newfoundland 3 
 1958–1962  West Indies Federation 
 1967–1983  West Indies Associated States 
 
 1.  Occupied jointly  with the United States. 
 2. In 1931, Canada and other British  dominions  obtained self-government through the  Statute of Westminster . See  Name of Canada . 
 3. Gave up  self-rule  in 1934, but remained a  de jure  Dominion until it  joined Canada  in 1949. 
 v t e Oceania 18th and 19th centuries 20th century 
 1788–1901  New South Wales 
 1803–1901  Van Diemen's Land / Tasmania 
 1807–1863  Auckland Islands 20 
 1824–1980  New Hebrides 21 
 1824–1901  Queensland 
 1829–1901  Swan River / Western Australia 
 1836–1901  South Australia 
 since 1838  Pitcairn Islands 
 
 1841–1907  New Zealand 
 1846-1847  North Australia 
 1851–1901  Victoria 
 1874–1970  Fiji 
 1877–1976  Western Pacific Territories 
 1884–1902  Papua 
 1888–1901  Rarotonga / Cook Islands 20 
 1889–1948  Union Islands 20 
 1892–1979  Gilbert and Ellice Islands 22 
 1893–1978 * Solomon Islands 
 
 1900–1970  Tonga 
 1900–1974  Niue 20 
 1901–1942 * Australia 
 1907–1947 * New Zealand 
 1914–1962  Samoa 
 1919–1942 and 1945–1968  Nauru 
 
 20. Now part of the * Realm of New Zealand . 
 21. Now  Vanuatu . 
 22. Now  Kiribati  and * Tuvalu . 
 South America 
 1631–1641  Providence Island 
 1651–1667  Willoughbyland 
 1670–1688  Saint Andrew and Providence Islands 4 
 1831–1966  Guiana 
 Since 1833  Falkland Islands 5 
 Since 1908  South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands 5 
 
 4. Now a  department  of  Colombia . 
 5. Occupied by Argentina during the  Falklands War  of April–June 1982. 
 Antarctica and the South Atlantic 
 Since 1658  Saint Helena 23 
 Since 1815  Ascension Island 23 
 Since 1816  Tristan da Cunha 23 
 Since 1833  Falkland Islands 
 1841–1933  Australian Antarctic Territory   (transferred to the  Commonwealth of Australia ) 
 1841–1947  Ross Dependency   (transferred to the  Realm of New Zealand ) 
 Since 1908  British Antarctic Territory 24 
 Since 1908  South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands 24 
 
 23. Since 2009 part of  Saint Helena, Ascension and Tristan da Cunha ; Ascension Island (1922–) and Tristan da Cunha (1938–) were previously dependencies of Saint Helena. 
 24. Both claimed in 1908; territories formed in 1962 (British Antarctic Territory) and 1985 (South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands). 
 
 Historical flags of the British Empire 
   Category 
   Commons 
   Portal 
 
 Authority control   General 
 ISNI 
 VIAF 
 WorldCat 
 National libraries 
 France 
 BnF data 
 Ukraine 
 Germany 
 Israel 
 United States 
 Japan 
 Czech Republic 
 Greece 
 Other 
 FAST 
 Historical Dictionary of Switzerland 
 MusicBrainz area 
 NARA 
 IdRef 
 esi <esi:include src="/esitest-fa8a495983347898/content" />  
 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Zimbabwe&oldid=1143756063#Cuisine " 
 Categories :  Zimbabwe 1980 establishments in Zimbabwe English-speaking countries and territories Former British colonies and protectorates in Africa G15 nations Landlocked countries Member states of the African Union Member states of the United Nations Republics East African countries Southeast African countries Southern African countries States and territories established in 1980 Countries in Africa Hidden categories:  Source attribution CS1 errors: generic name Webarchive template wayback links CS1 Portuguese-language sources (pt) CS1 European Portuguese-language sources (pt-pt) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia pending changes protected pages Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages Use South African English from April 2013 All Wikipedia articles written in South African English Use dmy dates from February 2017 Coordinates on Wikidata Articles containing Shona-language text Articles containing Northern Ndebele-language text Articles containing Chichewa-language text Articles containing Barwe-language text Articles containing Kalanga-language text Articles containing Sotho-language text Articles containing Nambya-language text Articles containing Ndau-language text Articles containing Tsonga-language text Articles containing Venda-language text Articles containing Xhosa-language text Pages using collapsible list with both background and text-align in titlestyle All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2016 Articles with unsourced statements from September 2015 Wikipedia articles in need of updating from July 2022 All Wikipedia articles in need of updating Articles containing potentially dated statements from October 2014 All articles containing potentially dated statements Wikipedia articles in need of updating from August 2017 All articles with vague or ambiguous time Vague or ambiguous time from June 2021 Free-content attribution Free content from UNESCO Pages using Sister project links with hidden wikidata Pages using Sister project links with default search Articles with Curlie links Articles with ISNI identifiers Articles with VIAF identifiers Articles with WorldCat identifiers Articles with BNF identifiers Articles with EMU identifiers Articles with GND identifiers Articles with J9U identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers Articles with NDL identifiers Articles with NKC identifiers Articles with NLG identifiers Articles with FAST identifiers Articles with HDS identifiers Articles with MusicBrainz area identifiers Articles with NARA identifiers Articles with SUDOC identifiers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  This page was last edited on 9 March 2023, at 18:01  (UTC) . 
 Text is available under the  Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0 ;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the  Terms of Use  and  Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the  Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. 
 
 
 Privacy policy 
 About Wikipedia 
 Disclaimers 
 Contact Wikipedia 
 Mobile view 
 Developers 
 Statistics 
 Cookie statement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
